                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               CHINA'S FOREIGN TRADE AND INVESTMENT, 1800-1950

                                       Wolfgang Keller
                                       Carol H. Shiue

                                      Working Paper 27558
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27558


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2020




Support from the National Science Foundation (Grants SES 0453040 and SES 1124426) is
gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Wolfgang Keller and Carol H. Shiue. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
China's Foreign Trade and Investment, 1800-1950
Wolfgang Keller and Carol H. Shiue
NBER Working Paper No. 27558
July 2020, Revised in October 2020
JEL No. F1,F2,N15,O1

                                         ABSTRACT

The First Opium War (1840-42) was a watershed in the history of China. In its aftermath Britain
and other countries forced open new ports to foreign trade through international treaties. Chinese
institutions of trade were abolished and re-organized under Western management, Western legal
institutions were introduced in China in form of courts and legal practices, and foreigners in
China were tried according to the laws of their country of origin (extraterritoriality). To better
understand the implications of these changes during the Treaty Port Era (1842-1943), we begin
by discussing the attitudes towards foreign trade before 1840 for both China and the West.
Drawing on information from the foreign-led Chinese Maritime Customs organization, we
provide a synopsis of China's foreign trade and investment both in terms of patterns and volumes.
The paper highlights the link between foreign and domestic trade as well as the important role of
new, previously not traded goods for welfare. Employing several outcome measures, we show
that Western influence generated significant benefits to China's economy, and the results suggest
that the geographic scope of these benefits reached into areas far beyond the treaty ports.


Wolfgang Keller
Department of Economics
University of Colorado, Boulder
Boulder, CO 80309-0256
and NBER
Wolfgang.Keller@colorado.edu

Carol H. Shiue
Department of Economics
University of Colorado at Boulder
Boulder, CO 80309
and NBER
carol.shiue@colorado.edu
1        Introduction

By the mid-18th century, the Qing Dynasty (1644-1911) was the dominant power within Asia.
Its political system and institutions of state-building were founded on structures inherited
from previous Chinese dynasties as well as on the social and cultural codes of interaction
among polities across Central Eurasia, East Asia, and Southeast Asia. Foreign trade between
China and other countries within and outside of Asia was a calculated matter of political
strategy and economic gain. In the decades leading up to the First Opium War of 1839 to
1842, China's stance with respect to the Sino-Western trade became increasingly at odds
with British ambitions in Asia. The growing tensions stemmed from abiding differences in
the political economy of not just two nations, but two empires. The overseas influence of the
British empire took on a forceful new impetus with the British Industrial Revolution, and
over the 19th century, technological improvements in transport continued to power Western
expansion in global trade.

The Opium War of 1839 to 1842 was the turning point after which foreign, in particular
Western nations, took greater control not only over China's international trade policy, but
important legal and economic institutions. After 1842, Chinese ports that had previously
been closed to Western traders were forced open to trade and investment. In these so-called
"treaty ports", tariffs on foreign imports into China were fixed at a low rate. Beyond trade,
consular offices and foreign courts were established in China, and foreign nationals were
exempt from the jurisdiction of Chinese law. The implications of the semi-colonial treaty
port system for China's long-run development has been the subject of perennial interest.1
1
    The impact of the treaty port system include questions related to technology transfer, legal institutions,
    state-building, nation-building, foreign policy, society and community, and other topics. A number of
    historical overviews have been written by 19th century observers. W. F. Mayers, N. B. Dennys, and C.
    King, The Treaty Ports of China and Japan: A Complete Guide to the Open Ports of Those Countries,
    Together with Peking, Yedo, Hongkong and Macao (London, Trübner, 1867) is a compilation by British
    consular officers about treaty ports and companies in China and Japan. Another comprehensive treatment
    by a customs official in China is H.B. Morse, The International Relations of the Chinese Empire, Vol. 1
    (Longmans, Green, and Company, 1910). See also C. S. See, The Foreign Trade of China (NY, Columbia
    University Press, 1919); Jiang Tingfu ,  (Modern Chinese History) (Changsha: Shangwu,
    1938). Reprint, Shanghai: Shanghai guji chubanshe, 2001; M. Greenberg, British Trade and the Opening
    of China 1800­1842 (Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University Press, 1951); A. Feuerwerker, The Foreign
    Establishment in China in the Early Twentieth Century (Ann Arbor, University of Michigan, 1976); A.
    Feuerwerker, 'Economic Trends in the Late Ch'ing Empire, 1870­1911', in J. K. Fairbank and K. C. Liu
    (eds), The Cambridge History of China Vol. 11, Part 2 (Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University Press,
    1980), pp. 1­69 for additional analysis. Recent historical treatments of the era can be found in J.M. Downs,
    The Golden Ghetto: The American Commercial Community at Canton and the Shaping of American China
    Policy, 1784-1844 (Hong Kong, Hong Kong University Press, 2014); R. Bickers, and I. Jackson (eds), Treaty
    Ports in Modern China: Law, Land, and Power (London, Routledge, 2016); A. Reinhardt, 'Navigating
    Semi-Colonialism: Shipping, Sovereignty, and Nation-Building in China, 1860­1937', Harvard East Asian


                                                        2
What has been less emphasized in the literature is that what we know about China's foreign
trade increased dramatically during this period. Before the 1800's, the quality of archival
data on the quantities, prices, and types of goods in China's foreign trade, although sub-
stantial, is on the whole variable. After the mid-19th century, there was a sea change in
what was systematically recorded about China's imports and exports. The reason was not
China's new interest in foreign trade nor improved statistical capacity due to a rising level
of development, but to Western interests in China.

This chapter discusses China's foreign openness from 1800 to 1950 from the point of view of
new sources of information on foreign trade and investment that became available because
of Western influence in China. In particular, the Chinese Maritime Customs (CMC) Service
was instrumental in helping to revolutionize the system of foreign trade statistics in China.
The records are the result of a complex yet consistent set of rules, and are of high quality.2
Notably, the CMC data gives more detail than is found even in modern day international
trade data as it captures re-exports, allowing gross trade to be distinguished from net trade
flows.3

In order to understand the opening of China in the 19th century, Section 2 discusses the
historical background of trade before 1840, and the motivations and attitudes towards trade
at the time. In Section 3, we consider the history of the CMC and the development of
the organization during the the Treaty Port Era (1842­1943). Drawing on recent work
and original quantitative research, we summarize recent findings based on the CMC data,
especially with respect to China's foreign trade at the aggregate level and its composition
by foreign country.4

Beyond the resource gains that arise from commodity trade, trade also affects development
  Monograph Series no. 410 (Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 2018).
2
  R. Murphey The Outsiders: The Western Experience in India and China (Ann Arbor, University of Michigan
  Press, 1977) stated, "the recorded figures probably inflated the real import and export of goods by close
  to 100 percent" (pp. 213­214), erroneously concluding the data was unreliable due to double-counting of
  what was traded. In actuality, a high degree of internal consistency and accuracy allows us to reconstruct
  real imports and exports at the port level.
3
  See W. Keller, B. Li, and C. H. Shiue, 'Shanghai's Trade, China's Growth: Continuity, Recovery, and
  Change since the Opium War', IMF Economic Review 2 (2013), 336-378, Data Appendix, for a discussion
  of data quality of the CMC trade data.
4
  In particular, see W. Keller, B. Li, and C. H. Shiue, 'China's Foreign Trade: Perspectives from the Past
  150 Years', The World Economy 6 (2011), 853-892; W. Keller, B. Li, and C. H. Shiue, 'The Evolution of
  Domestic Trade Flows when Foreign Trade is Liberalized: Evidence from the Chinese Maritime Customs
  Service', in M. Aoki, T. Kuran, and G. Roland (eds), Institutions and Comparative Economic Development
  (Palgrave Macmillan, 2012); Keller et. al. (2013); W. Keller, J. A. Santiago, and C. H. Shiue, 'China's
  Domestic Trade during the Treaty-Port Era', Explorations in Economic History 1 (2017), 26­43; and W.
  Keller, and C. H. Shiue, 'Capital Markets and Colonial Institutions in China', presentation at NBER
  Summer Institute, July 2020, (Cambridge, MA, 2020).

                                                     3
by transferring knowledge with respect to new products, institutional environments, and dif-
ferent legal systems.5 Section 4 briefly outlines the evolution of foreign-owned firms in China
and aggregate levels of foreign direct investment, both of which became more systematically
recorded during this period.

Since foreign trade often requires shipments from points of local production to ports of export,
a high degree of domestic market integration between regions where goods are produced, and
the ports where the goods are ultimately destined for export, would have been important
for the flow of exports. Domestic markets in 18th century China were populated by many
buyers and sellers and were relatively efficient. But how did foreign trade affect the domestic
economy? Section 5 quantifies the effect of foreign trade in China from two key perspectives:
the size and distribution of its welfare effects and the geographic scope of foreign influence
on domestic capital markets.

Finally, in Section 6, we show how commodity level trade statistics can be used to obtain
a more granular view on trade, and in particular, on the role of the extensive margin, that
is, goods that newly enter foreign trade. As there were important revisions to the manner
in which China's foreign trade data was collected throughout the period, we discuss new
methodologies that can be implemented to address changes in the definition of new goods.
A number of broader lessons are discussed in the concluding Section 7.



2     China's Foreign Trade Before 1839 and the Opium
      Wars

To understand foreign trade in China prior to the Opium Wars, it is essential to consider
the motivations and preoccupations of Chinese and Western traders and their respective
governments in the period leading up to the 19th century.6 Moreover, China didn't have one
5
  See W. Keller, M. Lampe, and C. H. Shiue, 'International Transactions: Real Trade and Factor Flows', in S.
  Broadberry, and K. Fukao (eds), Cambridge Economic History of the Modern World (Cambridge, Cambridge
  University Press, 2020) for a survey on real trade and factor flows in the 18th and 19th centuries from the
  viewpoint of global trade.
6
  Secondary accounts on the nature of the conflicts of the Opium Wars: A. Waley, The Opium War through
  Chinese Eyes (Palo Alto, Stanford University Press, 1963); H. Chang, Commissioner Lin and the Opium
  War (Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1964); I.C.Y. Hsü, The Rise of Modern China (Oxford, Oxford
  University Press, 1970); J. Beeching, The Chinese Opium Wars (NY, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1975); Su
  Zhiliang ,  (A History of Drugs in China) (Shanghai, Shanghai renmin chubanshe, 1997);
  R. Wakeman, Strangers at the Gate: Social Disorder in South China, 1839-1861 (Berkeley, University of
  California Press, 1997); P. W. Fay, The Opium War, 1840-1842: Barbarians in the Celestial Empire (Chapel


                                                     4
foreign policy, but multiple policies that depended on the region in question. In addition,
these policies changed over time.

Whether over land or sea, China's borders were always porous to foreign traders. Early on,
in the Western Han (206 BCE-9CE), China's push into Central Asia was instrumental in
supporting the caravan trade on the famous Silk Road. In the Tang-Song transition (755 to
1127) the Yangtze7 River valley emerged at the center of China's economy, and with it more
urbanization, expanded domestic markets.8 Significantly, China's cross-border commodity
exchange permanently shifted away from the Silk Road, and towards maritime trade at
the turn of the 10th century, by which time Chinese merchants were conducting trade over
long distances with numerous foreign countries from Arabia and Persia, as well as Java,
Brunei, India, Japan, the Korean peninsula, and the Philippine archipelago.9 Intra-Asian
maritime trade was active especially in the South China Sea. Over approximately 900-1300,
triggered by the outward looking policies of the Song and Yuan, an increase in maritime
trade occurred based on the export of pepper, safflower, and spices from Southeast Asia to
China, in exchange for ceramics and metals.10 Over Central Eurasia, nomadic Kazakhs and
Mongolian tribes traded horses and furs in exchange for Chinese tea, cloth, and silks, and
grain.11

Even as private, merchant-organized foreign trade routes were established, from the point
of view of the state, foreign trade was tied to foreign diplomacy. The diplomatic terms
were formalized in the framework of the tribute system (chaogong tizhi ). Notably,
  Hill, University of North Carolina Press, 1998); T. Brook and B.T. Wakabayashi (eds), Opium Regimes:
  China, Britain, and Japan, 1839-1952 (Berkeley, University of California Press, 2000); J. Spence, "Opium",
  in Chinese Roundabout (New York, Norton, 1992), pp. 228-258; J. G. Lutz, Opening China: Karl F. A.
  Gützlaff and Sino-Western Relations, 1827-1852 (William B Erdsman Publishing, 2008); J. Lovell, The
  Opium War: Drugs, Dreams and the Making of Modern China (New York, Abrams Press, 2015).
7
  Romanization of names of locations and treaty ports in this paper will follow that used by the CMC in the
  19th and 20th centuries. Pinyin will be used in other cases.
8
  H. Miyakawa, 'The Nait Hypothesis and its Effects on Japanese Studies of China', Far Eastern Quarterly
  4 (1955), 533-52; see also chapter in R. von Glahn, The Economic History of China: From Antiquity to the
  Nineteenth Century (Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University Press, 2016), pp. 208-217.
9
  B.K.L. So, and J. Su, Prosperity, Region, and Institutions in Maritime China: The South Fukien Pattern
  (Harvard University Asia Center, 2000), p. 35.
10
   See G. Wade, 'An early Age of Commerce in Southeast Asia, 900-1300 CE', Journal of Southeast Asian
   Studies 2 (2009), 221-265; A. Reid,'An Age of Commerce' in Southeast Asian History', Modern Asian
   Studies 1 (1990a), 1-30; and A. Reid, 'The Seventeenth-Century Crisis in Southeast Asia', Modern Asian
   Studies 4 (1990b), 639-659. A. Reid, The Seventeenth-Century Crisis, 639-659 argues that these trades
   continued until the mid-17th century when the expansion of the Dutch East India Company into the region
   effectively ended the maritime trade boom.
11
   See P. C. Perdue, China Marches West: The Qing Conquest of Central Eurasia (Cambridge, Harvard
   University Press, 2005), pp. 400-402, 575 for accounts related to the private trade and cooperative official
   exchange of Central Eurasia.



                                                      5
the tributary system encompassed different regional interests. Prior to the Opium Wars,
the Qing state organized the management of foreign relations into separate offices: the
Court of Colonial Affairs (lifanyuan ), which dealt with Inner Asian regions including
Mongolia, Russia, and Tibet; and the Board of Rites (libu ), which handled court
religious ceremonies but also the relations with Sinified tributaries. The tributaries retained
their own sovereignty, but their rulers accepted the emperor of China as the nominal political
and cultural hegemony, and they were rewarded for loyalty.12 The Qing also recognized arms-
length relationships with non-tributary states, depending on the circumstances.13

Tributary trade--in which states ritually presented China with gifts, and often received gifts
of even greater value in return--was used to maintain and to expand relationships with
neighboring polities.14 According to Fairbank (1942, 1969) and Fairbank and Teng (1941),
the tribute system governed the entire foreign relations world order of China's empire up
to the 19th century, and this narrow mindset precluded the possibility of free trade and
nation-state diplomacy based on terms of mutual equality.15

Recent research by numerous scholars has reexamined these interpretations in major ways. In
particular, the importance of tributary trade has been shown to have weakened significantly
over time, even if the the tributary system as such provided a way for China to promote
diplomatic relations. The Ming emperors were the last to prohibit maritime trade in favor
of tributary trade, and even they didn't succeed fully to enforce it. Moreover, compared
to Ming emperors, Qing rulers were generally more relaxed about market-based exchange.
Although Qing emperors also used maritime trade bans (haijin ), the most stringent
of the bans were imposed for political ends rather than in pursuit of any autarkic ideals.
Between 1656 and 1684, the Qing imposed a maritime ban in order to subdue the Zheng
empire--a powerful merchant organization that was loyal to the former rulers of the Ming
12
   Korea, for example, was considered a loyal tributary state, and thus Ming troops were sent in 1590's
   to help Korea fight off the Japanese. Other close tributaries included: Vietnam, Siam, Laos, Burma,
   Cambodia, Liuqiu (Rykukyu), Luzon and Java, and the Central Asian peoples such as the Kazakhs,
   Kirghiz, and Badakhshanis. In 1754, Qianlong refers to Java as "already within the compass of Our
   enlightened government", M. Elliot, Qianlong: Son of Heaven, Man of the World (Pearson, 2009), p. 126.
13
   For example, the Portuguese did not accept the emperor of China as the nominal authority but were,
   nonetheless, allowed to settle in Macau, establishing a private trade center there in the mid-16th century.
14
   Stability on the frontiers in Central Asia could have meant a net gain from the perspective of China's
   rulers if that reduced the chance of military encounters; see Perdue, China Marches West, pp. 402-03.
15
   J.K. Fairbank, and S.Y. Teng, 'On the Ch'ing Tributary System', Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies 2
   (1941), 135-246, citing Jiang Tingfu, p. 140: "...[in the 11th and 12th centuries], the neo-Confucian phi-
   losophy worked, which began to dominate China, worked out a dogma in regard to international relations,
   to hold sway in China right to the middle of the nineteenth century...That dogma asserts that national
   security could only be found in isolation and stipulates that whoever wished to enter into relations with
   China must do so as China's vassal, acknowledging the supremacy of the Chinese emperor and obeying
   his commands, thus ruling out all possibility of international intercourse on terms of equality."

                                                      6
Dynasty.16 Immediately after the Zheng empire was vanquished in 1684, the Qing emperor
Kangxi opened all coastal ports to private trade and established customs stations to collect
taxes.17

Because of the precedents set up during Kangxi's reign (1661-1722), which moved the Qing
further away from the traditional tributary system, private trade frequently overshadowed
the importance of tributary trade.18 The Sino-Western trade, which first emerged out of a de-
mand for Chinese luxury goods--tea, silk, porcelain, furniture, art, and lacquers--continued
to operate over the 18th century. In addition to maritime exchange among traders in the
South China Sea, Chinese merchants sailed to Nagasaki regularly to trade with Japanese
merchants and entrepreneurs, and private Japanese traders plied the Chinese coastal trade.19
Moreover, maritime exchange among Asian traders in the South China Sea may have ex-
tended beyond trade to organized private enterprises.20

Evidence of the pervasiveness of these global trading networks can be seen in the movement
of precious metals as silver from overseas surged into China in exchange for Chinese goods.21
In the 17th century, China imported around 115 tons of silver annually, approximately half
of which came from mines in Japan, and the other half from the Americas.22 Whether
this extensive global trade is the cause or the outcome of the divergence in living stan-
dards between China and Europe in the 20th century has been the subject of long-standing
16
   In 1661, Zheng Chenggong (also known by Koxinga), successfully laid siege to the Dutch fort, Zeelandia,
   located in Taiwan, and in open defiance of the Qing, established a separate state named Ming Eastern
   Capital (Dongdu Mingjing ). The Zheng family was one of the most successful merchant organi-
   zations of the period, with annual profits from maritime trade at least one-third that of the Dutch VOC;
   see Appendix 3 in X. Hang, Conflict and Commerce in Maritime East Asia: The Zheng Family and the
   Shaping of the Modern World, c. 1620-1720, (Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University Press, 2015).
17
   W. Rowe, China's Last Empire: The Great Qing (Cambridge, The Belknap Press of Harvard University
   Press, 2009), pp.136.
18
   Rowe, China's Last Empire, pp. 136 concludes tributary trade was "nil"; whereas T. Hamashita, China,
   East Asia, and the Global Economy: Regional and Historical Perspectives (Routledge, 2008), Ch. 2 depicts
   tributary trade as being intertwined with commercial trade.
19
   Since the 1970's, historians have challenged the "national seclusion" view of Japan, documenting the
   continuous arrival of foreign trading vessels in Japan from the 17th through the 19th centuries. See Figure
   1.2 in H. Peng, Trade Relations between Qing China and Tokugawa Japan (UK, Springer, 2019); Hamashita,
   China, East Asia, and the Global Economy presents a regional maritime history based on networks of trade
   that cut across national borders.
20
   Hamashita, China, East Asia, and the Global Economy, Ch. 3-6 and Ch. 6.
21
   See Hamashita, China, East Asia, and the Global Economy, Ch. 4, pp. 39-56. Zhao, G., The Qing
   Opening to the Ocean: Chinese Maritime Policies, 1684-1757 (Honolulu, University of Hawaii Press,
   2013) synthesizes additional evidence on China's role in early globalization.
22
   See von Glahn, The Economic History of China., pp. 309; R. von Glahn, 'Foreign Silver Coins in the Market
   Culture of Nineteenth Century', International Journal of Asian Studies 1 (2007), 51-78. documents how
   foreign coins could be found circulating alongside domestic currencies, or, as the dominating means of
   payment.



                                                      7
debates.23 What seems clear, however, is that accumulating qualitative and quantitative ev-
idence largely overturns the perspectives of an earlier literature by Fairbanks and others who
saw China as a closed and isolationist state before Western nations "opened" its markets.

Furthermore, not only does the recent evidence on international silver flows point to consid-
erable foreign trade activity, but it also appears that the Qing, and the earlier Ming state,
paid attention to the advantages of empire building.24 The Qianlong emperor (1711-1799)
achieved successes on this front. At its maximal geographical extent, the total territories of
the Qing Dynasty were about double the extent governed by the Ming. Around the year
1780, the Qing state was the second largest Chinese empire, surpassed only by the Mongol
Empire of Kublai Khan. Neither could it be claimed that the Chinese state had no chal-
lengers, as there were numerous and near continuous conflicts both from within and from
nearby states.25 Instead, the Qing state had no challengers of equal stature in Asia because
it had successfully eliminated the threats from neighboring regions, as well as the domestic
rebellions from within. The military campaigns by the Qing state over Central Asia, for
example, nearly obliterated the Dzungar (Zunghar) population of 600,000.26 A combination
of diplomacy and military aggression had thus made it possible for the Qing to achieve a
high level of political, economic, and civilizational hegemony.

The stance of the Qing emperors towards the Sino-Western trade was not inconsistent with
its overall strategy of statecraft. Within China, three key ports directed the trade coming
from the West: Macau, Canton (now Guangzhou), and Hong Kong. Starting from the year
23
   Offering a contrasting point of view to Wallerstein's treatment of Asia as a semi-peripheral area relative
   to the European core before the mid-19th century, A.G. Frank, ReOrient: Global Economy in the Asian
   Age (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1998) argues that a global economy in 1400-1900 centered
   on Asia. E. Jones, The European Miracle: Environments, Economies and Geopolitics in the History
   of Europe and Asia (Cambridge University Press, 2003) and K. Pomeranz, The Great Divergence (NJ,
   Princeton University Press, 2000) offer competing explanations explanations and points of emphasis, with
   the latter arguing that it was the relaxing of ecological constraints in Europe brought about by access
   to New World resources that laid the foundations for the Great Divergence between China and Europe.
   Also see R. Findlay and K. O'Rourke, Power and Plenty: Trade, War, and The World Economy in the
   Second Millennium (NJ, Princeton University Press, 2007), who focus on the role of empire and the global
   connections established through trade.
24
   G. Wade, 'The Zheng He Voyages: A Reassessment', Journal of the Malaysian Branch of the Royal Asiatic
   Society 1 (2005), 37-58 links the Zheng He voyages to aggressive attempts to dominate trade routes in the
   Middle East and East Asia, and suggests the voyages constitutes maritime proto-colonialism.
25
   Referencing what he felt to be his top ten military achievements during his reign, Qianlong wrote: "The ten
   instances of military merit include the two pacifications of the Dzungars, the quelling of the Muslim tribes,
   the two annihilations of the Jinchuan [rebels], the restoring of peace to Taiwan, and the subjugations of
   Burma and Vietnam; adding the recent twin capitulations of the Gurkhas makes ten in all. Why is there
   any need to include those three trivial rebellions in the inner provinces?" Elliot, Qianlong, pp. 89.
26
   About 90% of the Dzungars were killed, died, or were taken captive; Elliot, Qianlong, pp. 94. Qianlong
   targeted young and strong men for massacre in order to destroy them as a people; Perdue, China Marches
   West, p. 283.

                                                       8
1684, and for more than 150 years after, the Qing managed Sino-Western trade through
a merchant guild, or "Co-Hong" (). These merchants were appointed by the state to
manage the European trade. The official superintendent of maritime customs, known as the
"Hoppo", collected duties on foreign trade through the Hong merchants. These revenues were
sent directly to the imperial household. After 1757, and until 1842, all Western trade had to
be conducted from Canton. The Canton System allowed British, Dutch, French, Austrians,
Swedish, Spanish, Americans, and other traders to carry out trades with a member of the
Hong merchants. In practice, this meant traders were required to live in special quarters,
in buildings called "factories". The factories were located outside of the city along Canton
Harbor and included space for warehouses and offices.

Although Qing emperors personally gained revenues from the Sino-West trade, they did not
seek to expand trade or diplomatic relations beyond the Canton System. This may seem
irrational, but it might be remembered that the early and mid-Qing rulers incorporated
foreign trade as a lever of power within a very different set of institutional constraints.
Both national security interests and economic gain entered into Qing calculations of how it
handled Western traders. Rulers were concerned about the encroachment of foreigners and
their activities on domestic interests and attempted to impose regulations. Thus, appointed
Co-Hong merchants were responsible not only for the payment of transit dues of foreign
traders, but also for the good behavior of foreign crews, in addition to managing the actual
trade. Furthermore, Qing regulations limited foreign merchants from having personal or
diplomatic channels of communication with Qing government officials. Outside of the four-
month trading season, foreigners had to relocate away from Canton and to Macau.

From the British trader's perspective, the Canton System was unsatisfactory. Western
traders who came to China often represented companies or syndicates that were funded
by wealthy landowners and entrepreneurs in an industrializing Europe, or from the United
States. They wanted more interaction and more representation of their interests in China.
These organizations were in some cases powerful enough to influence government politics
at home.27 One prominent example of the close connection between merchants' interests
and their political activity is the British East India Company (BEIC), which operated from
1600 until 1834. The BEIC was a trading monopoly that competed with the nationally
chartered Dutch East India Company (Vereenigde Oost-Indische Compagnie, VOC) in Asia.
The expansion of foreign trade into Asia was a central aim of the British government and
the BEIC.
27
     R. Brenner, Merchants and Revolution: Commercial Change, Political Conflict, and London's Overseas
     Traders, 1550-1653 (NJ, Princeton University Press, 2003) examines the relationship between English
     commerce and the political activities of overseas traders in the 17th century.

                                                    9
An incident that compellingly illustrates the different motivations of Britain and China was
Lord Macartney's mission to China. In 1792, Macartney was commissioned by Henry Dundas
(who was president of the board of BEIC, and a member of Britain's home ministry) to speak
to the Qing court on behalf of British interests. Specifically, Macartney was instructed to
relay to China's emperor "the mutual benefit to be derived from trade between the two
Nations".28 He was also to bring some products in order to "excite at Peking a taste for
many articles of English workmanship hitherto unknown there ... [and] turn the balance of
the China trade considerably in favour of Great Britain".29 As imported opium was already
a growing point of discord, Macartney was also instructed that should the subject of opium
should come up, and "if it should be made a positive requisition or any article of any proposed
commercial treaty, that none of that drug should be sent by us to China, you must accede
to it, rather than risk any essential benefit by contending for a liberty in this respect".30

On September 14, 1793, Macartney arrived in the court of Qianlong, who was over 80 years
old at the time, with numerous gifts, most of which were European luxury items, such as
German planetariums and clocks by Vulliamy. From Qianlong's written reply to King George
III, we know that Macartney successfully transmitted to the Qing court Britain's requests,
which Qianlong understood well. They were: 1) to have more ports in China to be open for
purposes of trade, 2) to be able to establish a repository at the capital in Peking, 3) to have
a island where merchants can reside and goods can be warehoused, 4) to be able to have a
place inside the city of Canton where foreign merchants may reside, 5) to have reduced duties
on merchandise, 6) to have reduced tariffs on ships, 7) to gain the full liberty to disseminate
European religions to Chinese subjects.31 Judging from the tone of Qianlong's long reply to
Macartney's entreaties, he did not view Britain as more than a presumptuous far away state
that had overstepped proper boundaries of civilized relations.

A common interpretation of Qianlong's dismissal of Macartney's requests is that it encapsu-
lates "the Chinese policy of superior indifference to Western things".32 Yet a closer reading
28
   J. Chen, P. Cheng, M. Lestz, and J. Spence, The Search for Modern China: A Documentary Collection,
   3rd edition (New York, W.W. Norton & Company, 2013), "Lord Macartney's Commission from Henry
   Dundas, 1792", p. 80.
29
   As quoted from H. B. Morse, The Chronicles of the East India Company, Trading to China 1635­1834,
   volumes 1­5 vol. 2 (Oxford, The Clarendon Press, 1926-1929), p. 215, as cited in M. Berg, "Britain,
   industry and perceptions of China: Matthew Boulton, 'useful knowledge' and the Macartney Embassy to
   China," Journal of Global History 2 (2006), 269-288.
30
   Chen et al., The Search for Modern China, "Lord Macartney's Commission from Henry Dundas, 1792", p.
   81.
31
   Chen et al., The Search for Modern China, pp. 90-93.
32
   D. S. Landes, 'Why Europe and the West? Why Not China?' Journal of Economic Perspectives 2 (2006),
   18.



                                                 10
of the events suggests that far from being indifferent, Qianlong was an astute collector of for-
eign objects, as he already possessed in his residence exactly the kinds of mechanical devices
that Macartney had brought with him on his journey to China.33 Apparently, unbeknown
to Macartney, similar objects had arrived in China through existing channels of the Canton
trade. Macartney later wrote in his journal that on his tour of Qianlong's pavilion, he saw
"stupendous vases of jasper and agate; with the finest porcelain and japan,34 and with every
kind of European toys and sing-songs; with spheres, orreries, clocks and musical automatons
of such exquisite workmanship, and in such profusion, that our present must shrink from the
comparison and hide their diminished heads".35

The Macartney mission did not fundamentally alter the way Sino-Western trade was con-
ducted. Corporate interests in China had neither the explicit military backing of the state,
nor, for the most part, the means to wage war against the state. Instead, Chinese merchants
typically tried to acquire official or semi-official roles within the state. Thus, many well-off
merchants in China sought to gain greater influence in the government by purchasing degrees
or investing in the education of their sons so that someone in the clan could gain the ear of
an official, or better, be anointed into officialdom themselves.36

British and other Western traders felt slighted as they sought to engage China in the new
diplomatic language of equal nation-states and negotiated benefits, while Qing emperors still
considered the arrival of Western traders on China's shores to be nothing more significant
than the understandable desire of foreigners to partake of the benefits of China's civilization
and the blessings of the emperor. British, American, and European merchants chafed under
the restrictions of Qing policies, but not so much as to be willing to give up their share of
the profits from the Canton trade.

The differences in the political economy in the two empires, and how each conceptualized
domestic and foreign relations, seem to be especially striking in the years leading up to the
Opium War.37 Because of the successful spread of the British Industrial Revolution, our
modern system of foreign trade and diplomacy aligns with that of the European system, but
33
   "On the court's side, questions concerning Macartney's pronouncements about the British gifts still lin-
   gered. As if to address this issue directly, the embassy was taken to buildings filled with intricate European
   clocks and mechanical devices...The point being made that the things Macartney had brought were in no
   way unique to his king's domain", from J. L. Hevia, Cherishing Men from Afar: Qing Guest Ritual and
   the Macartney Embassy of 1793 (Durham, Duke University Press, 1995), p. 179.
34
   Objects made with a dark lacquer.
35
   Cited in J. L. Hevia, Cherishing Men from Afar, p. 176. See also Berg, Britain, industry and perceptions
   of China, 269-288.
36
   These official positions were frequently the most rewarding from socio-economic point of view; see C. H.
   Shiue, 'Human Capital and Fertility in Chinese Clans', Journal of Economic Growth 4 (2017), 351-396.
37
   The similarities and differences in the economy and political system of China and Europe are further

                                                       11
it might be remembered that Europe had itself only not that long ago--sometime between
the Treaty of Westphalia (1646-1648), the revolutionary decade of 1787 to 1799 in France,
and the Congress of Vienna (1814-1815)--settled on the nation-state framework as a formal
system of international relations among sovereign states.38 Before that, customs, personal
relationships, and family alliances through marriage tended to play a larger role in foreign
diplomatic negotiations in Europe too.

From the start of the Sino-Western trade, European traders sought access to Chinese markets
not only to buy Chinese goods, but also to sell their own wares in what was they imagined
to be an immense market. The problem, however, was not simply market access, but a lack
of products that ordinary consumers in China could afford. As late as the 1830s, traders
of one of the dominating trading houses at the time--Jardine, Matheson & Co.--reported
that the Chinese native nankeen cotton cloth (named for Nanjing) was superior in quality
and cost compared to Manchester cotton goods.39 Thus, even though cotton was one of the
core industries that was revolutionized by the British industrial revolution, it would still
be some time before machine produced textiles could compete with the low costs of labor
production in China. By contrast, as industrialization spread from Britain to northwest
Europe and its offshoots, wealthier classes in urban centers may have been better able
to afford foreign imports and Chinese luxury goods.40 Not only did tea drinking become
fashionable, but consumers were fascinated with chinoiserie and other Chinese decorative
goods. Chinese craftsmen and manufacturers, for their part, also eagerly catered to custom-
designed products for foreign markets.

The good that tipped the trade balance was opium.41 In 1773, 140,000 pounds of opium were
   analyzed in detail in R. B. Wong, China Transformed: Historical Change and the Limits of European
   Experience (Ithaca, Cornell University Press, 1997); K. Pomeranz, The Great Divergence; and R. B. Wong
   and J. Rosenthal, Before and beyond Divergence: The Politics of Economic Change in China and Europe
   (Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 2011). On the influence of cultural change in the China and Europe,
   see J. Mokyr, A Culture of Growth: The Origins of the Modern Economy (NJ, Princeton University Press,
   2016), pp. 287-320.
38
   For contrasts of Europe's "Westphalian system" with East Asia's formal hierarchy in international relations,
   see: D. Kang, East Asia Before the West: Five Centuries of Trade and Tribute (New York, Columbia
   University Press, 2010) and Hamashita, China, East Asia, and the Global Economy.
39
   M. Greenberg, British Trade and the Opening of China, p. 2.
40
   Average wages of urban residents in major cities of Western Europe like London were likely trending higher
   than it was for counterparts in Beijing or even Suzhou (R. Allen, J. P. Bassino, D. Ma, C. Moll-Murata,
   and J. L. van Zanden, 'Wages, Prices, and Living Standards in China, Japan, and Europe, 1738­1925',
   The Economic History Review Special Issue: Asia in the Great Divergence s1 (2011), 3-38). Additional
   research is needed before we can be sure, but to the extent that average wages are correlated with incomes
   of the wealthier classes within each region, the trends may be similar.
41
   On perspectives on the history of the consumption of opium, see F. Dikötter, and L. Laamann, and Z. Xun,
   'Narcotic Culture: A Social History of Drug Consumption in China', The British Journal of Criminology
   2 (2002), 317-336; also see, Su, A History of Drugs in China.

                                                      12
imported into China from India; by the early 1820s, imports had grown ten-fold.42 Opium
was illegal and yet openly smuggled, bought and sold on the watch of Qing merchants and
officials alike. In the 1830's, 20-30 percent of government officials consumed opium, and the
Daoguang Emperor (reign 1820-50) was himself an addict.43 At first considered a foreign
luxury good and a symbol of privilege and hospitality, opium became widely used throughout
Chinese society. Early debates in the Qing court about the appropriate response to opium
imports considered the pros and cons of legalization and taxation of the drug, as opposed
to strict prohibition.44 Eventually, opium imports became a scapegoat for the failures of the
government, social unrest, and the economic decline that characterizes the last third of the
Qing Dynasty.45

In 1839, Qing Commissioner Lin Zexu was sent by Emperor Daoguang to end the opium
problem through prohibition. Lin took the moral high ground on the matter of opium, even-
tually destroying a large cargo of opium when his entreaties to cease the opium trade were
ignored.46 In response, British traders declared property damage and quickly resorted to
military action. It was the new technology of the steam engine outfitted on British boats,
however, that determined the outcome of the Opium Wars. Finally, European grievances
about the restrictive conditions of the Canton System could be forcefully expressed in the
form of the steamships that could deftly steer into the shallow harbor waters of Canton.
British military forces took Canton, moved up the coast and along the Yangtze River, cap-
tured Shanghai, and eventually reached the Grand Canal, in effect threatening Peking itself.

China quickly surrendered, agreeing to sign the Treaty of Nanjing (1842), which stipulated
that an indemnity had to be paid as compensation to Britain; in addition, Hong Kong
was ceded to Britain. Beyond the initial four treaty ports (Xiamen, Fuzhou, Ningbo, and
Shanghai), additional ports were later opened to foreign trade. Trade duties were limited to
42
   J. Spence, Chinese Roundabout, pp. 233-235.
43
   P. C. Perdue, 'The First Opium War: The Anglo-Chinese War of 1839-1842', MIT Visualizing Cultures,
   2011. https://visualizingcultures.mit.edu/opium_wars_01/ow1_essay01.html.
44
   See the arguments from proponents legalization and taxation, as well as prohibition in J. Slade, Narrative
   of the late proceedings and events in China (Canton Register Press, 1839), pp. 1-140.
45
   More recently, Z. Wang, Never Forget National Humiliation: Historical Memory in Chinese Politics and
   Foreign Relations (New York, Columbia University Press, 2012) argues that after 1991, historical revision-
   ism shifted from class struggle to struggle with outside forces, pp. 96-98.
46
   Lin's communication to Charles Elliot, the British Superintendent of Trade in March of 1839: "While our
   Celestial Court has in humble submission to it ten thousand (i.e. all) regions, and the heaven-like goodness
   of the great Emperor overshadows all, the nation aforesaid (Britain) and the Americans have, by their
   trade at Canton during many years, enjoyed, of all those in subjection, the largest measure of favors;"
   "but that they have brought opium--that pervading poison--to this land: thus profiting themselves by
   the injury of others..." Great Britain. Foreign Office, Correspondence relating to China: presented to both
   houses of Parliament, by command of Her Majesty (London, T.R. Harrison, 1840), pp. 268-269.



                                                      13
5 percent ad valorem or less on all goods. Moreover, foreign nationals were given the right to
reside and own property in designated treaty ports. In addition, foreigners in China would
be subject to the legal jurisdiction of their own country rather than to Chinese laws.

The issue of the legality of opium in China was hardly worth even a mention in the Treaty
of Nanjing. Indeed, the coup d'etat was not about making the opium trade legal in China.
The real prize was about market access and the entry of foreign businesses into China's
economy. This sentiment was voiced by the British Plenipotentiary Sir Henry Pottinger,
who announced after Britain's victory over China in the First Opium War (1840­42) that
China's potential for trade was so vast "that all the mills of Lancashire could not make
stocking stuff sufficient for one of its provinces".47 His overly ambitious forecast was slow to
come to fruition, however.

Initially, the Qing court did not see the Treaty of Nanjing as the resolution of a grand
showdown, but rather as a small concession made in order to smooth over a conflict that
could eventually be redressed in China's favor. For Britain, however, signed treaties be-
tween nations, compelled or not, was all that mattered in the new era defined by contrac-
tual agreements between nation-states. In 1844, the United States and France concluded
similar treaties with China, the Treaty of Wanghia and Treaty of Whampoa, respectively.
China's reluctance to enforce the terms of the earlier treaties led to the Second Opium War
(1856-1860), and further treaty ratifications and most-favored-nation clauses that allowed
all foreign powers operating in China to seek the same concessions. The various treaties thus
gradually opened China to international markets and ushered in an age of ever-increasing
commerce with the rest of the world until 1949, when Mao Zedong came to power.



3        China's Foreign Trade During the Treaty Port Era
         (1842-1943)

The Treaty of Nanjing (1842) put into motion a significant transformation of China's trade
environment. It was followed by the Treaty of Tianjin (1858), which opened yet more treaty
ports, and it also laid the foundation for foreign trade policies in China in essential ways.
The most important of the clauses of the Treaty of Tianjin established a system under
which trade duties would be collected under a consistent system across treaty ports. In
47
     Chinese Maritime Customs (CMC), Decennial Reports, Fifth Issue (1922­1931) vol. 1 (Shanghai, Statis-
     tical Department of the Inspectorate General of Customs, 2001a), p. 39.


                                                    14
principle, this implied that foreign goods would be taxed only once upon entry into China
and thereafter be exempt from further duties even if the goods were transported further
inland. Among other rights granted to foreign traders and residents, foreign vessels were
permitted on the Yangtze River and foreign merchants could also employ Chinese ships
to carry their goods. The British were officially permitted, in 1848, to establish a foreign
settlement in Shanghai. During the Treaty Port Era, foreigners came to have a much more
active role in the wider economy than in earlier times, which included the ownership of
hundreds of firms and businesses, including banks and shipyards.



3.1        The Chinese Maritime Customs and its Records

While the Treaty of Nanjing did away with several existing elements of China's foreign trade
system, the Chinese Customs authority initially retained its oversight of the processing of
foreign trade. However, the erosion of the central government's authority after the Opium
War and the government's lasting preoccupation with the suppression of domestic uprisings
(in particular the Taiping Rebellion of 1844 to 60), meant that foreign trade revenue col-
lection fell primarily in the hands of provincial and local authorities. These local officials
were ill-equipped to handle the larger volume of trade coming in, and foreign trade was not
subject to a consistent set of rules. Rather, the payment of trade taxes was a matter of
bargaining power, and the system was rife with corruption.48

The Chinese Maritime Customs (CMC) was founded in 1854 by the foreign consuls in Shang-
hai to collect maritime trade taxes that had been going unpaid due to the inability of Chinese
officials to collect them during the Taiping Rebellion. Although the CMC was nominally
under the jurisdiction of China's Foreign Office (the Zongli yamen, ), which was
newly established in 1861, in practice it operated under the management of foreign pow-
ers. In the beginning, its staff were mostly British. Later, nationals from other Western
countries joined. The top CMC position and director of its operations was the Inspector
General, who worked side by side with his Chinese counterpart, called the Superintendent
of Customs, who oversaw the collection of trade taxes from the so-called native trade, that
is, from Chinese-owned junks.
48
     Tax collection was poor even in major ports such as Shanghai. The British Consul of Shanghai estimated
     in one year that the loss of tariff revenue in Shanghai was at least 25 percent, and complained that "two
     or three sleepy menials at $5 or $6 a month" were the sole means existing for the collection of duty, with
     which he was bound by the Treaty of Nanjing to cooperate; CMC, Decennial Reports, Fifth Issue, vol. 1,
     p. 81.



                                                       15
Early opposition to the CMC arose largely from foreign consuls who feared that the CMC
would usurp some of their powers. Foreign merchants were also initially opposed to the CMC
because now they had to deal with customs formalities that before were left in their entirety
to Chinese middlemen and clerks. Within only a couple of years, however, foreign traders
and entrepreneurs had come to prefer the consistent and predictable customs treatment by
the new CMC system, and over time foreign merchants were generally in favor of the foreign
inspectorship system--this smoothed the frictions between consuls and CMC officials.

Although the Chinese central government resented the loss of sovereignty that came with
the Treaty of Nanjing and customs operations by the CMC, the introduction of the CMC
also substantially increased the net tariff revenues it received.49 Local Chinese government
officials likely experienced a net decline in benefits as the CMC reduced their ability to
withhold revenues from the central government and strike deals for personal enrichment.
Moreover, smugglers, pirates, and adventurers saw their prospects of gain diminished with
the arrival of the CMC, especially because over time the CMC extended its responsibilities to
include anti-smuggling operations. Later, the CMC also expanded its involvement into postal
administration, coastal policing, harbor and waterway management, and weather reporting.

From the point of view of the Treaty Powers, the establishment of the CMC not only broad-
ened their political influence in China but also ensured that China would have the means to
pay the indemnities imposed on it after the First and Second Opium Wars. The information
generated by this system was so credible that China was able to put the tariff revenue down
as collateral against which it could borrow from abroad at relatively low rates or interest.
A further motive, arguably the most important, was that the Treaty Powers wanted to sup-
port the expansion of commercial exchange between China and their own economies, which
necessitated a more open and consistent Chinese system.

The CMC's jurisdiction extended to "foreign-type" vessels, in particular steamships, whether
owned by foreigners or by Chinese, and to junks chartered by foreigners. In addition to
calculating tax revenues that were due, the CMC was responsible for the examination of
cargo, the prevention of smuggling, and the assessment of treaty tariffs on exports, imports,
and coastal trade. The nominal tariff was fixed to yield a rate of approximately five percent
ad valorem, however, over time the effective rate was often lower, around three percent or
less, due to price increases.
49
     Robert Hart, the Inspector General of the CMC from 1863 to 1911 and one of the most influential indi-
     viduals in the history of the Service, estimated that under the native customs system the costs of tariff
     collection were larger than the customs system's revenues, while under the CMC at Shanghai these costs
     were only around 2 percent of the revenues; CMC, Decennial Reports, Fifth Issue, vol. 1, p. 81.


                                                       16
             Figure 1: Chinese Maritime Customs Stations and Treaty Ports




Source: CMC customs stations given in T. Lyons, China Maritime Customs and China's Trade
Statistics, 1859-1948 (Trumansburg, NY, Willow Creek Press, 1973) and Treaty Ports (TP) with
entries in the Returns to Trade of 1910.




                                            17
The number of treaty ports and Customs houses expanded until there were over 40 by the
year 1907. Figure 1 displays the location of CMC stations that were established over the
organization's existence.50 The CMC did not establish customs stations in all ports, but
focused on the ports that were important for foreign trade. Generally, the more important
ports were opened relatively early, which means that even in the 1860s the CMC covered 80
to 90 percent of all foreign trade. With the opening of the CMC customs station in Kowloon
(which was located opposite of Hong Kong Island and thus important for the trade with
Hong Kong) in the year 1886, virtually all of China's foreign trade was covered.

The CMC's statistical records on trade are contained primarily in the Returns of Trade, with
additional statistics and more descriptive accounts available in the Trade Reports and Special
Collections. From the start of the CMC in 1859 to its end in 1948, records on trade were
entered at least on an annual interval. There is some daily information (e.g. for Shanghai)
during some periods. Previous studies have given overviews of the institutional features of
the CMC organization and have provided broad outlines of some of the contents of the CMC
trade data.51

One of the most notable aspects of the CMC's trade records is that they capture trade flows
that are difficult or impossible to obtain even in modern-day advanced economies. Most
data on international trade consider the country as the unit of observation. By contrast, the
CMC recorded information not only by country, but by port. That is, the unit of observation
is not countrytocountry trade, but rather country to portofentry trade, where the port
is treated independently as if it were a country. In this case, the port is the customs area.
This allows for analyses that consider international trade flows at the intranational level
because the data effectively integrate domestic trade with international trade. This unique
perspective on the movement of goods had much to do with the political circumstances at
the time, when the treaty ports of China were treated as enclaves over which certain foreign
countries had trading rights.

In order to assess trade duties in this elaborate system, the CMC's staff recorded the quantity
50
   The map gives on the list of treaty ports given in the CMC Returns to Trade of 1910. There were 92
   treaty ports by 1917, but many were self-opened ports.
51
   Lyons, China Maritime Customs and China's Trade Statistics, 1859­1948 outlines the contents of the CMC
   data and also paints a detailed portrait of the tea trade at several Chinese ports. On the institutional
   history of the CMC, see L. Hsiao, China's Foreign Trade Statistics (Cambridge, Harvard University Press,
   1974); H. van de Ven, 'Globalizing Chinese History', History Compass 1 (2004), 1­5; D. Brunero, Britain's
   Imperial Cornerstone: The Chinese Maritime Customs Service, 1854­1949 (New York, Routledge Curzon,
   2004); and R. Bickers, 'Revisiting the Chinese Maritime Customs Service, 1854­1950', The Journal of
   Imperial and Commonwealth History 2 (2008), 221­226; R. Nield, China's Foreign Places: The Foreign
   Presence in China in the Treaty Port Era, 1840-1943 (Hong Kong, Hong Kong University Press, 2015).


                                                    18
and value of the goods carried. For example, in 1881, one can find over 20 different categories
of Cotton Goods being imported (from Velvets and Velveteens to Turkey Red Cloths), at
least 10 different varieties of Woolen Goods, and some 70 different Sundries that included
Window Glass, Alpaca Umbrellas, Needles, and Dried Clams. From 1875 until around 1933,
values were reported in terms of silver, also known as the Customs tael (or haiguan liang
). Rates of exchange between the Customs tael and the local currency existed for
each port and were also reported by the CMC.52

Some qualifications should be noted. First, the CMC improved its record-keeping over time,
so that it was not until 1867 that relatively uniform methods of accounting were put in
place. Second, the statistics do not refer to the entirety of China's trade, but only to the
trade through treaty ports, and of this trade, only that part of it that was carried on foreign
vessels or on Chinese ships of the foreign type (that is, steamers). At the same time, the
foreignflag vessels not only included ships, but also those transports traveling overland to
Russia. Further, from the year 1901 on, the CMC also took over the operation of Native
Customs stations within 25 kilometers of open ports and began to collect data on trade going
through these stations as well. The records on flows of those Chineseproduced goods were
published in separate tables.

The trade statistics are broadly consistent, both internally to other numbers reported by
the CMC and with foreign partner trade records where the data is considered to be of high
quality. With the decline of 'junk' shipping, the coverage of foreign trade in the CMC data
by the year 1904 was essentially one hundred percent. At the same time, the CMC data
collection system underwent a number of changes, in part due to changing international
practice, and in part due to structural economic changes. This is to be expected over a long
period of close to one hundred years--1859 to 1948. We will return to this below in our
discussion of China's commodity-level trade.



3.2        China's Overall Foreign Trade

In this section, we summarize China's overall foreign trade. This provides a benchmark for
the more disaggregated analysis below. All data are taken from the annual CMC reports
(CMC 2001a). Figure 2 shows the evolution of China's aggregate foreign commodity trade.
It is clear from the figure that trade expansion in China's trade remained relatively stagnant
52
     Between 1875 and 1933, there were more variations in Currency units for value­these included the Spanish
     dollar, the British pound, local currency, Gold units, Gold Dollar, and the Chinese dollar.


                                                      19
                      Figure 2: China's Foreign Trade, 1865 to 1940




         Notes: Reported are nominal values of haiguan taels, the currency adopted by
         the CMC. No adjustments have been made for territorial changes, for example
         Manchuria, which became part of Japan in 1931. Shown in the graph are total
         imports; a fraction between 1 and 5 percent of these were re-exported from
         China to other countries.

from 1865 to 1885. However, overall trade growth averaged 3.5 percent per year for imports
and 2.7 percent for exports over the period 1865 to 1900.

Two things are apparent. First, for the period shown China was more likely to have a
trade deficit than a trade surplus in its commodity trade, the difference to be covered by
bullion or international debt. Second, the volume of China's overall foreign trade is relatively
stable before the year 1885. Afterwards, the evolution of China's trade is reasonably well-
characterized by a linear growth trend of about 5 percent per year.



3.3    Country Composition

Turning to the composition of China's foreign trade across countries, we analyze the 19th
and 20th centuries separately because several major changes took place over this period.


                                              20
                              Table 1: Average Trade Shares, 1865 to 1900
                Imports                        %                Exports                         %

                Great Britain               24.82               Hong Kong                   26.94
                Hong Kong                   41.36               Great Britain               31.65
                British India               18.23               Continental Europe          11.86
                Japan                        5.80               United States               11.07
                United States                2.65               Russia                       5.82
                Continental Europe           2.31               Japan                        4.93
                Other countries              4.84               Other countries              7.73



Table 1 shows China's main trade partners in both imports and exports between the years
1865 and 1900.

The role of Hong Kong in intermediating China's trade through re-exports (entrepôt trade) is
well known. Only a small fraction of China's imports from Hong Kong are produced in Hong
Kong, and analogously, only a small part of Chinese exports to Hong Kong are consumed in
Hong Kong. Table 1 quantifies this for the 19th century, with around 40 percent of China's
imports originating in Hong Kong, and nearly 30 percent of its exports destined for Hong
Kong. Because the ultimate origin and destination of China's trade via Hong Kong is not
known for all years, the following analysis nets out trade through Hong Kong.53

Table 2 shows the breakdown of China's imports for 1900 to 1946, which show with the
turn of the century, a number of additional countries became important in China's trade.
During the first half of the 20th century, Japan was the most important source of Chinese
imports, followed by the United States, while Great Britain had fallen to third place. Beyond
the level of overall trade, the types of goods imported from these countries differed, with
Great Britain and the United States exporting relatively more machinery and other producer
goods than Japan to China. Significant amounts of imports originated from nearby sources
such as the Dutch East Indies, French Indochina, Singapore and Australia. Among the
Continental European countries, the relatively early industrializers such as Germany and
Belgium were more important than countries that industrialized later such as Italy. Overall,
while the relative importance of trade with the British Empire had diminished, the evolution
of China's trade patterns transitioned smoothly along the foundations laid during the 19th
century.

It is useful to examine China's share of world trade in comparison with other countries.
53
     A quantitative analysis of Hong Kong's role as entrepôt is in Keller, Li, and Shiue, China's Foreign Trade,
     853-892.

                                                        21
                  Table 2: Major Sources of Chinese Imports, 1900 to 1946
                       Country                                               %

                       Japan                                             24.51
                       United States                                     22.05
                       Great Britain                                     17.02
                       British India                                      9.65
                       Germany                                            4.19
                       Java (Dutch East Indies)                           2.91
                       French Indochina                                   2.39
                       Russia (Soviet Union)                              2.10
                       Belgium-Luxembourg                                 1.85
                       Singapore                                          1.56
                       Australia                                          1.25
                       Other countries                                   10.53

                       Notes: Figures represent each country's share of total
                      imports directly into China net of imports from Hong
                      Kong.


While statistics on China's trade were meticulously recorded by the CMC, it was only at
the beginning of the 20th century that trade statistics for many other countries in the world
became available. These figures are given in Table 3.54

China accounted for about 2 percent of world trade from 1913 to 1938, with a peak in the
1920s. As we will see below, it took a large part of the 20th century before it was able
to capture a similar share of world trade. The value of China's foreign trade corresponds
to about three-quarters of that of Japan and around two-thirds of that of British India.
Unsurprisingly, China's foreign trade during this period fell far short of that of industrialized
countries such as Great Britain, the United States, and Germany.



3.4    The Volume of Trade

This section considers the volume of foreign trade of China. For concreteness, we focus
on the most important port of China during this period, which is Shanghai.55 We employ
the so-called gravity equation of trade to examine Shanghai's bilateral trade with foreign
54
   For countries other than China, see League of Nations, Statistical Yearbook of the League of Nations
   (Geneva, League of Nations, 1940).
55
   See Keller, Li, and Shiue, Shanghai's Trade, China's Growth, 336-378 for additional analysis.



                                                  22
                          Table 3: World Merchandise Trade by Country
        Country                                        Year                               Mean
                                       1913         1925          1930         1938

        China                          1.88          2.30         1.83         1.98          2.00
        Great Britain                 15.24         14.90        13.44        13.90         14.37
        United States                 11.15         14.31        12.61        10.70         12.19
        Japan                          1.79          3.07         2.62         3.20          2.67
        British India                  3.60          3.59         2.87         2.50          3.14
        Germany                       13.12          8.00         9.65         9.20          9.99

        Notes: Figures for China are from the CMC reports, various volumes. Numbers in the
       table measure exports plus imports as a percentage share of the world total.


countries. Generally, because the gravity equation is highly successful in explaining bilateral
trade, and it has been established that many trade theories imply a version of the gravity
equation.56 It is also of interest to see whether Shanghai's bilateral trade volumes during
the Treaty Port Era were unusual. The fact that trade treaties were imposed upon China
may give rise to doubts as to whether a model of trade based on voluntary exchange can
fit the data. For example, if there were forced trade for certain bilateral partners, then this
could violate the gravity model if the trades were imposed in a way that ran counter to
the economic basis of trade. What we demonstrate is that in the case of China's opening,
the gravity model still applies, suggesting that natural trade flows resulted when ports were
opened, with implications of gains from trade to China and foreign partners.

The gravity equation of trade is, in its simplest form, given by

                                                    GDPi GDPj
                                     T RADEij =               ,                                     (1)
                                                      DISTij

where i and j are two trading economies. T RADE is either exports or imports, GDP is
gross domestic product, and DIST is shipping distance. The idea is that bilateral commercial
interaction is increasing in the size of each economy (The GDPs) and declining in as trade
barriers increase (distance would be one example of a trade barrier). In its log-linearized
regression form, the equation is

                                                               
               ln T RADEij =  ln GDPi +  ln GDPj +  ln DIST + Xij  + ij ,                           (2)
56
     An overview is presented in J. Anderson, 'The Gravity Model', Annual Review of Economics 3 (2011),
     133­160.



                                                   23
               Figure 3: Predicted vs. Actual Bilateral Trade Volume for Shanghai




     Notes: On the horizontal axis is the predicted value of trade using values on the independent variables
     in the year 1904 and the gravity equation coefficients of Table 4. On the vertical axis the actual value of
     trade for the same years is given. Trade data from CMC (2001a) and Shanghai Statistical Yearbooks,
     various volumes.


where X refers to a set of control variables, and  is a regression error. We expect , > 0
and  < 0. The usual signs of the estimated coefficients are ^ > 0 and  ^ > 0 because bilateral
transactions increase in the size of the trade partners, and  ^ < 0 because greater distance
implies more resistance to trade due to higher transport costs and other impediments. The
term X includes time fixed-effects in some specifications.

The following countries and regions are included in the analysis: Continental Europe, Egypt,
Hong Kong, Japan, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and the United States.57 Among
these, Hong Kong and Singapore were entrepôts, and to control for this we include an
indicator variable. GDP for Shanghai is proxied by population. Using data for years 1869 to
1904, we estimate a positive coefficient on foreign GDP and a negative coefficient on distance.
Furthermore, the coefficients are not far from plus one (GDP) and minus one (distance).58

The fit of the gravity equation can be assessed by comparing actual with predicted trade for
a particular year. The results for 1904 are reported in Figure 3. The diagonal in each of the
graphs of Figure 3 denotes the 45-degree line, where the prediction is equal to actual trade.
We see that bilateral trade during the Treaty Port Era indeed follows the gravity equation.
The gravity equation in trade is typically derived for models of market economies based on
voluntary exchange; the results indicate that it also explains trade volumes in a time when
colonial trade and regular trade are intertwined.59
57
   Results for foreign GDP and distance are similar when we include the United Kingdom.
58
   This is in line with other finding by K. Head and T. Mayer, 'Gravity Equations: Workhorse, Toolkit,
   and Cookbook', in G. Gopinath, E. Helpman, and K. Rogoff (eds), Handbook of International Economics,
   Volume 4 (Amsterdam, Elsevier, 2014), pp. 131­195.
59
   See Keller, Li, and Shiue, 'Shanghai's Trade, China's Growth', 336-378, for further analysis.

                                                         24
4        Foreign Direct Investment in China

With the arrival of foreign traders, consulates, firms, and residents, Chinese treaty ports were
exposed to aspects of British and Western technologies in mechanization, transportation,
steam power, and other innovations in financial institutions and banking. Two channels
through which major transfers of technology can place between countries are first, capital
flows through foreign investments, and second, through foreign firms and residents. There
is abundant evidence for both direct capital flows and for the possibility of knowledge and
technological know-how to have diffused from Western countries to China.60



4.1       Capital Flows

In this and the following subsection, we highlight the fact that capital flows increased during
the 19th to early 20th century. Remer (1933) shows that Foreign Direct Investment (FDI)
grew considerably over time, even after adjusting for inflation. As shown in Table 4, in 1902,
business investments totaled around $503.2 million and this grew to $1,048.5 million in 1914
and $2,474.5 million in 1931. The primary investor was Britain who invested around 30-40%
in each year, and Japan who became a large investor by 1931 with 36.9% of the investment.
Russia, on the other hand, was a large investor in 1902 with 43.7% of the investment but
was down to only 11.1% by 1931. To put the total FDI numbers in context, Remer notes
comparable estimates for India in 1933, with between 2,000 million and 3,500 million U.S. $
in total FDI. Similar to the trade flows, FDI activity was concentrated at Shanghai (and to
a lesser extent Manchuria). In 1931 as seen in Table 5, 46.4% of the business FDI was based
in Shanghai.



4.2       Foreign Firms and Residents

Foreign Direct Investment can be seen as not just a transfer of capital, but also as a transfer
of technological know-how. Furthermore, foreign-owned companies and individuals that can
be sources of spillovers to the local economy. Generally, it is challenging to find quantitative
evidence of technological know-how transfers in historical contexts, but CMC statistics can
provide useful information for China, as summarized in the following.
60
     See also data tabulated in J. Kung's chapter, 'Economic Impact of the West', Cambridge Economic History
     of China, forthcoming.


                                                      25
                    Table 4: Business Investments in China by Country
                                       Business Investments in China by Country
                                  1902                   1914                   1913
                         Mill. US $ % of Total Mill. US $ % of Total Mill. US $ % of Total

Britain                      150           29.8              400         36.9       963.4     38.9
Japan                          1            0.2              210         19.4       912.8     36.9
Russia                      220.1          43.7             236.5        21.8        273.2    11.1
U.S.                         17.5          3.5               42           3.9       155.1     6.3
France                       29.6          5.9               60           5.5         95      3.9
Germany                       85           16.9              136         12.5         75       3
Total                       503.2          100            1,084.50       100       2,474.50   100
Source: Remer (1933), Table 13.




Table 5: Geographical Distribution of the Direct Business Investments of Four Countries,
                                         1931
                                  Direct Business Investments (Millions of U.S. Dollars)
                                  Great Japan Russia USA             Total   % of Total
                                  Britain

       Shanghai                   737.4     215                 97.5    1,049.90    46.4
       Manchuria                           550.2        261.8              812       36
       Rest of China (incl.        226     108.9        11.4    52.7       399      17.6
       Hong Kong)
       Total Business             963.4    874.1        273.2   150.2   2,260.90    100
       Investments
      Source: Remer (1933), Table 11.




                                                   26
                                   Figure 4: Foreign Firms in China by Country of Origin
             800      600
 Number of foreign firms
200      400 0
                            1872


                                       1877


                                              1882


                                                     1887


                                                            1892


                                                                        1897


                                                                               1902


                                                                                        1907


                                                                                                   1912


                                                                                                          1917


                                                                                                                 1922


                                          France     Germany            Great Britain          United States




                                                                   27
           Figure 5: Foreign Firms in China: The Case of Shanghai, 1872 - 1921




        Notes: Shown are shares of firms by foreign country (source: CMC 2001a, various
        volumes).


Figure 4 details foreign presence over time for some of the largest Treaty Powers, as measured
by the number of foreign firms. Great Britain's position as the premier colonial power of
the day is evident from the hundreds of firms and thousands of residents present in China
over the 50 years portrayed. Other powers saw their presence grow over time, though the
number of German firms and residents declined noticeably following the country's defeat in
the First World War.

Initially, much of the foreign-owned activity was linked to trade, such as retail and whole-
sale operations, banking to finance the trade, insurance to cover trade risk, shipyards to
repair ships, and railroads to provide land-based transportation. From there it spread into
other sectors of the economy. Manufacturing and mining became important especially af-
ter the Treaty of Shimonoseki (1895) established the legal right of foreigners to establish
manufacturing firms in China.61

As the most important destination for FDI, Shanghai's situation merits closer examination.
During the Treaty Port Era, the number of foreign firms in Shanghai was 152 for the year 1872
and 1,741 in the year 1921, implying an annual growth rate of about 5 percent. These firms
originated primarily from Japan and Britain, with concerns from these countries accounting
for 35 and 30 percent, respectively (Figure 5). The largest five sources accounted for 87
percent of all FDI into Shanghai.

There was much heterogeneity in the nature and scope of foreign firms operating in China.62
61
   Historical treatments of the role of foreign investment in the period can be found in C. M. Hous, Foreign
   Investment and Economic Development in China 1840­1937 (Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1965),
   Ch. 3; and A. Feuerwerker, The Foreign Establishment in China, Ch. V.
62
   See A. Feuerwerker, The Foreign Establishment in China, pp. 80­81.

                                                    28
They included large firms such as the British Jardine, Matheson and Company trading firm.
From its head office in Hong Kong and with branches in every major port, it not only
controlled its trade operations, but also managed other activities such as the operation of
the 41 Yangtze steamers of its affiliate, the Indo-China Steam Navigation Company, the
large Shanghai and Hongkew Wharf Company, the Ewo Cotton Mill, and a silk filature in
Shanghai. At the other end of the spectrum was the modest retail store Schlachterei W.
Fütterer, which was the butcher for Shanghai's German community.



5     Quantifying Foreign Influence in China during the
      Treaty Port Era

5.1    Integrated Statistics on Foreign and Domestic Trade

When a country shifts to opening its economy to more foreign trade, this also affects com-
merce in the country's interior. In the case of China during this period this can be traced
out because every port was treated as its own customs area. The following graph illustrates
the nature of the information contained in the CMC reports. Figure 6 shows the trade flows
to and from Shanghai, for example, that were reported by the CMC. These flows are decom-
posed and labeled from one to nine. The first breakdown is by type of good; flows 1 to 4
concern goods that are produced abroad (foreign goods; abbreviated F), while flows 5 to 9
show trade in goods that are produced in China (Chineseproduced goods; abbreviated D).
Flow 1 gives the imports of goods from Japan into Shanghai. Other imports of foreign goods
into Shanghai consist of those coming from other Chinese treaty ports; in the figure, flow
4 represents the foreign goods reaching Shanghai via Xiamen. Once imported into Shang-
hai, these foreign goods may be reexported. The CMC data allow us to distinguish between
reexports of foreign goods to foreign countries (flow 2) or to other treaty ports within China
(flow 3).

The statistics on reexports of foreign goods provide key information on the extent to which
foreign imports diffused throughout the country, something that has important welfare im-
plications in the case of a large country such as China. They also offer a direct measure of the
consumption of foreign goods in the treaty ports as withinport foreign goods consumption
may be obtained by subtracting reexports from foreign imports. Separately from foreign
goods trade, the CMC data also reports trade in Chineseproduced goods. Flow 5, for ex-
ample, shows Chineseproduced goods that are exported from Shanghai to foreign countries.

                                              29
                Figure 6: Export and Import Flows to and from Shanghai




These exports are direct exports in the sense that the goods are produced in the Greater
Shanghai area. The direct exports are to be distinguished from other Chineseproduced
goods that are exported abroad from Shanghai but were produced elsewhere in China (flow
6). Both direct exports and reexports capture major aspects of the evolution of an economy.
In particular, the size of direct exports demonstrates the change in the production possibil-
ity of the local economy, while the extent of reexports sheds light on the development (and
trade integration) of the hinterland as well as the capacities of the entrepôts (in this case,
Shanghai).

Flow 7 represents Shanghaiproduced goods that are exported to other parts of China,
whereas flow 8 gives the export of Chineseproduced goods that flow from one region of China
to another through Shanghai. The information on domestic exports of Chineseproduced
goods at the portlevel is thus comparable to the information on foreign exports. Finally,
flow 9 shows Shanghai's imports of Chinese goods that were produced elsewhere in China.


5.2    Welfare Effects from Foreign Influence: China's Domestic Trade

This section quantifies the size and distribution of welfare effects from new technology due to
foreign influence in terms of China's domestic trade using a well-known trade model (Eaton

                                              30
and Kortum 2002).63 The model captures the Ricardian determinants of comparative advan-
tage, differences in relative productivities across goods, and relates them to the geography
separating the trading partners.

First, there is the technology of each trading partner, which determines the cost at which
a good can be produced in different regions, and, therefore determines which region has
the lowest factory-gate production costs. Second, there is the size of trade barriers between
regions; for example, trade barriers between regions i and j determine the trade-cost-inclusive
price in region j of a good that is produced in region i. Because trade costs are increasing in
geographic distance between regions, geography is the second key force in the model. Using
historical data on prices, trade flows of domestically produced goods, and input uses, we can
calibrate and solve the model in the context of Treaty Port Era China.

Figure 7 shows the volumes of aggregate bilateral trade, with the thickness of each line
proportional to the size of the flow. The maximum distance between any two regions in
our bilateral pairs is about 2,700 kilometers. Exports are shown in the same shade as the
region's label and are offset towards the center of the figure. We see that Hankow exports
a large amount of its production to Shanghai, for example, while Tientsin's imports from
Hankow are smaller than Tientsin's imports from Shanghai. Importantly, the trade volumes
shown in Figure 7 are for locally produced goods.

Commodity-level trade data are employed to estimate a key model parameter governing the
strength of comparative advantage. Employing 26 homogeneous commodities that are traded
between virtually all 15 regions­including coal, matches, and cotton yarn­price differences
across ports are used to pin down this parameter. The commodity-level trade data are also
employed to estimate trade costs between any two regions, because arbitrage ensures that
the price difference for a given good between two regions is an upper bound on the trade
costs between these two regions.64

With key parameters and the model in hand, one can perform interesting counterfactual
experiments. One is to increase the parameter capturing port productivity by 20 percent.
This magnitude is reasonable given that customs operation by the CMC brought with it
a wide range of improvements, such as dredging of the harbor, the construction of new
lighthouses, increased protection from pirates, and the customs process itself. Increasing
the productivity of Shanghai by this amount while leaving all other parameters unchanged
raises GDP (our measure of welfare) in Shanghai by 1.5 percent, and general equilibrium
63
     This section is based on Keller, Santiago, and Shiue, 'China's Domestic Trade', 26­43.
64
     See Keller, Santiago, and Shiue, 'China's Domestic Trade', 26­43, for information on other, related, data.

                                                       31
 Figure 7: The Size of Bilateral Trade between Regions




Source: Calculated from CMC trade data.




                            32
                        Table 6: Lower Geographic Barriers and Welfare
                                            Trade Barriers 50%
                                               % change relative to
                                                   baseline
                                             (1)          (2)          (3)
                                           Welfare     Prices        Wages
                        Amoy                2.58       ­7.15         ­2.07
                        Chefoo              0.17         4.25         9.36
                        Chinkiang           0.75       ­2.90         ­3.53
                        Foochow             2.15         0.05         4.02
                        Canton              1.67       ­0.03          3.24
                        Hankow              2.01       10.23         10.30
                        Ichang              8.90      ­26.89        ­24.80
                        Kiaochow            1.95       ­6.13         ­2.79
                        Kiukiang            3.51       ­8.00         ­2.26
                        Newchwang           4.22       ­3.48          9.96
                        Ningbo            ­31.41       15.12        ­32.25
                        Swatow              0.27         3.22        14.44
                        Tientsin            3.43         4.25         8.95
                        Wuhu                2.38       ­4.59          1.77
                        Shanghai          ­17.29       23.73         ­7.76

                                            % change in overall trade
                                            13.14
Notes: Table shows results of lowering geographic barriers by 50 percent relative to baseline trade costs.


effects lead to an increase of GDP by about a quarter of one percent on average in the other
regions.

Table 6 presents the results of reductions in trade costs, as would have happened through
the introduction of foreign steamship technology. Trade increases by 13 percent as a result
of the lower trade costs. Welfare gains, however, are unevenly distributed across ports, and
some regions, in particular Shanghai and Ningbo, experience welfare losses.

The intuition for this lies in the reallocation of production and trade. Lower trade barriers
diminish the relative importance of technology-based advantages. Notice that the four re-
gions with the lowest welfare gains are Shanghai, Ningbo, Chefoo, and Swatow. They turn
out to be also the four regions with the highest level of labor-cost adjusted technology. For
such regions lower trade barriers means that they might no longer be the low-cost source of
supply in some region because with lower trade costs that region now imports from elsewhere.
As a result, welfare in the high-technology regions might fall.


                                                    33
Further, Shanghai and Ningbo are relatively centrally located in China, which means that
before the reduction of trade barriers these regions had a sizable low transport-cost based
advantage compared to other regions. In contrast, Chefoo and Swatow are located in geo-
graphically more remote parts of China. They lose some markets as a result of the lower
trade barriers at the same time when they maintain their hold on others precisely because
of their geographic location. As a consequence, Chefoo and Swatow lose less than Shanghai
and Ningbo.



5.3     The Geographic Scope of Foreign Influence

The previous analysis has assessed the welfare effects of foreign trade and technology for
China through the lens of a specific trade model. The impact of foreign influence in China
can also be studied using a less-structural, regression-based approach. Specifically, foreign in-
fluence in China originated from the foreign places, often treaty ports, in which the foreigners
with their firms, families, and institutions were located. While treaty ports never accounted
for more than ten percent of China's output, foreign influence in the treaty ports might have
generated spillovers for neighboring areas and China's hinterland.65 Moreover, this literature
emphasizes the role of institutions for the impact of foreign countries in China.66

Connecting the anecdotal and case study evidence, Keller and Shiue (2020) estimate the
impact of foreign institutions on the level of interest rates in China's regional capital markets
during the 19th century. Using variation on the location of opening treaty ports, customs
stations, and foreign consulates, which supported trade by enforcing legal courts in China,
they show that foreign institutions had a positive impact by substantially lowering regional
interest rates relative to areas without foreign influence.67
65
   See B. K. L. So, H. Yip, T. Shiroyama, and K. Matsubara, 'Modern China's Treaty port Economy in Insti-
   tutional Perspective', presented at the All-University of California Group in Economic History, February
   2011, (Berkeley, CA).
66
   D. Ma, 'The Rise of Modern Shanghai: 1900-1936: An Institutional Perspective', in So and Myers (eds),
   The Treaty Port Economy in Modern China: Empirical Studies of Institutional Change and Economic
   Performance (Institute of East Asian Studies, 2011), pp. 33-46 discusses the expansion of Western institu-
   tions in Shanghai in the early 20th century; T. Shiroyama, 'The Shanghai Real Estate Market and Capital
   Investment, 1860-1936', in So and Myers (eds), The Treaty Port Economy in Modern China: Empirical
   Studies of Institutional Change and Economic Performance (Institute of East Asian Studies, 2011), pp.
   47-74 deals with institutional changes in real estate markets that promoted economic change; and K. Chan,
   'The Rice and Wheat Flour Market Economies in the Lower Yangzi, 1900-1936', in So and Myers (ed),
   The Treaty Port Economy in Modern China: Empirical Studies of Institutional Change and Economic
   Performance (Institute of East Asian Studies, 2011), pp. 75-95 shows how the expansion of vertical inte-
   gration in grain markets was directly related to the presence of foreign technologies and economic activity
   in treaty ports.
67
   Chinese capital markets are compared with British markets for the period 1770 to 1860 in W. Keller,

                                                     34
         Figure 8: The Impact of Foreign Influence in China: Geographic Effects




Notes: Source is Keller and Shiue, 'Capital Markets and Colonial Institutions in China'.


Their work also quantifies the scope of foreign influence by estimating the size of geographic
spillovers of the foreign impact. Figure 8 shows that a foreign consulate located at up to 200
kilometers from the center of the region leads to a lower interest rate by about -1.3 percentage
points, and a similar effect comes from an open treaty port within 200 kilometers. The results
point to a relatively strong impact through foreign consular courts, with their foreign legal
practices due to extraterritoriality, because consulates generated significant spillovers for up
to four hundred kilometers (in contrast to treaty ports).

The implications for the geographic scope of foreign influence can be seen by plotting the
predicted effects from the regression on a map of China, see Figure 9. While the analysis
confirms that foreign influence in China was strongest where foreigners had their strongest
presence, Figure 9 also indicates that by the 1890s, the geographic scope of foreign influence
 C. H. Shiue, and X. Wang, 'Capital Market Development in China and Britain, 18th and 19th Century:
 Evidence from Grain Prices', American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, in press (2020); see also W.
 Keller, C. H. Shiue, and X. Wang, 'Capital markets and grain prices: assessing the storage cost approach',
 Cliometrica 14 (2020b), 367­396 for more on the estimation of comparable interest rates.

                                                   35
            Figure 9: The Impact of Foreign Influence on Local Capital Markets




Notes: Figure gives predicted effects for the year 1890 of analysis underlying Figure 8; treaty ports shown.


                                                    36
may have been felt in the majority of China's areas.



6     The Granular View: Chinese Commodity-Level Trade

6.1    Mapping China's Trade to the First International Trade Clas-
       sification

The League of Nation's Minimum List of Commodities (1935; MLC) emerged as the first way
of recording international trade data in a consistent way from the 1931 League of Nation's
tariff Nomenclature. The MLC is the precursor of the modern day Standard International
Trade Classification (SITC). At the time of the MLC's creation China's government stated
that it was not prepared to compile statistics based on the MLC classifications. However,
to be able to consistently track China's international trade over time and for making inter-
national comparisons, we have matched CMC information on Chinese exports of the years
1867 to 1930 to the MLC classification.

We create a match to the MLC classification by assigning each CMC export to an MLC
commodity number with up to 8 digits for every year from 1867 to 1930. For example,
our version of the MLC classification contains in its Chapter 8 the item "Beans and Peas,"
classified with item number 0803 (item 03 in chapter 08). This item is further disaggregated
into other items such as "Beans" (080301) or "Peas" (080302). The item "Beans" contains an
even finer classification with different varieties of beans such as "Beans, Black" (08030101)
or "Beans, Green" (08030103), among others.

This detailed mapping of China's commodity-level trade enables us to consistently track the
evolution of China's exports starting in a period for which to date there is little systematic
information. It is also instrumental to studying the changing commodity structure in China's
trade, in particular the emergence of new goods, to which we turn now.



6.2    Quantifying New and Disappearing Goods in China's Trade

New goods in trade matter for several reasons. For one, in the absence of comprehensive
information on supply, exports of a new good is proof of a certain level of production ca-
pability. The arrival of new goods also provides evidence on the level of specialization in

                                             37
production. On the demand side, new goods reflect changes in consumption patterns, and
they are indicative of changes in income because demand is non-homothetic (e.g., the share
spend on luxury goods increases with income). New goods can also be an important source
of utility (welfare) gains.68

The importance of new goods and of disappearing goods between two years s and t, with
s being earlier, can be quantified by considering the set of goods that is available in year
s, the set of goods available in year t, and the set of goods that is available in both years
s and t. Clearly, the set of goods available in both years will typically be smaller than the
set of goods that is available in a single year.69 Now consider the value of goods available
both in years s and t evaluated at prices of year s, relative to the value goods of year s at
prices of year s; call this expression s . Because both of these bundles are evaluated in year-s
prices but the first set is (weakly) smaller than the second, s must be smaller or equal to
one (s  1). Also, let the value of goods available both in years s and t evaluated at prices
of year t, relative to the value goods of year t at prices of year t, be denoted by t . For
analogous reasons, also t must be smaller or equal to one (t  1).

Table 7 shows what the values of t and s tell us about the importance of new and dis-
appearing goods. To begin with, t = 1 indicates that all goods that are available in year
t were also available in s (no new goods). In contrast, t < 1 indicates that some of the
goods available in year t were not available in year s. That is, some new goods appeared by
year t . The case s = 1 indicates that all the goods that were available in year s are also
available in year t (none of the goods disappeared). Finally, s < 1 indicates that some of
the goods available in year s were not available in year t (some goods disappeared by period
t ). Thus, for any earlier year s and later year t, t provides information about new goods
while s tells us about disappearing goods.70

To implement this in our case, ideally one would like to have the value of trade on every
item in every year­at the most disaggregated, eight-digit level­ that was ever exported in
any year during the period 1867 to 1930. Because the information collected by the CMC
covers virtually the universe of China's foreign trade it is well-suited for an extensive-margin
analysis. At the same time, the CMC reports China's universe of exports with a classification
that has a varying degree of disaggregation and is changing over time. In essence, in the early
68
   See R. Feenstra, 'New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International Prices', The American
   Economic Review 1 (1994), 157­177 for more analysis.
69
   The former will be smaller than the set of goods available in at least one of the years, except when the
   sets of goods in s and t are the same.
70
   For values of s and t below one, it is important to keep in mind that these expressions reflect the value,
   not the product count of disappearing and new goods, respectively.

                                                     38
                 Table 7: Measuring the Appearance and Disappearance of Goods

                                           s = 1                            s < 1

                                                                 · Some goods disappear
                                 · Same goods in both
                t = 1                                              between years s and t
                                          years
                                                                · No new goods by year t

                                 · No goods disappear            · Some goods disappear
                t < 1             between years s and t            between years s and t
                                 · New goods by year t            · New goods by year t


years China's exports are relatively low and only a few relatively aggregate categories are
distinguished, while in the final years of the sample period exports are higher and many more
goods are reported at a relatively disaggregated level. The category that ensures that CMC
statistics cover the universe of exports in every year is called "Sundries, unenumerated",
which is listed in every year. The Sundries category is not further defined but it includes all
other goods that do not fit into any of the other categories defined in the CMC statistics in
a particular year.

Our approach for studying the extensive margin of trade is based on the fact that the CMC
produced a major update of its goods classification only every couple of years.71 In a year
when there is a major increase in terms of reported product groups, one typically observes a
substantial decline in Sundries exports. This is indicative the fact that before this year, the
newly reported product groups were part of the Sundries category. To fix ideas, beginning
in the year 1896, CMC statistics report the value of "Cattle, Sheep, Goats and Pigs" as
its own export category. Presumably, this is due to the fact that there was a sizable and
sustained export of these animals, but it would be erroneous to conclude that China did not
export any cattle, sheep, goats, or pigs before the year 1896--export of such livestock is not
a "new good" export of China in the year 1896. Rather, prior to that year, the value of the
exports of such livestock was recorded as part of the Sundries category. Further, starting
in the year 1910 CMC statistics report export values for "Cattle", "Sheep", "Goats" and
"Pigs" separately.

An extreme approach to the new-goods margin is to assume that there are not any new
goods, only redefinitions of previously traded goods. In the example, this means that given
we observe positive exports of "Cattle", "Sheep", "Goats" and "Pigs" separately in the year
71
     To identify these years we employ a threshold value for the change in Sundries exports from one year to
     the next; different threshold values are employed to ensure the robustness of the analysis.


                                                      39
1930, we assume that all of these items were also exported already in the year 1867. Our
way of implementing this approach to estimate disaggregated export values for 1867 (and
any later year) is to use the 1910 export values of "Cattle", "Sheep", "Goats" and "Pigs"
to allocate the given export values of the single category "Cattle, Sheep, Goats and Pigs"
during 1896 and 1909 between the four different types of livestock. To obtain values for
earlier years we use the fact that livestock exports before 1896 are part of Sundries, which
implies that livestock exports in 1895 are equal to the change in Sundries exports between
1895 and 1896.72 We arrive at disaggregated export values for the year 1867 (and any later
year) by using the change in Sundries exports between 1895 and 1867 together with the
disaggregated livestock shares that are available for the years 1910 to 1930.

While this approach is conceptually straightforward, t is equal to one for every year t, that
is, there are no new goods by assumption. To allow for the possibility of new goods, we define
a baseline threshold value of exports for the new good relative to the change in Sundries
exports category. Thus, for example, if the exports of "Cattle" in 1895 that we estimate
based on the change in Sundries exports from 1895 to 1896 is below this threshold, we take
"Cattle" to be a newly exported item in the year 1896. We vary this baseline threshold to
ensure the robustness of our analysis.



6.3       The Importance of New and Disappearing Goods

The sixty-four years of data, 1867 to 1930, provide an excellent setting to explore the in-
troduction of new goods and the disappearance of existing goods. We construct a 64 × 64
matrix of 's for each s and t pair, which is shown in Figure 10.

For any pair of different years (s < t ), t is shown in position (t, s) on the right of the
diagonal in Figure 10, and s in position (s, t) to the left of the diagonal in Figure 10. In
particular, in our baseline approach the (1930, 1867) element is equal to 0.334. This indicates
that the 1930 value of the goods available in both 1867 and 1930 represents about one third
of the 1930 value of all the goods available in the year 1930. Thus, many new goods appeared
between 1867 and 1930, or at least the new goods had relatively high value compared to
the old (1867) goods. This indicates that there was a substantial change in the composition
of the goods exported from China over this period. Furthermore, the (1867, 1930) element
in this matrix is equal to 0.999. Thus, the 1867 value of the goods available in both 1867
72
     In practice, "Cattle", "Sheep", "Goats" and "Pigs" exports are not the only new categories that are
     introduced in the year 1896. We account for that by assuming the sum of all new category exports in a
     year, when there are major changes, is equal to the change in Sundries trade.

                                                     40
                 Figure 10: New and Disappearing Goods: China's Exports




Notes: Source is authors' computations based on CMC (2001b) trade statistics.




                                                  41
and 1930 represents almost 100 percent of the 1867 value of all the goods available in that
year. It means that either only few goods disappeared between 1867 and 1930, or that those
goods that disappeared had a relatively low value. This indicates that the appearance of
new goods (or their value) tends to be more important than the disappearance of old goods
in China in the 19th and early 20th century.

The work on mapping the commodity-level trade of China over time is still in progress, yet
the above analysis has shown that investigations of various margins of trade are feasible
with historical trade data for China. The new goods that enter foreign trade are likely to
generate implications for welfare; they are likely to impact domestic markets and domestic
firms by changing the conditions for innovation and competition. The fact that the CMC
collected detailed statistics on commodity-level trade means that we will ultimately be able
to produce a complete picture of the historical evolution of China's comparative advantage
and trade, which is rarely available in the case of other countries.



7    Conclusions

Today, China is one of the largest traders in the world. Unlike the emperors of the past,
China is actively engaged in and pursuing the gains from openness, be that commodity
trade or foreign direct investment. Nevertheless, China's prominence in global trade today
can be linked to its historical past. From the 17th to the 18th century, China's foreign
trade and foreign diplomacy was an inherent part of the the socioeconomic and political
context of Asia. The empire had emerged as a dominant power in the region through a wide
combination of strategies that included tributary trade, colonialism, economic investment,
and military conquest. Compared to the Ming state, the Qing state had a relatively laissez-
faire stance towards the activities of merchants in domestic markets and within the sphere of
intra-Asian foreign trade. Nevertheless, Qing emperors reserved the right to regulate trade,
and in particular, the Sino-Western trade. For over a century, China was able to enforce its
foreign policy on Western traders. In the 1839, a combination of conflicts on market access,
opium imports, and foreign diplomacy resulted in the Opium Wars. Over the 19th century,
China was forced to sign a series of treaties with foreign powers that legally entitled Western
nations and Japan to establish numerous ports of trade, customs stations, consular cities
and other types of port cities within China.

The Treaty Port system originated in the effort to open up China's markets to Western
traders, and subsequent institutions that arrived in China sought to support that trade.

                                              42
Besides for the Chinese Maritime Customs Service, pervasive legal institutions--in the form
of consular offices and formal courts--were also established to support foreign trade. From
the mid-19th century until the departure of the Chinese Maritime Customs Service in the
20th century, the quantity and quality of data that was collected on Chinese international and
domestic trade increased dramatically. This chapter documented the trends and highlighted
a few methodologies that can be used to allow researchers to gain a window into the economy
of China during this time. These data can be used to investigate numerous additional
questions about international and domestic trade, as well as the impact of foreign trade on
the welfare of China. In addition, as the data is particularly detailed with respect to port-
level information, it is exceptionally valuable for understanding the conceptual relationships
between international trade and regional (domestic) trade more generally when a country
changes its trading regime.

We find that already by the 1890's foreign influence in China was strongest where foreigners
had their strongest presence, and spillover effects may have resulted in the majority of China's
areas being affected. While we have yet to reach a complete understanding of the global
effects of foreign trade and factor flows in the past two centuries, beyond the direct impact
of trade and specialization, the most important effects during the Treaty Port Era are likely
related to interactions with foreign institutions and technology transfer. Investigations of
the various margins of trade on welfare, innovation, and competition are promising areas of
further research. More generally, it will open new ground with respect to our understanding
of China's history of development as it relates to the legacy of the Treaty Port Era.




                                              43
References
 [1] Allen, R., J.-P. Bassino, D. Ma, C. Moll-Murata, and J. J. van Zanden (2007). Wages,
     Prices, and Living Standards in China, Japan, and Europe, 1738­1925. The Economic
     History Review Special Issue: Asia in the Great Divergence 64 (1): 3-38.

 [2] Anderson, J. (2011). The Gravity Model. Annual Review of Economics 3, 133­160.

 [3] Bergère, M. (2009). Shanghai, China's Gateway to Modernity. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford
     University Press.

 [4] Beeching, J. (1975). The Chinese Opium Wars. NY: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

 [5] Berg, M. (2006). "Britain, industry and perceptions of China: Matthew Boulton, 'useful
     knowledge' and the Macartney Embassy to China", Journal of Global History 1 (2):
     269-288.

 [6] Bickers, R. (2008). Revisiting the Chinese Maritime Customs Service, 1854­1950. The
     Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History 36 (2), 221­226.

 [7] Bickers, Robert, and I. Jackson, eds. (2016). Treaty Ports in Modern China: Law, Land,
     and Power. London: Routledge.

 [8] Brenner, R. (2003). Merchants and Revolution: Commercial Change, Political Conflict,
     and London's Overseas Traders, 1550-1653. Princeton University Press.

 [9] Brook, T. and B.T. Wakabayashi eds. (2000). Opium Regimes: China, Britain, and
     Japan, 1839-1952. Berkeley: University of California Press.

[10] Brunero, D. (2004). Britain's Imperial Cornerstone: The Chinese Maritime Customs
     Service, 1854­1949. New York: Routledge Curzon.

[11] Chan, K. (2011), "The Rice and Wheat Flour Market Economies in the Lower Yangzi,
     1900-1936", in So and Myers (2011), chapter 4.

[12] Chang, H. (1964). Commissioner Lin and the Opium War. Harvard University Press.

[13] Chen J. and P. Cheng, M. Lestz, with J. Spence (2013). The Search for Modern China:
     A Documentary Collection, 3rd edition. W.W. Norton & Company.

[14] Chinese Maritime Customs (CMC) (2001a). Decennial Reports, First Issue (1882­1891),
     Second Issue (1892­1901), Third Issue (1902­1911), Fourth Issue (1912­1921) and Fifth
     Issue (1922­ 1931). Shanghai: Statistical Department of the Inspectorate General of
     Customs.

[15] Chinese Maritime Customs Service (CMC) (2001b). Returns of Trade and Trade Re-
     ports, various years. Shanghai: Statistical Department of the Inspectorate General of
     Customs.



                                            44
[16] Dikötter, F. and L. Laamann, Z. Xun (2002). "Narcotic Culture: A Social History of
     Drug Consumption in China", The British Journal of Criminology, 42 (2): 317-336.

[17] Downs, J. M. (2014). The Golden Ghetto: The American Commercial Community at
     Canton and the Shaping of American China Policy, 1784-1844. Hong Kong: Hong Kong
     University Press.

[18] Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (2002). Technology, Geography, and Trade. Econometrica 70
     (5), 1741­ 1779.

[19] Elliot, M. (2009). Qianlong: Son of Heaven, Man of the World. Pearson.

[20] Fairbank, J. K. (1942). Tributary Trade and China's Relations with the West. The Far
     Eastern Quarterly 1(2), 129-149.

[21] Fairbank, J. K. (1969). Trade and Diplomacy on the China Coast: The Opening of the
     Treaty Ports, 1842-1854. Harvard University Press. First edition published in 1953.

[22] Fairbank, J.K. and S.Y. Teng (1941). "On the Ch'ing Tributary System", Harvard
     Journal of Asiatic Studies 6 (2): 135-246.

[23] Fay, P.W. (1998). The Opium War, 1840-1842: Barbarians in the Celestial Empire.
     University of North Carolina Press.

[24] Feenstra, R. (1994). New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International
     Prices. The American Economic Review 84 (1), 157­177.

[25] Feuerwerker, A. (1976). The Foreign Establishment in China in the Early Twentieth
     Century. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan.

[26] Feuerwerker, A. (1980). Economic Trends in the Late Ch'ing Empire, 1870­1911. In
     The Cambridge History of China Vol. 11, Part 2. Edited by J. Fairbank and K.C. Liu.
     Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1­69.

[27] Findlay, R. and K. O'Rourke (2007). Power and Plenty: Trade, War, and The World
     Economy in the Second Millennium. Princeton University Press.

[28] Frank, A.G. (1998). ReOrient: Global Economy in the Asian Age. University of Cali-
     fornia Press.

[29] Great Britain. Foreign Office. (1840). Correspondence relating to China: presented to
     both houses of Parliament, by command of Her Majesty. 1840. London: Printed by T.R.
     Harrison.

[30] Greenberg, M. (1951). British Trade and the Opening of China 1800­1842. Cambridge,
     UK: Cambridge University Press.

[31] Hall, B. E. F. (1977). "The Chinese Maritime Customs: An International Servie, 1854-
     1950". The Chinese Maritime Customs Project Occasional papers: No. 5. Reproduction.
     Bristol: University of Bristol.

                                           45
[32] Hamashita, T. (2008). China, East Asia, and the Global Economy: Regional and His-
     torical Perspectives. Routledge.

[33] Hang, X. (2015). Conflict and Commerce in Maritime East Asia: The Zheng Family
     and the Shaping of the Modern World, c. 1620-1720. Cambridge University Press.

[34] Head, K. and T. Mayer (2014). Gravity Equations: Workhorse, Toolkit, and Cook-
     book. In Handbook of International Economics, Volume 4. Edited by G. Gopinath, E.
     Helpman, and K. Rogoff. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 131­195.

[35] Hevia, J. L. (1995). Cherishing Men from Afar: Qing Guest Ritual and the Macartney
     Embassy of 1793. Durham: Duke University Press.

[36] Hou, C.-M. (1965). Foreign Investment and Economic Development in China 1840­1937.
     Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

[37] Hsiao, L. (1974). China's Foreign Trade Statistics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
     Press.

[38] Hsü, I. C. Y. (1970). The Rise of Modern China. Oxford University Press.

[39] Jia, R. (2014). "The legacy of forced freedom: China's treaty ports", Review of Eco-
     nomics and Statistics 96 (4): 596-608.

[40] Jiang, Tingfu (1938). Zhongguo jindai shi [Modern Chinese History]. (Changsha:
     Shangwu, 1938). Reprint, Shanghai: Shanghai guji chubanshe, 2001.

[41] Kang, D. (2010). East Asia Before the West: Five Centuries of Trade and Tribute.
     Columbia University Press.

[42] Keller, W., B. Li, and C. H. Shiue (2011). "China's Foreign Trade: Perspectives from
     the Past 150 Years", The World Economy 34 (6): 853-892.

[43] Keller, W., B. Li, and C. H. Shiue (2012). "The Evolution of Domestic Trade Flows when
     Foreign Trade is Liberalized: Evidence from the Chinese Maritime Customs Service",
     in Institutions and Comparative Economic Development, M. Aoki, T. Kuran, and G.
     Roland (eds.), Palgrave Macmillan.

[44] Keller, W., B. Li, and C. H. Shiue (2013). "Shanghai's Trade, China's Growth: Con-
     tinuity, Recovery, and Change since the Opium War", IMF Economic Review 61 (2):
     336-378.

[45] Keller, W., J. A. Santiago, and C. H. Shiue (2017). "China's Domestic Trade during
     the Treaty-Port Era", Explorations in Economic History 63, 26­43.

[46] Keller, W., M. Lampe, and C. H. Shiue (2020). "International Transactions: Real Trade
     and Factor Flows", Cambridge Economic History of the Modern World, Broadberry, S.,
     and K. Fukao (eds.).



                                            46
[47] Keller, W., and C. H. Shiue (2020). "Capital Markets and Colonial Institutions in
     China", presentation at NBER Summer Institute, July 2020, Cambridge, MA.

[48] Keller, W., C. H. Shiue, and X. Wang (2020a), "Capital Market Development in China
     and Britain, 18th and 19th Century: Evidence from Grain Prices", forthcoming, Amer-
     ican Economic Journal: Applied Economics.

[49] Keller, W., C. H. Shiue, and X. Wang (2020b), "Capital markets and grain prices:
     assessing the storage cost approach", Cliometrica Vol.14, pages 367­396.

[50] Kung, J. (2020). "Economic Impact of the West: Findings from New Data", Chapter
     prepared for the Cambridge Economic History of China, forthcoming.

[51] League of Nations (1940). Statistical Yearbook of the League of Nations. Geneva:
     League of Nations.

[52] Liu, T. and K. Yeh (1965). The Economy of the Chinese Mainland: National Income
     and Economic Development, 1933­1959. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

[53] Lovell, J. (2015). The Opium War: Drugs, Dreams and the Making of Modern China.
     Abrams Press.

[54] Lutz, J. G. (2008). Opening China: Karl F. A. Gützlaff and Sino-Western Relations,
     1827-1852. William B Erdsman Publishing.

[55] Lyons, T. (1973). China Maritime Customs and China's Trade Statistics, 1859­1948.
     Trumansburg, NY: Willow Creek Press.

[56] Ma, D. (2011), "The Rise of Modern Shanghai: 1900-1936: An Institutional Perspec-
     tive", in So and Myers (2011), Chapter 2.

[57] Mayers, W. F., N. B. Dennys, and C. King. (1867). The Treaty Ports of China and
     Japan: A Complete Guide to the Open Ports of Those Countries, Together with Peking,
     Yedo, Hongkong and Macao. London: Trübner.

[58] Miyakawa, H. (1955). "The Nait Hypothesis and its Effects on Japanese Studies of
     China." Far Eastern Quarterly 14 (4), Special Number on Chinese History and Society:
     533-52.

[59] Mokyr, J. (2016). A Culture of Growth: The Origins of the Modern Economy. Princeton
     University Press.

[60] Morse, H. B. (1926­29) The Chronicles of the East India Company, Trading to China
     1635­1834, volumes 1­5. Oxford: The Clarendon Press.

[61] Morse, H. B. (1910). The International Relations of the Chinese Empire, Vol. 1. Long-
     mans, Green, and Company.

[62] Murphey, R. (1977). The Outsiders: The Western Experience in India and China. Ann
     Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

                                           47
[63] Nield, R. (2015). China's Foreign Places: The Foreign Presence in China in the Treaty
     Port Era, 1840-1943. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press.

[64] Peng, H. (2019). Trade Relations between Qing China and Tokugawa Japan. UK:
     Springer.

[65] Perdue,      P.     C.      (2011).   "The     First   Opium      War:          The
     Anglo-Chinese       War       of    1839-1842"     MIT    Visualizing      Cultures,
     https://visualizingcultures.mit.edu/opium_wars_01/ow1_essay01.html.

[66] Perdue, P. C. (2005). China Marches West: The Qing Conquest of Central Eurasia.
     Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

[67] Perkins, D. (1969). Agricultural Development in China 1368­1968. Chicago: Aldine
     Publishing Company.

[68] Pomeranz, K. (2000). The Great Divergence. Princeton University Press.

[69] Qi, S. (1959), Huangfuezi Xu Naiji zouyi hekan (A combined volume of Huangjuezi's
     and Xu Naiji's memorials). Beijing: Zhonghua shuju.

[70] Qin, H. (1998), Yunnan yapian wenti yujinyan yundong (The problem of opium in
     Yunnan and the movement of opium prohibition). Chengdu: Sichuan minzu chuban
     she.

[71] Rawski, T. (1969). "Chinese Dominance of Treaty Port Commerce and its Implications
     1860-1875", Explorations in Economic History 7 (1-2): 451-473.

[72] Reid, A. (1990a). "An 'Age of Commerce' in Southeast Asian History", Modern Asian
     Studies 24 (1): 1-30.

[73] Reid, A. (1990b). "The Seventeenth-Century Crisis in Southeast Asia", Modern Asian
     Studies 24 (4): 639-659.

[74] Reinhardt, A. (2018). Navigating Semi-Colonialism: Shipping, Sovereignty, and Nation-
     Building in China, 1860­1937. Harvard East Asian Monograph Series, no. 41. Cam-
     bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press

[75] Remer, C. F. (1933). Foreign Investment in China. MacMillan.

[76] Rowe, W. (2009). China's Last Empire: The Great Qing. Cambridge, MA: The Belknap
     Press of Harvard University Press.

[77] See, C. S. (1919). The Foreign Trade of China. NY: Columbia University Press.

[78] Shiroyama, T. (2011), "The Shanghai Real Estate Market and Capital Investment,
     1860-1936", in So and Myers (2011), Chapter 3.

[79] Shiue, C. H. (2002). Transport Costs and the Geography of Arbitrage in Eighteenth
     Century China. The American Economic Review 92 (5), 1406­1419.

                                           48
[80] Shiue, C. H. (2017). "Human Capital and Fertility in Chinese Clans." Journal of Eco-
     nomic Growth 22: 351-396

[81] Shiue, C. H. and W. Keller (2007). "Markets in China and Europe on the Eve of the
     Industrial Revolution". The American Economic Review 97 (4), 1189­1216.

[82] Slade, J. (1839). Narrative of the late proceedings and events in China. Canton Register
     Press.

[83] So, B. K. L. and R. Myers (2011), The Treaty Port Economy in Modern China, So and
     Myers (eds.), Institute of East Asian Studies, University of California-Berkeley.

[84] So, B. K. L. and J. Su (2000). Prosperity, Region, and Institutions in Maritime China:
     The South Fukien Pattern, 946-1368. Harvard University Asia Center.

[85] So, B. K. L., H. Yip, T. Shiroyama, and K. Matsubara (2011), "Modern China's Treaty-
     port Economy in Institutional Perspective", paper presented at the All-University of
     California Group in Economic History, Berkeley, CA, February.

[86] Spence, J. (1992). "Opium", Chinese Roundabout. Norton.

[87] Su, Zhiliang (1997). Zhongguo dupin shi [A History of Drugs in China]. Shanghai:
     Shanghai renmin chubanshe.

[88] van de Ven, H. (2004). Globalizing Chinese History. History Compass 2 (1), 1­5.

[89] von Glahn, R. (2007). Foreign Silver Coins in the Market Culture of Nineteenth Century.
     International Journal of Asian Studies 4 (1), 51-78.

[90] von Glahn, R. (2016). The Economic History of China: From Antiquity to the Nine-
     teenth Century. Cambridge University Press.

[91] Wade, G. (2005). "The Zheng He Voyages: A Reassessment", Journal of the Malaysian
     Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 78 (1): 37-58.

[92] Wade, G. (2009). "An early Age of Commerce in Southeast Asia, 900-1300 CE", Journal
     of Southeast Asian Studies 40 (2): 221-265.

[93] Wakeman, R. (1997). Strangers at the Gate: Social Disorder in South China, 1839-1861.
     Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

[94] Wallerstein, I. (1974). The Modern World System: Capitalist Agriculture and the Ori-
     gins of the European World-Economy in the Sixteenth Century, Vol. 1. Academic Press:
     New York.

[95] Waley, A. (1963). The Opium War through Chinese Eyes. Stanford University Press.

[96] Wang, Z. (2012). Never Forget National Humiliation: Historical Memory in Chinese
     Politics and Foreign Relations. New York: Columbia University Press.


                                             49
[97] Wong, R. B. (1997). China Transformed: Historical Change and the Limits of European
     Experience. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.

[98] Wong, R. B. and J. Rosenthal (2011). Before and beyond Divergence: The Politics of
     Economic Change in China and Europe Cambridge, Mass.:Harvard University Press.

[99] Zhao, G. (2013). The Qing Opening to the Ocean: Chinese Maritime Policies, 1684-
     1757. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.




                                          50
