                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                AN OUNCE OF PREVENTION

                                      Joseph P. Newhouse

                                      Working Paper 27553
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27553


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2020




I am grateful to Michael Chernew, Richard Frank, Gordon Hanson, Pragya Kakani, Amanda
Kowalski, Tim Layton, Tom McGuire, Enrico Moretti, Mahnum Shahzad, and Heidi Williams for
helpful suggestions on a preliminary draft and especially to Tim Taylor not only for his
substantive comments but also for his superb editing. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Joseph P. Newhouse. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
An Ounce of Prevention
Joseph P. Newhouse
NBER Working Paper No. 27553
July 2020
JEL No. I1,I12,I13,I18

                                         ABSTRACT

I look at prevention through an economic lens and make three main points. First, those
advocating preventive measures are often asked how much money a given measure saves. This
question is misguided. Rather preventive measures can be thought of as insurance, with a certain
cost in the present that may or may not pay off in the future. In fact, although most medical
preventive measures improve expected health, they do not save money. Various lifestyle and
early childhood interventions, however, may both save money and improve health. Second,
preventive measures, including medical and lifestyle measures, are heterogeneous in their value,
both across measures and, within measure, across individuals. As a result, generalizations in
everyday discourse about the value of prevention can be overly broad. Third, health insurance
coverage for medical preventive measures should generally be more extensive than coverage for
the treatment of a medical condition, though full coverage of preventive services is not
necessarily optimal.


Joseph P. Newhouse
Division of Health Policy Research and Education
Harvard University
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115-5899
and NBER
newhouse@hcp.med.harvard.edu
         Benjamin Franklin advised that the marginal rate of substitution between prevention
and cure had a constant value of -16, although he didn't put it in exactly those terms (Franklin
1735). Perhaps with Franklin's adage in mind, when discussions turn to the cost of health care,
many advocate more resources for prevention.
         In this paper I look at prevention through an economic lens and make three main points.
First, those advocating preventive measures are often asked how much money a given measure
saves. This question is misguided. Rather preventive measures can be thought of as insurance,
with a certain cost in the present that may or may not pay off in the future. In fact, although
most medical preventive measures improve expected health, they do not save money. Various
lifestyle and early childhood interventions, however, may both save money and improve health.
         Second, preventive measures, including medical and lifestyle measures, are
heterogeneous in their value, both across measures and, within measure, across individuals. As
a result, generalizations in everyday discourse about the value of prevention can be overly
broad.
         Third, health insurance coverage for medical preventive measures should generally be
more extensive than coverage for the treatment of a medical condition, though full coverage of
preventive services is not necessarily optimal.
         The Covid-19 pandemic has made prevention highly salient; virtually the entire world
has engaged in various forms of preventive behavior, including partial shutdowns of the
economy, sheltering in place, wearing of face masks, and frequent hand washing. Such behavior
is not surprising since there is no immunity against a pathogen that is rather easily transmissible
and potentially fatal.
         Here, however, I focus on preventive measures against chronic diseases rather than
infectious diseases like Covid-19. Chronic diseases account for the great bulk of American health
care spending; pre-pandemic, persons with one or more chronic diseases accounted for 90
percent of American health care spending, although they were only 60 percent of the
population (Buttorff, et al. 2017). The pandemic has surely increased the proportion of health
spending on infectious disease, but at some point it will recede and the chronic diseases will
remain. Examples of preventive measures that I have in mind in the case of coronary heart
disease include having one's blood pressure and cholesterol checked regularly and starting
treatment if abnormal, maintaining a healthy diet, getting regular exercise, and keeping one's
weight at reasonable levels.

An Economic Formulation of Preventive Measures

         I define prevention as a medical or behavioral action that on expectation reduces either
the probability or the potential severity of ill health in the non-immediate future. (The
qualification of non-immediate is meant to exclude medical treatments that simply alleviate a
symptom or other condition in the immediate future, such as taking aspirin for a headache.)
This definition includes what epidemiologists call primary prevention, meaning an activity that
reduces the likelihood of the initial occurrence of a disease, like a flu shot or other vaccinations
or avoiding crowds during a pandemic. It also includes what epidemiologists term secondary
        prevention, or reducing the likelihood of recurrence or the future severity of a disease one
        already has, for example taking a drug that lowers blood pressure to reduce the likelihood of a
        second heart attack, as well as screening programs such as mammography that are intended to
        detect disease at an early stage when treatment may be more successful. Moreover, this
        definition includes both medical interventions as well as what Ehrlich and Becker (1972) term
        self-protection, or, in this context, maintaining a healthy lifestyle.
                  Despite the widespread belief among the general public that medical preventive
        measures save money, they frequently do not. Even more importantly, whether a preventive
        measure is welfare-increasing does not depend on whether it saves money, any more than the
        welfare judgement on whether or how to treat a disease such as cancer depends on whether it
        saves money. Both medical prevention and medical treatment sometimes save money, but
        often neither does.
                  From an economic perspective a preventive activity is effectively an insurance policy
        that requires some cost in the present for an expected positive future benefit. 1 As a basic
        analytical framework, imagine a utility function that depends on consumption and health over a
        number of time periods, with a discount factor applied in future time periods. This utility
        function is optimized subject to the present value of a lifetime income constraint. To keep
        matters simple, it is useful as a starting point to assume perfect capital markets, and to ignore
        time constraints, uncertainty about one's lifetime, and bequest motives. Because of several
        uncertainties described below, an expectation must be formed for the present value of this
        utility function.
                  Next, add to this framework a preventive action that may be taken in the present, which
        is costly in terms of money, time, clinical risk, and/or disutility such as pain or physical
        discomfort. Then, the question is whether the expected present value of this consumption-and-
        health utility function is higher when taking the preventive action in the present, or not taking
        it. 2
                  In this framework, the formation of expectations is meant to capture several dimensions
        of uncertainty about the preventive action. First, the expected value of a preventive action will
        generally depend upon the future state of the world: for example, is the type of prevalent flu in
        the flu season one that those responsible for formulating the annual flu vaccine guessed will
        occur? Second, even if the preventive measure lowers risk as intended, the event in question
        may still occur; for example, persons who successfully lower their blood pressure and reduce
        their risk of a heart attack may still have a heart attack. Third, with some probability the
        preventive measure itself may have adverse effects, such as a reaction to a vaccine.



1
  For a more extensive discussion of many of the points made in this paper, see (Phelps 1978) and
(Kenkel 2000).
2
  This setup is a simplified statement of Michael Grossman's classic model of the demand for health
(Grossman 1972, Grossman 2000).
          Whereas the intent of conventional insurance is to protect against financial risk, or
variation in income level, the intent of a preventive measure is to protect against health risk, or
variation in health level. Furthermore, because health and earnings capability are related, if a
preventive measure reduces future sick time and/or raises future productivity, it could increase
lifetime income and so the future stream of consumption, just as the smoothing of consumption
from conventional insurance could affect health states. The analogy from conventional
insurance to preventive health care is not exact, however, because with conventional insurance
the most one can lose is the premium paid, while with preventive medicine there is also the
possibility that the costs could include an adverse health reaction.
          This framework for thinking about preventive health care measures can account for
competing risks. For example, preventing a cardiac event may allow an individual to survive, but
then later to develop dementia and incur related costs. If the discounted expected utility of
living in a demented state is sufficiently low, the preventive measure might conceivably
decrease welfare.
          The economic perspective of prevention as insurance that may increase or decrease
welfare differs from the perspective of many medical and public health professionals. A primary
goal of medical professionals is to alleviate suffering and the consequences of disease, often
expressed without regard to resource constraints. For example, a modern version of the
Hippocratic Oath, as formulated in 1964, says in part: "I will prevent disease whenever I can, for
prevention is preferable to cure." The version of the Oath that contains this sentence is the
most popular form of the Oath among American medical school graduates, with a third of the
graduates taking it (Hajar 2017).


Heterogeneity Across Individuals



        Decisions about whether a preventive measure increases utility will differ across
individuals for various reasons including degree of risk aversion, age, and other individual
background factors that can predict health outcomes.

         For example, in making decisions about preventive medicine, the degree of risk aversion
is relevant. It is quite possible that the expected net benefit of taking a preventive action could
be negative for a risk-neutral individual, but positive for a risk-averse individual. Individuals may
also vary in their choice of discount rates.

         Decisions about preventive measures, of course, are taken throughout an individual's
lifetime. Thus, given a finite lifetime, expected net benefits of preventive measures fall with
age. It is not surprising, therefore, that guidelines for the use of medical preventive services
account for age. For example, the US Preventive Services Task Force (2018) recommends
against prostate cancer screening for men age 70 and over. And the US Preventive Services Task
Force (2016) recommends biennial mammography for women only up to age 74, concluding
that "the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits and harms of
screening mammography in women 75 and older."

          Heterogeneity across individuals also matters is creating clinical guidelines Those
responsible for formulating them prefer to base the guidelines on clinical trial results, but
heterogeneity across individuals may cause results in practice to differ from those of a clinical
trial. (Einav, et al. 2019) point out that the population in a trial of a preventive measure, for
example all females of a given age range, may differ in its risk distribution from those who
choose to obtain a preventive measure such as mammography. For example, those who choose
to obtain a mammography may have knowledge that they are personally more susceptible to
breast cancer because of habits like smoking or background like family genetic history.

Heterogeneity Among Clinical Measures of Effectiveness of Preventive Medicine

         The utility-maximizing framework discussed here follows most of the American health
economics literature in using standard welfare economics, which can also be translated into
cost-benefit analysis comparing the costs of preventive medicine, broadly understood, to
expectations of possible gains in consumption and health. Unfortunately, however, the
empirical health economics literature has only scattered results that quantify the benefits of
specific preventive measures. There is, however, an extensive public health literature that uses
Quality Adjusted Life Years (QALYs) or Disability Adjusted Life Years (DALYs) to assess the value
of various clinical preventive measures (Torrance 1986, Gold, et al. 1996, Neumann, et al. 2016).
QALYs and DALYs are utility-weighted life expectancies that account for an individual's state of
health or quality of life at each point in time, rather than simply expected length of life, using
stated-preference methods to elicit weights. A year of perfect health is weighted as 1, death is
weighted as zero, and a year spent with a chronic illness, for example hay fever or cancer in
remission or a specified level of disability, is intermediate. In QALY terms, therefore, the usual
life-expectancy measure assumes all remaining years are spent in perfect health. The cost-
effectiveness of a preventive or a treatment measure is its incremental cost per incremental
QALY relative to the next best measure.

         If the preventive measure does not save money and is financed from an insurance pool
or is tax financed, one faces the question of whether its health benefits are worth the cost.
Here the public health literature departs from standard welfare economics, which is based on
preferences as revealed by an observed demand curve; that is, an individual compares
personally paying the costs of preventive care (broadly understood to include both monetary
and non-monetary costs) with the expected personal benefits received in terms of future
consumption and health. This approach will clearly depend on an individual's willingness to pay,
which will vary with income.

        In contrast, the public health literature typically gives QALYs and DALYs equal weight
across persons, and thus removes willingness to pay from the calculation of incremental cost per
incremental QALY. In principle one can weight persons according to a measure of social welfare
(Saez and Stantcheva 2016), but this is usually not done in practice. The public health literature
often rationalizes the use of equal weights on equity grounds, but one can also appeal to the
extensive literature that questions the normative meaning of observed demand curves, much of
which uses health care choices under uncertainty as examples (Handel and Kolstad 2015,
Bhargava, et al. 2017, Ericson and Sydnor 2017, Handel and Schwartzstein 2018).

        Having computed the incremental cost per incremental QALY for a given measure, the
public health literature evaluates whether the measure should be implemented by determining
whether its incremental cost per incremental QALY falls below a specified dollar threshold. A
common rule-of-thumb threshold in the US is $100,000 per QALY, although this may well now
be a lower bound; in 2020 a value of $150,000 or even $200,000 may be more realistic
(Braithwaite, et al. 2008).

         The key points for my purposes, however, are the large variation in cost per QALY across
various preventive measures found in the public health literature and the modest number of
measures, about 20 percent, that both improve health and reduce cost (Cohen, et al. 2008).
Vaccination is a well-known example of a measure that improves health and reduces cost. It is
typically inexpensive, causes few adverse events, and confers immunity for many years. The
development of the polio vaccine, for example, was one of the great public health triumphs of
the 20th century. In the late 1940's, polio crippled 35,000 Americans annually; because of
vaccination it was eradicated in the US in 1979 (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
n.d.). Vaccination also differs from many other preventive measures because of the external
benefit it confers on the unvaccinated ("herd immunity"). Another example of a preventive
measure that saves money and improves health is a "polypill," a single pill with several active
ingredients, for secondary prevention of heart disease versus single prescriptions for various
agents (Gaziano, et al. 2019).

        The remaining 80 percent of preventive measures do not save money; Table 1 shows
various examples. The majority of all preventive measures, about 60 percent of them, provide
health benefits at a cost of less than $100,000/QALY (2006 dollars). Another 10 percent of
measures cost between $100,000 and $1,000,000 per QALY; those measures with costs near the
lower end of this range might pass the common rules of thumb of cost-effectiveness described
above. The remaining 10 percent of preventive measures studied in the literature either worsen
expected health or, if they improve it, cost more than $1,000,000 per QALY.
                                            Table 1
     Examples of Cost-Effectiveness Ratios of Selected Preventive Measures, 2006 dollars*

 Cost-Saving                                     Polypill versus individual prescriptions and
                                                 their rate of usage of up to four medications
                                                 from recommended medication classes for
                                                 secondary prevention of cardiovascular
                                                 disease

 Cost < $100,000/QALY                            Newborn screening for medium-chain acyl-
                                                 coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency,
                                                 $160/QALY

                                                 High intensity smoking-relapse program,
                                                 $190/QALY

                                                 Intensive tobacco use prevention program
                                                 for 7th and 8th graders, $23,000/QALY

 Cost between $100,000-$1,000,000/QALY           Screening all 65-year olds with hypertension
                                                 for diabetes, $590,000/QALY

 Cost > $1,000,000/QALY                          Antibiotic prophylaxis (amoxicillin) for
                                                 children with moderate cardiac lesions who
                                                 are undergoing urinary catheterization,
                                                 $10,000,000/QALY

*These examples were drawn on June 15, 2020 from the 100 publicly accessible values of the
registry of cost-effectiveness studies maintained by the Center for the Evaluation of Value and
Risk in Health at Tufts Medical Center,
http://healtheconomics.tuftsmedicalcenter.org/cear2n/search/ratio0.aspx. As of June 2020, the
entire Tufts registry contained results of over 20,000 cost-effectiveness studies, but the public
website only shows the 100 that have been most recently added.

        An important caveat is that the published ratios for cost per QALY shown in Table 1 are
average rather than marginal or incremental values. However, the use of average values for
policy purposes is mitigated to some degree because many of the measures are both studied
and described as being conditioned on observables such as age, sex, and prior disease history,
and within those subgroups the expected benefit may be approximately constant.


Errors in Screening Procedures
                Many common preventive procedures, for example mammography, screen a population
        for evidence of disease. Errors in these measures can be large enough to make them welfare
        decreasing, at least among certain subgroups. Errors can be both false positives (known as
        "Type 1" errors), in which a screening test may signal disease when it is not present, or false
        negatives (known as "Type 2" errors), in which a screening test and may fail to detect disease
        when it is present.

                 For example, in one large observational study, mammography gave an abnormal result
        11.6 percent of the time, but had a false positive rate of 95.6 percent (2007-2013 data)
        (Lehman, et al. 2017). 3 False positive rates depend heavily on the true prevalence of the disease
        in the sample studied, and other studies with different populations give lower, but still relatively
        high false positive rates for mammography (Nelson, et al. 2016). Using the 95.6 percent figure,
        however, and expected values, for every 1,000 women screened, mammography would signal
        that further investigation was indicated for 116 of them, but 111 of those 116 women would not
        actually have breast cancer. The likelihood of a false positive together with remaining life
        expectancy is one reason that US Preventive Services Task Force concluded that evidence was
        insufficient to recommend screening mammography for women 75 and older (US Preventive
        Services Task Force 2016).

                 A screening test does not generally diagnose the illness, merely suggests its presence. If
        the screening test is positive, the next step is either to repeat the test or carry out a diagnostic
        test or procedure. Repeating the test is more attractive the higher the false positive rate, the
        lower the cost of the test, and the greater the independence between the results of the two
        tests. In the mammography example the follow-up diagnostic procedure is a biopsy, which of
        course has non-trivial expense and can result in medical complications.

                Continuing the results from the large observational study of mammography, 884 of the
        1,000 women screened would have had a negative test. In the study, mammography had a false
        negative rate of 0.09 percent, so using expected values 1 of those 884 women would actually
        have breast cancer. Both because of the possibility of false negatives but even more because of
        the probability of a woman's developing detectable breast cancer in a given time interval after a
        negative screen, periodic testing is desirable. More frequent testing, however, increases the
        number of women experiencing false positives. Hubbard et al. (2011) and Nelson et al. (2016)


3
  Of 1,682,504 mammograms in the Lehman et al. (2017) study, 194,668 had an interpretation of an abnormality
(0.116 = 194,668/1,682,504). Among the 194,668 women who screened positive, there were 8,529 true positives
and 186,140 false positives. The false positive rate was therefore 0.956 = 186,140/194,668. Among the 1,487,836
women who screened negative, there were 1,283 false negatives and 1,486,663 true negatives. In epidemiologic
jargon, the "sensitivity" of mammography (equal to the ratio of screen positive/true positive), was 86.9 percent
and the "specificity" (equal to the screen negative/true negative) was 88.9 percent. The "true prevalence" in the
population (equal to the true positive rate plus the false negative rate) was (8,529+1,283)/1,682,504 = 0.0058
percent. The calculation that 111 of the 116 women who screened positive for breast cancer did not actually have
it is 111 = (186,140/194,668) x 116. The false negative rate was 1,283/1,487,836.
calculate that among women who hypothetically would have had annual screening
mammography for a decade, 61 percent would have had at least one false positive screening
and that biennial (every two years) testing would lower this rate to 42 percent. As noted above,
the US Preventive Services Task Force (2016) recommends biennial testing for women 50-74.

         In sum, the optimal screening frequency depends on several parameters, especially the
true prevalence in the population, the frequency and cost of Type 1 and Type 2 errors, the cost
of the test itself, and the probability and value of successful prevention or treatment if the
screening test is positive. A sufficiently high false positive rate can make the value of a
screening test negative, depending on the cost of the test, the cost and potential adverse health
consequences of any follow-up procedure from a positive test, and whether treating the disease
can be just as successful if the disease is detected at a later time when a person has symptoms.



Insurance Coverage of Preventive Services

        At one time, it was common to hear arguments that clinical preventive services were
not insurable because they were "not a random variable and hence not an `insurable risk'"
(Zweifel and Breyer 1997). Zweifel and Breyer give the example that "it is hardly conceivable
that a health insurer would ever cover expenditure on items such as ... atomizers that help to
prevent respiratory disorders;" a similar point could be made about a flu shot or mammography.
There are, however, both economic efficiency and behavioral arguments for many preventive
measures.

Standard Efficiency Arguments

         A textbook example of the efficiency argument for clinical preventive services is the
externality from vaccination against a contagious disease mentioned above. The externality is
the rationale for compulsory measles vaccination (Oster 2018). In part because of the
externality, billions of dollars are being invested to develop a vaccine for Covid-19.

         Even if the contagion argument is not relevant, however, there are standard efficiency
arguments for not only insuring preventive services but subsidizing them to a greater degree
than treatment services. Assume that certain kinds of prevention do in fact reduce the
likelihood of disease and thus the demand for treatment; in other words, preventive services
substitute for treatment services. Also assume that an individual's insurance premiums or taxes
are negligibly affected by their personal use of preventive and treatment services, as is generally
the case. Then preventive services should be at least partially insured. Otherwise individuals,
by not accounting for the financial consequences of the reduction in their future use of
treatment services, will under consume preventive services relative to a social optimum (Ellis
and Manning 2007, Goldman and Philipson 2007).
         Although this argument does not imply that full insurance is optimal, the 2010
Affordable Care Act ("Obamacare") made all preventive services rated A and B by the US
Preventive Services Task Force free for public insurance plans as well as the great majority of
private insurance plans (the exceptions are so-called grandfathered private plans, but few of
those remain). An A rating means the service has a "high certainty of substantial net benefit,"
while a B rating means it has a "moderate certainty of substantial net benefit or high certainty of
moderate to substantial net benefit." (US Preventive Services Task Force n.d.)

         The logic of less cost-sharing for preventive services also implies that drugs to treat a
chronic disease such as diabetes should face less cost-sharing than drugs to reduce a transient
problem such as itching or pain from a sprain or minor burn, because failure to take the diabetic
drug could lead to exacerbations of the disease that would be costly to treat whereas a transient
problem would resolve with time and not require further treatment. In practice, however,
insurance policies generally do not differentiate cost sharing for drugs according to the potential
consequences of non-compliance. This has led to proposals to make medications that treat
serious chronic diseases such as diabetes and cardiac conditions free to the consumer to
forestall downstream adverse events, so called "value-based insurance design" (Chernew, et al.
2008). Some steps in this direction have been taken by Medicare Advantage plans (Starc and
Town 2018).


Behavioral Considerations

        Behavioral considerations offer another ­ and likely more powerful ­ rationale for
insurance coverage of preventive activities. Failure to engage in preventive activities is a
standard example in the hyperbolic discounting literature. Every day, I may eat a cookie and
plan to exercise tomorrow, rather than the other way around. In this situation, decisions are
not time-consistent, and people will later experience regret that they did not take certain
actions at earlier times.

        It is clear that time inconsistency can be an issue in health-related decisions, like
smoking. In a classic paper in this genre, (Gruber and Koszegi 2001) begin from the rational
addiction model of (Becker and Murphy 1988), in which tobacco use is individually rational if
individual decisions are time consistent. Gruber and Koszegi show that if individual decisions
are not time-consistent, one can make a case for much higher excise taxes than taxes that
simply equal the external costs because those high taxes will reduce the "internalities"
experienced from smoking by a time-inconsistent individual. The evidence for time inconsistent
behavior is not conclusive, but in the case of smoking, some support for the hypothesis can be
found in the regret expressed by many addicted smokers, many of whom initiated tobacco use
in adolescence before the legal age for smoking, and the corresponding demand for aids to quit
smoking.
                 However, the evidence on whether more extensive insurance coverage overcomes the
        issue of time inconsistency by reducing the up-front cost for preventive measures suggests
        reducing out-of-pocket cost is not the main barrier. In one randomized trial, insured patients
        who had suffered a heart attack received free access to four types of drugs to reduce the
        likelihood of a second and possibly fatal heart attack. Meanwhile, the control group continued
        on their existing insurance plan with their usual copayment for drugs (Choudhry, et al. 2011).
        Rates of adherence increased with free drugs, but only by about 5 percentage points. Even
        more strikingly, over one-half the population in both the treatment and control groups did not
        comply with prescriptions for the drugs, despite the potentially dire consequences of non-
        compliance. These findings echoed those from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment; in that
        study, when both preventive and treatment services were free, rates of compliance with
        preventive guidelines were around 10 percentage points higher than when services were costly
        to the patient, but compliance was still well under half for adult males, although it was higher
        for females (Newhouse and the Insurance Experiment Group 1993).

                  Behavioral considerations may shape the structure of dental insurance, the most
        common form of which is a group policy with relatively low annual benefit limits. Dental
        insurance almost always, however, covers prophylaxis (teeth cleaning). Thus, rather than
        offering much protection against expensive dental procedures, dental insurance can be seen as
        a nudge to seek preventive care. One can only speculate as to why dental insurance has such
        low limits but one possibility is that because dental insurance was and remains mainly provided
        by dental societies (Delta Dental), and dentists may well have wanted a mechanism to
        encourage patients to seek care through an untaxed employer-provided fringe benefit, while
        still having the freedom to price expensive dental procedures. 4 Although the Patient Protection
        and Affordable Care Act of 2010 ("Obamacare") banned annual and lifetime upper limits on
        payouts from medical insurance, it did not apply those limits to dental insurance.


        Non-Clinical Preventive Interventions

                Over the course of the 20th century, there was a remarkable shift in the leading causes
        of death from acute to chronic diseases, as illustrated in Table 2 by the 10 leading causes of
        death in the United States in 1900 and 2016. In 1900, the three leading causes of death were
        attributable to infectious disease, and two of those three are not even among the top 10 causes
        in recent years. Influenza and pneumonia, the leading cause of death in 1900, was the tenth-

4
  Data from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment (Newhouse and the Insurance Experiment Group 1993) show
that the probability of using diagnostic and preventive dental services in a year is 15 percentage points higher
when care is free than when it is costly. My own view is that the current situation is a low-level equilibrium trap;
because dental insurance is mostly employment-based, any individual employer that offered more generous
dental insurance benefits, for example for orthodontia, could well be selected against in the labor market. Cabral
(2017) has shown that individuals can time their dental expenditures, which potentially creates a selection
problem in individual markets, but timing should not be much of an issue for self-insured employers with relatively
low employee turnover (such an employer doesn't much care whether the dental work is done in December or
January), and many such employers offer dental insurance to employees and their dependents.
leading cause in 2016, and death rates from it have fallen by a factor of 200. (Deaths from
pneumonia will be higher in 2020 because of Covid-19, but once the pandemic recedes the
causes of death should again be similar to those shown in Table 2.) Many of the chronic
diseases that are among the current leading causes of death are influenced by lifestyle and
health habits, including tobacco use, diet, exercise, and substance misuse. While rates of
smoking have fallen, the ongoing, worsening obesity epidemic suggests that policy efforts to
improve diet and exercise have had at best modest effects (Cutler, et al. 2003, Ward, et al.
2019).



                                                Table2
               American Death Rates from the Ten Leading Causes of Death in 1900 and 2016
            1900 Causes of Death/10,000                  2016 Causes of Death/10,000

 Influenza and pneumonia                 202.2      Diseases of the heart                16.6

 Tuberculosis                            194.4      Malignant Neoplasms (cancer)         15.6

 Diarrhea, Enteritis, and ulceration     142.7      Unintentional injuries               4.7
 of the intestines
 Diseases of the heart                   137.4      Chronic lower respiratory            4.1
                                                    diseases
 Intracranial lesions of vascular        106.9      Cerebrovascular diseases             3.8
 origin
 Nephritis                               88.6       Alzheimer's disease                  3.0

 All accidents                           72.3       Diabetes mellitus                    2.1

 Cancer and other malignant tumors       64.0       Suicide                              1.4

 Senility                                50.2       Nephritis, nephrotic syndrome,       1.3
                                                    and nephrosis
 Diphtheria                              40.3       Influenza and pneumonia              1.1


Sources: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/dvs/lead1900_98.pdf and
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/hus/contents2017.htm#Table, Table 17. The 1900 data are from 11
death reporting states, mostly in the Northeast, plus the District of Columbia. The specific states
can be found in Table 1.04 in Appendix II of https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/misc/usvss.pdf.

         Clinical preventive care plays a role in addressing these health issues, perhaps especially
in the case of screening for cancer, high blood pressure, high cholesterol, and depression. Some
of the most significant preventive interventions to improve health status in the 20th and 21st
century, however, have been nonmedical.
Taxing or Regulating Goods with High Health Costs

        The flip side of subsidizing preventive medical services is taxing unhealthy goods or
services to reduce their use. Public policies to alter lifestyles and health habits have a mixed
track record. The most successful are likely the increased cigarette taxes and laws and
regulations prohibiting smoking in public places that have played a central role in the
percentage of cigarette smokers falling from 42 percent in 1965 to 16 percent in 2016 among
Americans age 18 and over (Chaloupka and Warner 2000, National Center for Health Statistics
2018). That large decline in smoking has played a major role in the fall of death rates from lung
cancer among males ­ roughly a factor of two since 1990. Lung cancer rates among females
have also begun to decline, but to a lesser extent because female smoking rates declined later
than rates among males (Siegel, et al. 2020).

         Externalities are a standard rationale for tobacco excise taxes. Their value can be
quantified by assuming two cohorts that differ only in that one begins to smoke at age 20 and
then calculating the present value of external costs in the two cohorts. Assume both cohorts
pay a common payroll tax to finance both health insurance and a pension. On one side, tobacco
users impose costs on non-users because taxes must be higher to finance their additional health
costs. On the other side, tobacco users subsidize non-users in a pension system, because their
lower life expectancy means that they collect less in pension benefits when or even if they
become eligible. The calculation of which effect is larger depends on the discount rate. The
undiscounted difference in pension benefits between the two cohorts is substantial, but
because the pension benefits are zero for the first 40+ years after smoking is assumed to begin,
they are heavily discounted with a typical discount rate. A lower discount rate will make the
long-term pension effects look larger and conversely. Using 1980s American data, the two
effects were equal at a real discount rate a little over 3 percent (Manning, et al. 1989).
Coincidentally the 3 percent real rate is the rate the two Panels on Cost-Effectiveness in Health
and Medicine have recommended be used in cost-effectiveness studies (Gold, et al., 1996;
Neumann, et al., 2016). As mentioned above, however, if individuals are time inconsistent, the
optimal tax is much higher because of the size of the "internality."

        Analogous to tobacco, sugar-sweetened beverages have been linked to obesity,
cardiovascular disease, and diabetes, which increase health care costs, and some localities have
begun to tax them. (Alcott, et al. 2019) provide a thorough discussion of the issues around
taxation of sugar-sweetened beverages.

        Alcohol also imposes external and internal costs, but the case for a tax to improve
economic efficiency is more complicated than for tobacco, because alcohol in moderation may
have beneficial health effects. As a result, the magnitude of an optimal efficient tax on alcohol
is uncertain (Manning, et al. 1989, Pogue and Sgontz 1989). In addition to the external costs
involved in smoking, alcohol has large external costs both from driving while intoxicated and
from its positive effect on violent crime (Chalfin, et al. 2019).

Exercise and Workplace Wellness Programs

          Workplace wellness programs are a form of employment-based subsidy to preventive
activities that seek to promote healthy lifestyles among a firm's workers. Employers offering
such programs may be motivated by selection concerns with respect to their labor force, a
desire to increase the productivity of their labor force, workers' desire for a non-taxable fringe
benefit, or some combination. Song and Baicker (2019) implemented a randomized trial of such
a program at a large retail warehouse company. The trial consisted of 8 modules implemented
over 18 months emphasizing nutrition, physical activity, stress reduction, and prevention. Like
subsidizing preventive care through health insurance, results suggested little effect on behavior.
In the intervention group, somewhat more persons reported engaging in regular exercise (8
percentage points) and actively managing their weight (14 percentage points), but a large
number of other pre-specified outcome measures did not differ significantly between the
intervention and control groups. These included 27 self-reported measures of health outcomes
and behaviors, including sleep quality and food choices, 10 clinical markers, including
cholesterol, blood pressure, and body mass index, 38 medical and pharmaceutical spending and
utilization measures, and 3 employment outcomes, absenteeism, job performance, and job
tenure. Jones et al. (2019) implemented a similar randomized trial among employees of the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and, like Song and Baicker, found essentially null
results.

Childhood Interventions

        Many chronic diseases can be traced back to childhood deprivation, and childhood
interventions with disadvantaged children, especially early childhood interventions, appear to
have important effects not only on child health but also health as an adult, especially for males
(Heckman, et al. 2013, Campbell, et al. 2014, Hendren and Sprung-Keyser 2019, Garci´a, et al.
2020). For example, the Carolina Abcedarian Project involving children born between 1972 and
1977 provided cognitive and social stimulation throughout an 8 hour day as well as health care
to a small randomized group of preschool, disadvantaged children age 0-5, and compared them
with a control group. At a 30-year follow-up, the researchers obtained data on 19 of the original
29 treatment group males and 9 of the original 23 control group males. Those with missing
data, however, appeared to be missing at random. Despite the small numbers, several risk
factors were markedly lower in the treatment group males around 30 years later, including
obesity and hypertension, dyslipidemia (high cholesterol), and metabolic syndrome (a
combination of obesity, cardiovascular disease, diabetes).

        In a broader study, Goodman-Bacon has shown that the introduction of Medicaid a half
century ago reduced infant and child mortality (Goodman-Bacon 2018). Hendren and Sprung-
Keyser, drawing on the work of Wherry, find positive effects of the more recent Medicaid
expansions to cover older children; indeed, the effects from expanding Medicaid coverage in
childhood are more than repaid by lower health care spending later in life. (Hoynes, et al. 2016)
review a considerable literature showing that malnutrition in utero or in early childhood leads to
poorer adult health outcomes and go on to show that access to food stamps in utero or in early
childhood reduces the prevalence of metabolic syndrome in adulthood. A thorough review of
policies to reduce child poverty can be found in (National Academies of Sciences 2019).



The Supply of Preventive Services



         The discussion up to this point has focused on demand for preventive measures or on
justifications for their cost-effectiveness, but supply considerations are also relevant. Firms
investing in research and development may tend to favor products to treat rather than prevent
disease.

         One reason is that a firm will tend to prefer products that can be tested in a clinical trial
with shorter durations because returns will come sooner; indeed, (Budish, et al. 2015) provide
evidence that cancer clinical trials favor shorter-term projects. Moreover, such trials are more
likely to be for agents designed to treat rather than prevent various cancers, because trials of
treatment agents will typically need less time than those of prevention agents to establish
whether an agent is efficacious. Even within trials of agents to treat cancer, the sample
population will often be those with late-stage cancers because results will be available sooner.
More generally, because trials of preventive agents are in healthy populations, they will likely
take longer to show a response (or not) than a treatment for a sick person.

         (Kremer and Snyder 2015) illustrate how heterogeneity in a population's risk of
contracting a disease also tends to favor trials of treatment agents rather than prevention
agents. The intuition is simplest in the case of a monopolist deciding between two products that
have the same research and development cost, show the same likelihood of success in
development, are both perfectly effective, have no production cost or side effects, and are
directed to a disease that results in the same harm for all who get the disease. The monopolist
is assumed to know the distribution of risk in the population, but not the risk of individual
consumers. In the case of the treatment product, someone with the disease will be willing to
pay up to the value of the harm the disease causes, while those who do not have the disease
will not be willing to pay anything. In the case of the preventive product, consumers will pay up
to their expected harm, but because of the varying risk among consumers, this amount will vary.
The firm can choose to sell the preventive product only to higher risk consumers at a price that
equals their expected harm, in which case lower risk consumers will not buy and the firm's
revenue relative to the treatment case will be less. Or the firm can sell to all consumers at a
price that equals the expected harm to low risk consumers, but this generates less revenue than
the treatment product because the firm sells the preventive product to the high-risk consumers
at the price a low-risk consumer would pay. In the special case in which all consumers have the
same risk of contracting the disease, the returns to the firm from the two types of products are
equal.



Conclusion



         Preventive activities are best viewed in conceptual terms as insurance where the payoff
is a reduction in the likelihood of states of the world with lower utility. There are a vast array of
preventive activities, with some purchased through the market, especially clinical interventions,
some largely produced by the individual's time, such as exercise, and some publicly provided or
subsidized. There is heterogeneity in value both across preventive measures, as well as across
individuals for a single measure.

         The decision to bear the costs of preventive activity, like the decision to purchase
conventional insurance, will not always pay off ex post. In the case of conventional insurance,
one may end up paying far more in premiums than one receives in claims. In the case of
preventive decisions, one may pay the costs of clinical preventive care or shifts in personal
habits, but still end up needing to be treated for the medical condition.

        In public rhetoric, a common test applied to preventive activity is to ask whether it saves
money, usually from avoided medical treatment, but this is much too narrow a test, because it
omits potential future benefits of improved health and productivity. Only a minority of clinical
preventive measures can be expected to save money in the narrow sense of reducing future
health care spending, but many are worth their cost when expected gains from health and
productivity are taken into account.

         There are both standard efficiency and behavioral arguments for subsidizing preventive
activities to a greater degree than treatment activities. The gist of the efficiency argument is
that an individual ignores the cost imposed on others in the health insurance pool from not
using preventive activities; the gist of the behavioral argument is hyperbolic discounting. But
from a broad social perspective, some of the most important and high-payoff preventive
activities may be outside clinical medicine, including policies such as cigarette taxes and smoking
regulations as well as interventions to improve health and cognitive skills in early childhood,
especially among disadvantaged children.
                                              REFERENCES

Alcott, Hunt, Benjamin B. Lockwood, and Dmitry Taubinsky (2019). "Should We Tax Sugar-Sweetened
Beverages? An Overview of Theory and Evidence." Journal of Economic Perspectives 33(3): 202-227.
Becker, Gary S. and Kevin M. Murphy (1988). "A Theory of Rational Addiction." Journal of Political
Economy 96(4): 675-700.
Bhargava, Saurabh, George Loewenstein, and Justin Sydnor (2017). "Choose to Lose: Health Plan Choices
from a Menu with Dominaated Options." Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(3): 1319-1372.
Braithwaite, R. Scott, David O. Meltzer, Joseph T. Jr. King, Douglas Leslie, and Mark S. Roberts (2008).
"What Does the Value of Modern Medicine Say About the $50,000 per Quality-Adjusted Life-Year
Decision Rule?" Medical Care 46(4): 349-356.
Budish, Eric, Benjamin N. Roin, and Heidi Williams (2015). "Do Firms Underinvest in Long-Term
Research? Evidence from Cancer Clinical Trials." American Economic Review 105(7): 2044-2085.
Buttorff, Christne, Teague Ruder, and Melissa Bauman. (2017). "Multiple Chronic Conditions in the
United States." Retrieved June 25, 2020, from
https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/tools/TL200/TL221/RAND_TL221.pdf
Campbell, Frances, Gabriella Conti, James J. Heckman, Seong Hyeok Moon, Rodrigo Pinto, Elizabeth
Pungello, and Yi Pan (2014). "Early Childhood Investments Substantially Boost Adult Health." Science
343(6178): 1478-1485.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (n.d.). "Polio Elimination in the United States." Retrieved
June 23, 2020, from https://www.cdc.gov/polio/what-is-polio/polio-us.html.
Chalfin, Aaron, Benjamin Hansen, and Rachel Ryley. (2019, July). "The Minimum Legal Drinking Age and
Crime Victimization." Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper Working Paper
26051.
Chaloupka, Frank J. and Kenneth E. Warner (2000). The Economics of Smoking. Handbook of Health
Economics. A. J. Culyer and J. P. Newhouse. Amsterdam, North-Holland. 1b: 1539-1627.
Chernew, Michael E., Mayur R. Shah, Arnold Wegh, Stephen N. Rosenberg, Iver A. Juster, Allison B.
Rosen, Michael C. Solol, Kristina Yu-Isenberg, and A. Mark Fendrick (2008). "Impact of Decreasing
Copayments on Medication Adherence Within a Disease Management Environment." Health Affairs
27(1): 103-112.
Choudhry, Niteesh K., Jerry Avorn, Robert J. Glynn, Elliott M. Antman, Sebastian Schneeweiss, Michelle
Toscano, Lonnie Reisman, Joaquim Fernandes, Claire Spettell, Joy L. Lee, Raisa Levin, and Troyen A.
Brennan (2011). "Full Coverage for Preventive Medications After Myocardial Infaractions." New England
Journal of Medicine 365(22): 2088-2097.
Cohen, Joshua T., Peter Neumann, and Milton C. Weinstein (2008). "Does Preventive Care Save Money?
Health Economics and the Presidential Candidates." New England Journal of Medicine 358(7): 661-663.
Cutler, David M., Edward L. Glaeser, and Jesse M. Shapiro (2003). "Why Are Americans Becoming More
Obese." Journal of Economic Perspectives 17(3): 93-118.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, Tamar Oostrom, Abigail J. Ostriker, and Heidi L. Williams. (2019).
"Screening and Selection: The Case of Mammograms." Cambridge MA: National Bureau of Economic
Research, Working Paper 26162.
Ellis, Randall P. and Willard G. Manning (2007). "Optimal Health Insurance for Prevention and
Treatment." Journal of Health Economics 26(6): 1128-1150.
Ericson, Keith Marzilli and Justin Sydnor (2017). "The Questionable Value of Having a Choice of Levels of
Health Insurance Coverage." Journal of Economic Perspectives 31(4): 51-72.
Franklin, Benjamin. (1735). "Letter to the Editor of the Philadelphia Gazette." Retrieved September 19,
2019, from http://www.ushistory.org/franklin/philadelphia/fire.htm.
Garci´a, Jorge Luis, James J. Heckman, Duncan Ermini Leaf, and Mari´a Jose´ Prados (2020). "Quantifying
the Life-Cycle Benefits of an Influential Early-Childhood Program." Journal of Political Economy 128(7):
2502-2541.
Gaziano, Thomas A., Ankur Pandya, Stephen Sy, Thihago Veiga Jardim, Jenna M. Ogden, Anthony
Rodgers, and Milton C. Weinstein (2019). "Modeling the Cost Effectiveness and Budgetary Impact of
Polypills for Secondary Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease in the United States." American Heart
Journal 214: 77-87.
Gold, Marthe R., Joanna E. Siegel, Louise B. Russell, and Milton C. Weinstein (1996). Cost-Effectiveness in
Health and Medicine. New York, Oxford University Press.
Goldman, Dana P. and Tomas J. Philipson (2007). "Integrated Insurance Design in the Presence of
Multiple Medical Technologies." American Economic Review 97(2): 427-432.
Goodman-Bacon, Andrew (2018). "Public Insurance and Mortality: Evidence from Medicaid
Implementation." Journal of Political Economy 126(1): 216-262.
Grossman, Michael (1972). "On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health." Journal of
Political Economy 80(2): 223-255.
Grossman, Michael (2000). The Human Capital Model. Handbook of Health Economics. A. J. Culyer and J.
P. Newhouse. Amsterdam, North-Holland.
Gruber, Joanthan and Botond Koszegi (2001). "Is Addiction Rational? Theory and Evidence." Quarterly
Journal of Economics 116(4): 1261-1305.
Hajar, Rachel (2017). "The Physician's Oath: Historical Perspectives." Heart Views 18(4): 154-159.
Handel, Benjamin R. and Jonathan T. Kolstad (2015). "Health Insurance for "Humans": Information
Frictions, Plan Choice, and Consumer Welfare." American Economic Review 105(8): 2449-2500.
Handel, Benjamin R. and Joshua Schwartzstein (2018). "Frictions or Mental Gaps: What's Behind the
Information We (Don't) Use and When Do We Care?" Journal of Economic Perspectives 32(1): 155-178.
Heckman, James J., Rodrigo Pinto, and Peter Savelyev (2013). "Understanding the Mechanisms Through
Which an Influential Early Childhood Program Boosted Adult Outcomes." American Economic Review
103(6): 2052-2086.
Hendren, Nathaniel and Ben Sprung-Keyser. (2019, August). "A Unified Welfare Analysis of Government
Policies." Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper Working Paper 26144.
Hoynes, Hilary, Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, and Douglas Almond (2016). "Long-Run Impacts of
Childhood Access to the Safety Net." American Economic Review 106(4): 903-934.
Kenkel, Donald S. (2000). Prevention. Handbook of Health Economics. A. J. Culyer and J. P. Newhouse.
Amsterdam, North-Holland. 1B: 1676-1720.
Kremer, Michael and Christopher M. Snyder (2015). "Preventives versus Treatments." Quarterly Journal
of Economics 130(3): 1167-1239.
Lehman, Constance D., Robert F. Arao, Brian L. Sprague, Janie M. Lee, Diana S.M. Buist, Karla
Kerlikowske, Louise M. Henderson, Tracy Onega, Anna N.A. Tosteson, Garth H. Rauscher, and Diana L.
Miglloretti (2017). "National Performance Benchmarks for Modern Screening Digital Mammography:
Update from the Breast Cancer Surveillance Consortium." Radiology 283(1): 49-58.
Manning, Willard G., Emmett B. Keeler, Joseph P. Newhouse, Elizabeth M. Sloss, and Jeffrey Wasserman
(1989). "The Taxes of Sin: Do Smokers and Drinkers Pay Their Way?" JAMA 261(11): 1604-1609.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (2019). A Roadmap to Reducing Child
Poverty. Washington, DC:, The National Academies Press.National Center for Health Statistics (2018).
Health, United States, 2017: With Special Feature on Mortality. Hyattsville, MD.Nelson, Heidi D., Amy
Cantor, Linda Humphrey, Rochelle Fu, Miranda Pappas, Monica Daeges, and Jessica Griffin. (2016).
"Screening for Breast Cancer: A Systematic Review to Update the 2009 U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force Recommendation, Evidence Syntheses, No. 124." Rockville MD: Agency for Healthcare Research
and Quality Working Paper 14-05201-EF-1.
Neumann, Peter J., Gillian D. Sanders, Louise B. Russell, Joanna E. Siegel, and Theodore G. Ganiats, Eds.
(2016). Cost-Effectiveness in Health and Medicine. New York, Oxford University Press.
Newhouse, Joseph P. and the Insurance Experiment Group (1993). Free for All? Lessons from the RAND
Health Insurance Experiment. Cambridge, Harvard University Press.
Oster, Emily (2018). "Does Disease Cause Vaccination? Disease Outbreaks and Vaccination Response."
Journal of Health Economics 57: 90-101.
Phelps, Charles E. (1978). "Illness Prevention and Medical Insurance." Journal of Human Resources
XIII(Supplement): 183-207.
Pogue, Thomas F. and Larry G. Sgontz (1989). "Taxing to Control Social Costs: The Case of Alcohol."
American Economic Review 79(1): 235-243.
Saez, Emmanuel and Stefanie Stantcheva (2016). "Generalized Social Welfare Weights for Optimal Tax
Theory." American Economic Review 106(1): 24-45.
Siegel, Rebecca L., Kimberly D. Miller, and Ahmedin Jemal (2020). "Cancer Statistics, 2020." CA: A Cancer
Journal for Clinicians 70(1): 7-30.
Starc, Amanda and Robert J. Town. (2018). "Externalities and Benefit Design in Health Insurance."
Cambridge MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 21783.
Torrance, George W. (1986). "Measurement of Health State Activities for Economic Appraisal." Journal
of Health Economics 5(1): 1-30.
US Preventive Services Task Force. (2016). "Final Recommendation Statement: Breast Cancer:
Screening." Retrieved June 23, 2020, from
https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/recommendation/breast-cancer-
screening#:~:text=Recommendation%20Summary&text=The%20USPSTF%20recommends%20biennial%
20screening,aged%2050%20to%2074%20years.&text=The%20decision%20to%20start%20screening,sho
uld%20be%20an%20individual%20one.
US Preventive Services Task Force. (n.d.). "US Preventive Services Task Force Ratings." Retrieved June
22, 2020, from https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/us-preventive-services-task-
force-ratings.
Ward, Zachary J., Sara N. Bleich, Angie L. Cradock, Jessica L. Barrett, Catherine M. Giles, Michael W.
Long, and Steven L. Gortmaker (2019). "Projected U.S. State-Level Prevalence of Adult Obesity and
Severe Obesity." New England Journal of Medicine 381(25): 2440-2450.
Zweifel, Peter and Friedrich Breyer (1997). Health Economics. New York, Oxford University Press.
