                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




A GRAPHICAL LASSO APPROACH TO ESTIMATING NETWORK CONNECTIONS: THE
                      CASE OF U.S. LAWMAKERS

                                       Marco Battaglini
                                      Forrest W. Crawford
                                      Eleonora Patacchini
                                           Sida Peng

                                       Working Paper 27557
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27557


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2020




We thank Aureo de Paula, Laura Forastiere, Michael Konig, Yuan Liao, Xiaodong Liu, Julien
Neves, Chen Qiu, Edoardo Rainone, Lingzhou Xue, and participants at the 2019 Network
Econometrics Juniors' Conference at Northwestern University for constructive comments and
discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Marco Battaglini, Forrest W. Crawford, Eleonora Patacchini, and Sida Peng. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Graphical Lasso Approach to Estimating Network Connections: The Case of U.S. Lawmakers
Marco Battaglini, Forrest W. Crawford, Eleonora Patacchini, and Sida Peng
NBER Working Paper No. 27557
July 2020
JEL No. D7,D72,D85

                                           ABSTRACT

In this paper, we propose a new approach to the estimation of social networks and we apply it to
the estimation of productivity spillovers in the U.S. Congress. Social networks such as the social
connections among lawmakers are not generally directly observed, they can be recovered only
using the observable outcomes that they contribute to determine (such as, for example, the
legislators' effectiveness). Moreover, they are typically stable for relatively short periods of time,
thus generating only short panels of observations. Our estimator has three appealing properties
that allows it to work in these environments. First, it is constructed for "small" asymptotic, thus
requiring only short panels of observations. Second, it requires relatively nonrestrictive sparsity
assumptions for identification, thus being applicable to dense networks with (potentially) star
shaped connections. Third, it allows for heterogeneous common shocks across subnetworks. The
application to the U.S. Congress gives us new insights about the nature of social interactions
among lawmakers. We estimate a significant decrease over time in the importance of productivity
spillovers among individual lawmakers, compensated by an increase in the party level common
shock over time. This suggests that the rise of partisanship is not affecting only the ideological
position of legislators when they vote, but more generally how lawmakers collaborate in the U.S.
Congress.

Marco Battaglini                                  Eleonora Patacchini
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
Uris Hall                                         Cornell University
Cornell University Ithaca,                        430 Uris Hall
NY 14850                                          Ithaca, NY 14853
and EIEF, CEPR                                    and CEPR
and also NBER                                     ep454@cornell.edu
battaglini@cornell.edu
                                                  Sida Peng
Forrest W. Crawford                               Microsoft Research
Yale University                                   sidpeng@microsoft.com
forrest.crawford@yale.edu
1       Introduction
In most applications in which social networks are important for economic outcomes,
the social network itself is not observed. Social networks, for example, are considered
to be key factors in the determination of risky behavior of adolescents, in the de-
termination of politicians' effectiveness in legislatures, in the determination of R&D
spillovers and in production networks, among other applications. In all these cases,
we typically do not observe the true social or productive connections. At best we
have proxies for these connections. Sometimes we observe whether the adolescents
belong to the same classroom or legislators belong to the same alumni network; in
other cases we observe trade or aggregate production data. The literature has there-
fore focused on studying the impact of these proxies for social connections, assuming
that they are good approximations for the real social connections. This suggests the
question: if we do not observe the real social connections, can we estimate them from
the social outcome that these social connections contribute to determine?
     Only recently has the literature started to address these questions, studying con-
ditions under which the entire social network is identified and under which it can,
at least in theory, be recovered from panel data on social outcomes. In other words,
researchers seek conditions under which it is possible to predict social connections
just by observing the students' risky behaviors, or the effectiveness of legislators,
or the productivity of firms over time. The conditions under which this is possible
naturally include the requirement that the time series of observed outcomes is suf-
ficiently long, and/or the network is sufficiently sparse. A degree of sparsity and/or
sufficiently long time series are necessary because, with the social outcomes of n
agents observed for T periods, the number of possible network connections is on the
order of n2 ,while observations are on the order of n ^ T with, typically, n " T .1
     The key question in the literature however is really not whether a network is
identified under some conditions, but instead it is whether identification is possible
    1
     For instance, in legislatures there are typically over n  400 legislators. The number of ob-
servations is however in the single digits or at best low two digits, depending on how frequently
behavior is observed, since the same network of legislators cannot be observed for more than a few
legislatures.


                                                2
for feasible and realistic data sets. While great advances have been made in the recent
literature, four limitations still characterize existing approaches.2 First, existing
approaches appear to work well only for long panels on social observations with
relatively small networks. The literature has indeed highlighted sufficient conditions
for identification requiring the number of observed social outcomes T to grow at the
same rate of the number of nodes n in the network. We however generally need a
technique that works for relatively short panel data-sets and large networks: most
networks are observed only for relatively short periods of time and few observations,
and they comprise many nodes. For example, the U.S. Congress comprises over 400
members; more than 15% of the its members, moreover, is not reelected after 2 years.
It is difficult to imagine panel data-sets with hundreds of observations all generated by
the same network: networks remain constant only for short periods of time. Second,
the literature has focused on environments in which realistic forms of common shocks
to the agents are ruled out. In many instances, however, we need to deal with
environments with heterogeneous common shocks targeting specific sub-networks.
In legislative environments, for example, it is natural to assume that Democrats
and Republicans are affected by different shocks. Third, existing approaches rely on
estimators for which no valid inference procedure is available.
     In this paper, we propose a new approach to the estimation of networks using
observable social outcomes that contributes to addressing these limitations. In our
approach, we extend the Graphical Lasso model first proposed by Friedman et al.
(2008) in order to incorporate the simultaneous equation framework typical of net-
work models. By inducing a structure on the precision of the matrix, our extension
leads to a new estimator, for which we prove identification, derive consistency, and
we characterize the asymptotic distribution.
     We contribute to addressing the questions highlighted above as follows. First, we
show that we achieve consistency under the small T , rather than the requirement in
the literature that n{T Ñ 0. More importantly, while we characterize the asymp-
totic relation between the node degree and network sparsity when n{T Ñ 8; we can
show with simulations that this improvement allows us to obtain much more accurate
  2
      A more exhaustive discussion of the related literature is presented in the next subsection.


                                                   3
estimates than with existing methods in samples with fewer than 100 observations.
Second, we allow for heterogeneous common shocks that, potentially, are different
across sub-networks. Finally, we derive a valid inference procedure by deriving the
asymptotic distribution for Graphical Lasso estimator under a simultaneous frame-
work, which allows us to obtain confidence intervals on each link of the estimated
network.
    The cost for these extension is that, by embracing the Graphical Lasso framework,
we add more structure to the environment by assuming sub-Gaussian noise. While
our theoretical results rely on this structure, we however show in simulations that
our approach works well even in more general environments.
    We showcase our new estimator using Monte Carlo simulations in finite sample
environments and, as a "real world" application, we apply our approach to the es-
timation of social links among U.S. representatives. The goal of the Monte Carlo
simulations is to assess the performance of our estimator in finite samples, evaluate
its robustness to the assumptions implicit in the Graphical Lasso and to compare its
performance to previous work. A natural benchmark for us is the penalized Gener-
alized Method of Moments (henceforth, penalized GMM) suggested in the seminal
work by de Paula et al. (2019) and also earlier work from Caner et al. (2018). The
simulations show that our approach works well starting from T " 20 observations
and improves in accuracy as T increases even if n is big. Compared to de Paula
et al. (2019)'s penalized GMM method, we observe a very significant improvement
in accuracy with our method under small T and big n, as measured by the True Pos-
itive Rate (TPR) and the False Positive Rate (FPR). Under small T , the penalized
GMM almost lost predictability when n  200 while our method can still detect true
connections under a relative moderate trade-off between TPR and FPR .
    We apply the techniques developed above to study production externalities among
lawmakers in the U.S. Congress. For each congress starting from the 93rd to the
112th, we measure the legislative effectiveness of each legislator in the House of Rep-
resentatives using the Legislative Effectiveness Score (LES) constructed by Volden
and Wiseman (2018). This index collects information measuring a legislator's ability
to move bills through the legislative process. Using the time series of the legislators'

                                           4
effectiveness in each congress, we estimate production externalities in each congress
using exclusively data on the individual effectiveness. Heterogeneous party fixed
effects allow us to capture the evolving importance of parties in shaping patterns
of collaboration between congress members. Comparing the estimated social net-
works over time, we find two main results. First, we observe a significant decrease
in importance in production spillovers among individual lawmakers over time, both
between members of their own party, and across parties. Second, we show that this
decrease in importance is compensated by an increase in the party level common
shock over time. Combined, these two results suggest that the rise of partisanship
is not affecting only the ideological position of legislators when they vote, but more
generally how legislation is constructed in the U.S. Congress.
    The organization of the remainder of the paper is as follows. We discuss related
literature in the next subsection. Section 2 outlines the theoretical model linking
social outcomes to social networks. In Section 3, we present our graphical Lasso
estimator and theoretically derive its main properties. In Section 4, we explore the
finite sample performance of the estimator. In Section 5 we apply our approach to
investigate productivity spillovers among U.S. lawmakers.Section 6 discusses method-
ological extensions and Section 7 concludes.


1.1    Related literature
There is a recent but already significant literature studying the conditions under
which social spillovers can be estimated using social outcomes despite being only
partially or completely unobserved. The case with partially observed social spillovers
has been studied by Souza (2014), Blume et al. (2015) and Peng (2019). Souza (2014)
proposes a maximum likelihood estimator for environments in which the probability
that pairs of individuals form connections in the social network depend on exogenous
factors such as common gender. Blume et al. (2015) considers the case in which two
individuals in the social network are known to not be directly connected. Peng (2019)
proposes a new method to identify leaders and followers in a known network.
    The focus of our work is on the case when the social network is not observed at


                                          5
all.3 This case has been studied by de Paula et al. (2019) and Rose (2018).4 de Paula
et al. (2019) show that identification of the social network is obtained if the number
T of observed social outcomes generated by the network is of the same order of the
size n of the network, a requirement that would be too demanding in the environment
we are interested in (such as, for example, the social networks in the U.S. Congress).
Rose [2018] does not derive the statistical properties of the estimator. He presents
an application of the STIV estimator characterized by Gautier and Tsybakov (2014)
that is not designed for dealing with systems of simultanous equations. We show
that the estimator in our paper achieve consistency if sn d2 log pnq {pnT q Ñ 0, and
d2 log pnq {T Ñ 0 where sn denotes the size of non-sparse elements and d denotes
the maximum degree centrality in the network. Differently from standard penalized
estimators, the additional restiction on d is due to the simultanous nature of the
equation system. However, our results still allow n{T Ñ 8 which allow significantly
shorter panels to be estimated in finite sample. As we mentioned above, moreover,
the previous literature allow a common shocks that is the same across all individuals
at every period. We instead adopt a random effect approach, which allows us to
handle sub-network common shocks without row-sum normalization.
     We contribute to overcoming these limitations proposing an extension to the
Graphical Lasso model by incorporating the simultaneous equation framework. The
Graphical Lasso method was first proposed by Friedman et al. (2008) to estimate
sparse graphs as a competing method to Meinshausen and Bühlmann (2006). It is
known for fast computational speed and good finite sample performance. Lam and
   3
      If the network is partially observed, potential missing links can be recovered using the method-
ology presented in Chandrasekhar and Lewis (2016). In these papers, stochastic block models are
adopted. The advantage of those methods is that they can be applied to very dense networks. The
advantage of our approach is that we do not need any notion on the underlying network structure.
In addition, our model can be augmented with partially observed network data. The known links
are simply removed from the penalizating function and thus certaintly detected.
    4
      Important recent work has also been done by Bonaldi et al. (2015) and Manresa (2013) for
models where the social network affects individual decisions only through exogenous characteristics
(exogenous social effect). We instead consider the case where own decisions are not only affected
by the characteristics of the social connections but also by their own behavior (endogenous social
effect) own behavior is affected. Such an extention boils down into a completely different model,
with a simultaneous equation structure. As a result, a novel estimator needs to be developed.



                                                  6
Fan (2009), Xue et al. (2012) and Xue and Zou (2012) propose various extensions and
derive statistical properties for Graphical Lasso type estimators. The simultaneous
equation framework that is at the core of our extension essentially induces a structure
on the precision matrix and leads to a novel estimator in our work. For this new
estimator, we prove identification, derive the consistency for this estimator, and we
characterize the asymptotic distribution.
    Naturally, there is a cost for these additional properties of our estimator: we
need to impose significant more structure on the error structure in our model. With
Montecarlo simulations we illustrate the cost/benefits of our approach. We test the
robustness of our approach with simulations and compare it to the performance of
the penalized GMM estimator in de Paula et al. (2019). For long panels (i.e. T " 500
and N " 10), the two methods perform similarly with penalized GMM estimator
doing better at true positive rate; but for T  100 and N  50, our estimator serves
as a better classifier comparing with penalized GMM estimator. We show that our
method performs well also if we deviate form the assumption of Gaussian errors.
    A different approach to the estimation of unobserved networks is presented in
Battaglini et al. (2019), who present a model of social network formation and struc-
turally estimate it by Bayesian methods. This approach requires shorter data-sets
for the estimation and it does not require strong sparsity assumptions, but relies
more on the underlying structural model of network formation.
    The empirical exercise in our work should be distinguished from the literature
attempting to estimate the determinants of network formation using network obser-
vations such as Graham (2016), Fowler and Christakis (2010), Mele (2017), Badev
(2017), among others. In these works, it is assumed that at least a social network
is observed and that these observations can be interpreted as realizations from an
underlying probability distribution of social networks. In our problem, and the lit-
erature discussed above, we attempt to estimate the social connections using social
outcomes generated by them.




                                          7
2     Model
In Section 2.1 we present a simple theory of the effectiveness of lawmakers in a
legislature in which the lawmakers' productivities depend on their social connections.
The analysis will establish the following linear relationship between the levels of
effectiveness and their social connections:
                                           ÿ
                               Ei " i `               g0,ij Ej ,                    (1)
                                               j PN


where Ei is the effectiveness in congress of legislator i, g0,ij is the link between
legislator i and legislator j ,  represents the endogenous effect as in Manski (1993),
and i is an individual fixed effect. In Section 3 we study under what condition this
relationship can be used to estimate the (unobserved) social connections g0,ij in the
U.S. Congress using only the (observed) levels of effectiveness E " pE1 , ..., En q.
    While it is useful to ground our analysis in a specific application for which we
have a clear microfoundation, we should note that the tools developed here and in
Section 3 have wider applicability. First, the model can be used to study any other
settings in which the individual performances of a team of players may be affected
by positive productivity spillovers among the players. Secondly, the basic linear
relationship derived in the model that is at the core of our estimation technique,
can be derived in a variety of other contexts and with alternative microfoundations
(see Section 2.2 below). Finally, we observe that the linear relationship (1) is often
directly assumed as a starting point of the empirical analysis of social networks
without any microfoundation (see for instance de Paula et al. (2019) Rose (2018),
and others).


2.1    A theory of legislative effectiveness
Consider a congress comprised of n legislators, where N " t1, ..., nu is the set of
legislators. Each legislator has a pet legislative project that s/he cares to implement.
The goal of each legislator is to maximize their legislative effectiveness, measured by
the probability of implementing the project.


                                           8
    We assume that legislator i's legislative effectiveness Ei is a function of the leg-
islator i's characteristics, the effort directly exerted by i and how socially connected
the legislator is. The idea is that legislators who are well connected are able to ben-
efit from their connections in pushing their pet legislative projects. We assume the
following "production function" for legislative effectiveness:

                                 Ei "  psi q pli q1´ ` i                                (2)

where li is legislator i's effort, si is the legislator's "social connectedness" and i is a
factor idiosyncratic to i that contributes to i's efficacy independently from his/her
connections or effort. The Cobb-Douglas in (2) describes the fact that legislator i's
level of "social connectedness" si and his/her effort li are complementary inputs in
lawmaking. Social connectedness is defined as:
                                           ÿ
                                    si "              g0,ij Ej ,                        (3)
                                               j PN


where the n ^ n matrix G0 " pg0,ij qi,j PN measures of the social link between i and j .
The idea behind (3) is that the higher is the effectiveness of the legislators socially
connected to i, the higher is i's effectiveness; because of this, the effect of j on i
is weighted in (3) by the degree of social connection of i to j . We assume that i's
characteristics as captured by i are observed by the other lawmakers, but not by an
econometrician studying the game.
    The cost of effort is assumed to be represented by a linear function Li pli q " c ¨ li ,
where c is a cost parameter. A sufficient condition for Ei P p0, 1q is that A ` l  1,
an assumption that we will maintain throughout the analysis. In the analysis below,
we also assume g0,ii " 0.
    The complication of analyzing the game presented above is that the choice of
effort li of a player i generates a complex cascade of externalities: effort affects i's
effectiveness directly; but also the effectiveness of all players connected to i; and
of those connected to those connected to i, etc. The complication is not dissimilar
to the complication that arise in the analysis of a competitive equilibrium in an


                                                9
exchange economy where a change in an agent's demand has a direct obvious effect
on an agent's utility and an indirect effect on equilibrium prices. The solution in
general equilibrium analysis is to assume that agents are "price takers:" agents solve
their optimization program taking prices as given. Prices, however, must clear the
market in equilibrium. Such analysis is motivated by the fact that, in many exchange
economies, each agent has only a marginal impact on equilibrium prices, thus allowing
us to ignore the indirect effects.
    The same approach can be adopted in a network game with many players such
as ours. Following Battaglini et al. [forthcoming] and [2019], we define a Network
Competitive Equilibrium as an allocation in which: 1. lawmakers choose their own
optimal level of effort li taking the other legislator's effectiveness pEj q j PN as given;
2. the expectations regarding the other player's effectiveness must be correct in
equilibrium, satisfying (2)-(3). The idea is that legislators are individually small, so
they are "price takers" with respect to the other legislators effectiveness: they se-
lect their individual efforts depending on how the expected equilibrium effectiveness
of their socially connected legislators; but they assume that their effort levels are
marginal and will not directly affect the levels of effectiveness of the other legisala-
tors. In equilibrium, however, the vector of effectivenesses must be consistent with
individual optimal behavior.
    Given the other legislator's effectiveness, the optimal level of effort li by an indi-
vidual i " 1, ..., n solves the problem:

                              max  psi q pli q1´ ´ c ¨ li ,
                                                         (
                                                                                       (4)
                             li Pr0,ls


Substituting the solution to this maximization in (4), we obtain that the equilibrium
levels of legislative efficiency for a type i " 1, ..., T are given by (1), where  "
` 1´  1´ 

   c
       
          . These equations can be expressed in matrix form as:

                                    E "  ` ¨ G0 ¨ E                                    (5)

where E is the vector of legislative effectiveness, and  is the vector of legislators'


                                            10
characteristics.


2.2    Alternative interpretations and microfoundations
The model presented above can be reinterpreted to describe other situations in which
E represents a vectors of individual levels of performances in a team of players and
G0 describes productive spillovers among the team members. The linear relationship
between E and G0 in (5), moreover, can be obtained from other microfoundations.
For example, Ballester et al. (2006) consider a model in which a level of output yi is
generated by the production function:

                                      1         ÿ
                           yi " i xi ` ii x2
                                           i `      i,j xi xj ,
                                      2         j i


where x " px1 , ..., xn q is the vector of effort levels in the team. They show that the
unique Nash equilibrium of the game in which each      ´ player
                                                             ¯    chooses effort simultane-
                                                         i,j
ously is given by the system xi " i `  ¨ j PN |i,i | ¨ xj for each i, which is the
same as (5), where E is replaced with x " px1 , ..., xn q and the matrix G0 is replaced
by the n ¨ n matrix  with i, j element equal to  ¨ i,j { |i,i |. This model has been
used extensively to study peer effects in education and risky behavior, using evidence
on x and observable proxies for i,j to estimate the magnitude of  . The techniques
developed in Section 3 for (5) can be used to estimate the entire  matrix using
only information on x. The difference with the model of Section 2.1 is that while
in Section 2.1 we relate a measure of performance (the levels of effectiveness) to the
social matrix G0 , in Ballester et al. (2006) the authors relate the individual levels
of effort x to the social matrix .


3     Estimation
Let t " 1, 2, ¨ ¨ ¨ , T denote the indeces for the congresses we observe. Assume that
i,t can be expressed as a linear function of a congressman i's observed characteristics
Xi,t , individuals fixed effect  " p1 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , n q1 and unobserved characteristics t "

                                            11
p1 , ..., n q1 in congress t:

                                Et " 2 G0 ¨ Et ` Xt  `  `         t


where Et is a n by 1 vector composed of the n legislators' effectiveness at congress t.
Becasue the network is unobserved,
                        ´          ¯2 and G are not separately identified (indeed,
any pair with the same 2 ¨ 2 , 1 G generates the same solution).5 As a result, we
                               2 0
can normalize 2 " 1 and obtain the following data generating process:

                                 Et " G0 ¨ Et ` Xt  `  `      t


To difference out the individual fixed effects, let Et " Et ´Et´1 and  t "            t   ´   t´1


                                Et " G0 ¨ Et ` Xt  `              t                           (6)


3.1     Assumptions
The identification of Equation (6) is well studied for the large T and fixed N case in
the literature. In those cases, no sparsity assumption is required as the number of
observations N ^T is greater than the number of parameters N ^pN ´1q. We consider
the situation when T ! N and thus equation (6) is not directly estimable due to
the coexistence of simultaneity and high-dimensionality. We impose the following
assumption to achieve identification.

Assumption 3.1 (Sparsity). Let Sn " tpi, j q : g0,ij  0u and sn " |Sn |, which is the
number of non-zero entries in the adjacency matrix G0 . Define d as the maximum
of degree centrality in the graph. Then,
                                                       ´a         ¯
           sn d2 " oP pnT { log nq    and     d " oP     T { log n      as n Ñ 8
   5


Note that, because of this different approach, the commonly assumed row sum normalization in
the traditional SAR literature (see Lee (2004)) identification of 2 is not needed here.




                                             12
    There are npn ´ 1q off-diagonal entries in an adjacency matrix with n legislators.
Assumption 3.1 specify a tradeoff between the global sparsity sn with the "individual
sparsity" d. First, the maxium number of connections for any legislator d must be of
       a
order T { logpnq, thus allows star-shaped network to be detected when n " T , i.e.
the number of legislators is greater than the time periods observed. Second, it re-
quires the product sn d2 must be of order nT { log n. For example, if individual sparsity
d is growing at rate pT { logpnqq1{3 , then sn can only grow at rate Op pnpT { logpnqq1{3 q.
We requires the additional sparsity assumption on the maximum of degree centrality
compare with standard Graphical Lasso model. This is because our sparsity assump-
tion is not on the precision matrix pIn ´ G0 q2 { 2 , but on the adjacency matrix G0
directly.

Assumption 3.2 (SAR restrictions).

    - There exists gmax  1 such that |g0,ij |  gmax for all i and j .

    - The     t   are i.i.d sub-Gaussian random variable with 0 mean and variance  2

    - The regressors xt,i in Xt are non-stochastic and uniformly bounded for all
      n. limnÑ8 Xt1 Xt {n exists and is nonsingular for all t.

    Assumption 3.2 is required to ensure the simultaneous framework is well defined.
The first and second parts ensure the matrix In ´ G0 is invertible. The assumption on
the error term currently excludes common shocks from our model and we will discuss
a relaxation in the next section. We also require the error term to be sub-Gaussian
so that concentration inequalities can be derived to bound the empirical process.
Sub-Gaussian processes are known to have "almost" bounded support due to the fast
decay of its tails. This assumption is usually required for high dimensional estimators
as in Belloni et al. (2014). We provide simulation evidence on the sensitivity of our
estimator to this assumption. We assume the regressors are deterministic following
the convention in the SAR literature (see Anselin (1988), Jin and Lee (2016)). This
assumption simplifies the calculation of the variance-covariance matrix by assuming
away the randomness from the exogenous effects. We leave the random design case
as a topic for future research.

                                            13
Assumption 3.3 (Graphical Lasso restrictions). There is a constant L such that

                         0  1{L  min pIn ´ G0 q  max pIn ´ G0 q  L.

where min and max denotes the minimum and maxmium eigen-value function
The minimum eigenvalue condition is required to prevent the spatial errors from
accumulating too fast. This is the same assumption as Assumption (A) in Lam and
Fan (2009) and Jankvoá and van de Geer (2019).


3.2       Estimator
We assume G0 is symmetric when designing our estimator (e.g. the network is
undirected). However, this assumption is purely for notation convenience. 6 . We
consider the following Graphical Lasso estimator for equation 6
                             ^                 ^                    
                                pIn ´ Gq2         pIn ´ Gq2
                   arg max log 
                                           ´ tr S
                                                             ´ }G}1                             (7)
                       ,G           2                 2
where S is the estimated variance-covariance matrix of PXt Et where PXt is
the projection matrix onto the orthogonal space spanned by Xt . Equation 7 is a
combination of a loss function based on the maximum likelihood estimator for normal
distribution as well as a penalty function where  is the penalization parameter that
induces sparsity in the estimated network (i.e. the smaller the lambda the more
dense the network will be). As we are directly imposing sparsity restriction on the
adjacency matrix instead of precision matrix, (7) differs from standard Graphical
Lasso estimator by imposing additional structures on the precision matrix.

Theorem 3.1. Under Assumptions 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3, equation 7 is concave. Further
           a
with  Á d ¨ logpnq{T , we have
                     ^                                                      ^                       
 ^ ´G0 }2                psn ` nqd2 logpnq                  2    2 2            psn ` nqd2 logpnq
}G      F     " OP                                and     |^ ´ | " OP                     ¨
                                T                                                   n        T
  6
      In the directed network case, the variance-covariance matrix is pIn ´ G0 qpIn ´ G0 qT .

                                                  14
where } ¨ }F is the Frobenius norm.

    The identification result in Theorem 3.1 coincides with finding a consistent es-
timator under the sparsity assumption, which is standard in the Lasso literature.
The convergence rate in our result also depends on the maximum of degree central-
ity. This is slower compared to the standard psn ` nq logpnq{T rate in Graphical
Lasso. This is again due to how we impose sparsity assumption in this simul-
taneous equation system. The results on Frobenius norm can also be stated as
}G^ ´ G0 }2 {n " Op ppsn ` nqd2 logpnq{pnT qq which provides an approximation for
          F
the operator norm. Another practical issue is how to choose the tuning parame-
ter . A theoretical guidance can be obtained by simulating the distribution for
n}pS ´ 0 qpIn ´ G0 q2 }8 with an prior on 0 and G0 . In practice, we recommend
using cross-validation on the time dimension to choose . Penalized estimators suf-
fer from shrinkage bias and thus have nonstandard distributions for inference. We
propose the following de-biased estimator for our Graphical Lasso estimator that can
achieve normality.
De-biased Glasso Estimator:
                                          ^                    
                      ~   ^    1      ^ 2          S       ^ 2
                     G " G ` pIn ´ Gq ´In ` 2 pIn ´ Gq                            (8)
                               2                   ^
                                                                         ?
Theorem 3.2. Under Assumptions 1-3, and further assume s0 d4 " oP p T { log n _
                           `?                 
T {pnplog nq2 qq and d " oP p T {pn log nqq1{4 , the de-sparse estimator

                             ?                 d
                              T pg
                                 ~ij ´ g0,ij q Ñ N p0, ij q

                                            2
where ij can be consistently estimated as g
                                          ~ij .

    The normality condition is achieved at a cost of stronger sparsity assumption.
Theorem 3.2 allows us to construct unbiased estimator for the strength of links and
also to test gi,j " 0 point-wise.




                                          15
3.3    Common Shocks
The identification of (6) crucially relies on the independence assumption on the error
term. However one of the biggest concerns in the network literature is the existence
of homophily. While it is temping to conclude there is a connection between two
legislators when we observe a strong correlation on their effectiveness, it could also be
the case the two legislators are from the same party and it is the party level common
shocks that is responsible for the observed correlation. In the linear-in-means model
proposed by Manski (1993), homophily is modeled as additively separable from the
individual idiosyncratic shocks . We adopt the same format and model the party
effects as follows:

                   Et " G0 ¨ Et ` Xt  `  ` ZR Rt ` ZD Dt ` t ,

where Rr and Dr are party random shocks that are the same for all party members
in a given year. Let R and D denote the set of Republicans and Democrats. ZR
and ZD are dummy variables representing the membership for each individual, i.e.
ZR " p1p1 P Rq, ¨ ¨ ¨ , 1pn P Rqq1 . Difference out the individual fixed effects:

                Et " G0 ¨ Et ` Xt  ` ZR Rt ` ZD Dt `  t .                            (9)

We consider a random effect approach to estimate (9).

Condition 3.1 (Correlated Effects). The random variable pRt , Dt q is sub-Gaussian
and independent of  r , i.e.
                   ~        ¸             ~~       ¸ ~           ¸¸
                                                          2
                       Rt                      0         R  RD
                                ,, subG             ,        2
                       Dt                      0         RD D

   Under (9) and Assumption 3.1, the variance-covariance matrix of Et can be
written as




                                           16
 "  2 pIn ´ G0 q´2 ` D
                     2
                       pIn ´ G0 q´1 Zd Zd
                                        1
                                          pIn ´ G0 q´1 ` R
                                                         2
                                                           pIn ´ G0 q´1 Zr Zr
                                                                            1
                                                                              pIn ´ G0 q´1
    ` DR pIn ´ G0 q´1 Zd Zr
                          1
                            pIn ´ G0 q´1 ` DR pIn ´ G0 q´1 Zr Zd
                                                               1
                                                                 pIn ´ G0 q´1

The inverse of this matrix can be calculated by the generalized Sherman­Morrison
formula given the following condition is satisfied:
                      ^             ^        
                            2           R2
                                               2
                          1` D nR    1 ` 2 nR ´ DR nD nR  0
                            2                   2


4       Simulations
In this section, we present the finite sample performance of our estimator and com-
pare it with the penalized GMM estimator under different network size n and panel
lengths T . We simulate the data as in equation (6), e.g.,

                            Et " pIn ´ G0 q´1 ¨ pXt  `  t q

We use the same simulation set up as de Paula et al. (2019).7 The parameters are
chosen as  " 0.4 2 " 0.7 and G is generated by the Erdös Rényi algorithm Erdös
and Rényi (1959). Each edge is included in the graph with probability p " 0.1
independent from every other edge. The variables Xt and  t are generated from
a standard normal distribution. To assess the performance of the estimated network
with the true network, we consider the estimator as a binary classifier (a connection
is detected or not) and compare two difference measures. The true positive rate
    7
    We thank Aureo de Paula, Imran Rasul and Pedro Souza for generously allowing us to use their
original code to replicate their results in our simulations.




                                              17
                  Figure 1: Comparing ROC under large n and small T




       (a) n " 50, T " 20            (b) n " 50, T " 50             (c) n " 50, T " 100




      (d) n " 100, T " 20            (e) n " 100, T " 50            (f) n " 100, T " 100




      (g) n " 200, T " 20            (h) n " 200, T " 50            (i) n " 200, T " 100




For each scenario, we plot the ROC curves under 200 simulations. The blue dash line represents
the ROC curves for penalized GMM method and red solid line represents ROC curves for Graphical
Lasso method.


(TPR) is calculated as
                                     
                                        ij   1pg0,ij  0q ¨ 1pg
                                                             ^ij   q
                        T P Rp q "                                   .
                                               ij 1pg0,ij  0q


                                               18
             Figure 2: Comparing TPR and FPR under small n and large T




   (a) n " 10, T " 100, TPR       (b) n " 10, T " 500, TPR        (c) n " 10, T " 1000, TPR




   (d) n " 10, T " 100, FPR          (e) n " 10, T " 500          (f) n " 10, T " 1000, FPR




For each scenario, we plot the TPR and FPR separately under 200 simulations. The blue dash
line represents the penalized GMM method and red solid line represents ROC curves for Graphical
Lasso method.


For a fixed threshold  , the bigger the TPR, the better the classifier performs. The
false positive rate (FPR) is calculated as
                                     
                                        ij   1pg0,ij " 0q ¨ 1pg
                                                              ^ij   q
                        F P Rp q "                                    .
                                               ij 1pg0,ij " 0q


For a fixed threshold  , the smaller the FPR, the better the classifier performs. The
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve is a plot of pT P Rp q, F P Rp qq with
 varying from 0 to 8.
   Figure 1 plots the ROC curves for both the Graphical Lasso and penalized GMM
method with the network size varying from n " 50 to n " 200 and time period


                                               19
                Figure 3: Comparing ROC under Non-subGaussian error




    (a) T " 20, mix " 0.001        (b) T " 50, mix " 0.001       (c) T " 100, mix " 0.001




    (d) T " 20, mix " 0.01         (e) T " 50, mix " 0.01         (f) T " 100, mix " 0.01




      (g) T " 20, Cauchy             (h) T " 50, Cauchy             (i) T " 100, Cauchy




For each scenario, we plot the ROC curves under 200 simulations. The blue dash line represents
the ROC curves for penalized GMM method and red solid line represents ROC curves for Graphical
Lasso method.


varying from T " 20 to T " 100. For each scenario, we plot the ROC curves under
200 simulations. The blue dashed line represents the ROC curves for the penalized
GMM method and red solid line represents the ROC curves for the Graphical Lasso


                                             20
method. The accuracy for both classifiers improves as T increases and n decreases.
The dominance of the solid red ROC curves versus the dashed blue ROC curves
in all scenario indicates that Graphical Lasso performs better at detecting the true
connections than the penalized GMM estimator. When n " 200, the TPR for the
penalized GMM method increases at the same speed as FPR, which suggests the lack
of predictability for the penalized GMM method at small T . The Graphical Lasso
method instead can still serve as a reasonably good classifier.
    Figure 2 plots the TPR and FPR separately for Graphical Lasso and penalized
GMM method under small n but large T . The ROC curves for the two methods are
very similar in such scenarios (both converge to the top right corner as T becomes
large) so we present the TPR and FPR plots separately. The penalized GMM method
outperforms the Graphical Lasso method in TPR as T becomes bigger. On the other
hand, Graphical Lasso method is doing better at controlling the FPR.
    Figure 3 plots the ROC curves for both the Graphical Lasso and penalized
GMM method when the sub-Gaussian assumption is violated. We consider a two-
dimensional mixture model for the error term between standard Normal and Cauchy
distribution. The mixing weight varies between 1, 0.1 and 0.001. When the mixing
weight is 1, the error term is drawn from a Cauchy distribution. When the mixing
weight is 0.01, the error term is drawing from a Cauchy distribution with probability
0.01 and from a normal distribution with probability 0.99. This is similar for the case
when mixing weight equals 0.001. While both methods suffer from the violation of
the sub-Gaussian error, the Graphical Lasso method still outperforms the penalized
GMM method in all cases.




                                          21
5       Estimating production spillovers among U.S. law-
        makers
An important literature in political science has highlighted an increase over time of
both partisanship and polarization in the U.S. Congress.8 This literature is based on
the study of roll call votes and has focused on the question of whether parties exert
pressure on congressional members in close votes (Snyder and Groseclose (2000)); or
whether the increase in polarization determines changes in the congressional mem-
bers' ideal points (McCarty et al. (2001)). An issue that has not been adequately
studied, however, is whether the rise of partisanship is affecting how legislators col-
laborate in drafting legislation. There is a big difference between a legislature where
bills are dropped by the leadership on the legislators for approval on partisan lines;
and a system where legislation is build from the bottom up, as the result of ac-
tive collaboration between individual legislators, both within and across parties. To
study this question, we apply our technique to the estimation of social spillovers in
the "production function" for bills in the U.S. Congress.
    We apply our method to study the latent connections among legislators by using
their Legislative Effectiveness Score (LES). This metric is based on the work of Volden
and Wiseman (2018) and it is a summary metric of how successful a lawmaker is at
moving his/her legislative agenda in the legislative process. For our analysis, we use
the LES information for the U.S. House of Representative members in 20 Congresses
(from the 93rd to the 112th Congress, spanning the years 1973-2013). We have
reconstructed the LES at monthly level to allow us obtain enough variations from
the time dimension in each congress. Even though we only have T " 24 for a two-
year congress, the analysis of the properties of our estimator in finite samples in
Section 4 shows that our estimator is suitable for this application when T is small.9
    We apply our method with and without correlated effects to estimate the latent
    8
     See Rohde (1991), James M. Snyder and Groseclose (2000), Cox and Poole (2002), McCarty
et al. (2001), among others for partisanship; and McCarty et al. (2001) and Poole and Rosenthal
(2007) on polarization.
   9
     Specifically, following Volden and Wiseman (2018), for each congress member i and month t



                                              22
network structure among legislators (equations (6) and (9)).10 The estimated net-
work can be interpreted as describing the network of production spillovers among
                                                                    a
lawmakers. We choose the tuning parameter  proportional to logpnq{T which
guarantees the rate of convergence as shown in Theorem 3.1. While our methodol-
ogy produces estimates of the link strength between any pair of Congress members,
we present the detected network structures under different choice of . For the model
with correlated effects, we assume independence between Rt and Dt to simplify
the computational burden. This assumption does not affect our final results as one
of the two correlated shocks are always estimated equal to 0.
    Figure 4 illustrates the estimated social networks without correlated effects (e.g.,
under equations (6)) for two congresses at the beginning of the sample period, the
93rd and the 97th, and two congresses at the end, the 109th and 112th.11 All Re-
publicans are arranged at the right of the plot while Democrats are at left. The
connections between two Republicans are colored in red while the connections be-
tween two Democrats are colored in blue. The color between blue and red represents
a link between a Republican and a Democratic legislator. We plot all links with
       a
 " 30 log n{T . This picture reveals a surprising feature: we observe a significant
we compute:

                  LESit "    pBILLC        C       C          C       C
                                   it ` AICit ` ABCit ` P ASSit ` LAWit q
                                     S       S       S         S      S
                             ` pBILLit ` AICit ` ABCit ` P ASSit ` LAWit q

where  " 1 and  " 5. Bills are classified as "significant bills" or as "commemorative bills:" the
sup-script S represents significant bill and sup-script C represents commemorative bills. For for
l " C, S , the variable BILLl   it represents the number of bills introduced by i at time t, AICit
                                                                                                    l
                                                                                                    l
represents the number of bills introduced by i at time t that received action in committee, ABCit
represents the number of bills introduced by i at time t that received action beyond committee,
        l                                                                                           l
P ASSit    represents the number of bills introduced by i at time t that pass the Senate and LAWit
is the the number of bills introduced by i at time t that become law. Volden and Wiseman (2018)
compute the formula below normalizing the LES scores by the total number of bills passed in each
subcategory and in each time period. This transform the score into a percentage format which is
relative easy to interpret. However, normalization may distort the variance-covariance matrix of
the underlying metrics and thus we choose not to normalize.
   10
      We take xt as a costant since no other time varying attributes are observed for the legislators
at monthly level.
   11
      A figure with all the congresses from the 93rd to the 112th is presented in the Appendix.



                                                 23
reduction over time of the number of detected links between lawmakers, both within
parties and between parties. We further investigate this finding in Table 3. We
report in this table the detected number of links for all the 20 congresses and under
different  for the estimated link strength. Panel A show the baseline estimates
(equation (6)), whereas in panel B we show the estimates that control for party level
common shocks (equation ((9))). Each panel illustrates the estimated networks by
reporting the number of links distinguishing between the Republican party (column
R), the Democrat party (column D) and between parties (column RD). The majority
party for each congress is indicated in the second column. In panel B , we also report
                                                               a
the estimated level of common shocks by party when  " 30 log n{T . The common
shocks estimated under the other two choice of  are similar.
    Three features appear clear from these results. First, the links in the majority
party are more numerous than those in the minority party. This is to be expected
since the party in the majority has an institutional advantage in lawmaking. Part
of this advantage is naturally captured by the individual fixed effects and the party
common shock. However, the pattern remains unchnaged even in Panel b), where
the party common shock has been purged out. In Appendix Table B4, we show
the estimates of the average link strength.12 The table shows that links between
members of the party in the majority are also stronger than between members of the
party in the minority. It is therefore important to note that the party advantage does
not only enter as a fixed effect, but it also significantly affects the marginal effect
of social connections, making complementarities in effectiveness more numerous and
significant.
    The second, and perhaps the most surprising, observation is that the table con-
firms a significant reduction over time of the number of detected links between law-
makers, both within parties and between parties, irrespective of the threshold chosen.
                                    a
Looking at panel A, with  " 10 log n{T , in the first 5 congresses in our sample,
we detect an average of over 228 links between lawmakers of different parties, over
100 links between lawmakers in the minority party, and over 700 between lawmakers
in the majority party (that was the Democratic party). In the last 5 congresses in
 12
      We present the de-biased estimates from Equation 8.


                                                24
our sample, on the contrary, the links between lawmakers of different parties are
on average only 52, the links between lawmakers in the minority are only 21, and
between lawmakers in the majority are 200. It is important to observe that this re-
duction in connections does not reflect an overall reduction in the legislative activity
in Congress. While the results in Table 3 show an important drop in the number of
detected connections from the 97th Congress onward, Appendix Figure 5 documents
that the average number of bills proposed in Congress over the period is stable.13
    The third observation emerges when we introduce in the estimation the party
level common shocks (panel B). On one hand, panel B confirms the decline in links
                                                                a
shown in panel A. Using the most selective tunning,  " 30 log n{T , we always
observe spillovers/links at the individual level (from a minimum of 8 to 36) in the
first 5 congresses in our sample; using the same criterion, in the last 5 congresses
in the sample, we observe less than 1 individually significant link in all congresses
except the 11th, where we observe a grand total of 6 links. Using the least selective
                 a
tunning,  " 10 log n{T , we observe from 164 to 268 significantly positive links in
the first 5 congresses; we observe from a minimum of 40 to a maximum of 59 links in
the last 5 congresses. Most importantly, however, on the other hand the table shows
that the decrease in productivity links at the individual level is associated with an
increasing importance of the party common shock over time. As it can be seen from
the table, the common shock is not detected in the first 5 congresses; it is detected,
on the contrary, in all the last 5 congresses that we observe.
    Combined, these observations suggest that, in the past 50 years, there has been
a significant change in the way the U.S. Congress operates, with an increase in
importance of the two leading parties, the Democratic and Republican parties; and
a reduction in importance of direct personal connections between lawmakers.
 13
   Bills from house of representatives. The data is available at https://thelawmakers.org/
data-download




                                           25
5.1    Validation
We now turn to the comparison between the social matrix estimated here and other
directly observed adjacency matrices commonly used in the literature to study so-
cial connections in the U.S. Congress. Two main types of adjacency matrices have
been used in previous work as proxies of social connections: the cosponsorship ma-
trix, where two lawmakers are linked if they cosponsor each other's bills (see Fowler
(2006)); and the alumni connection matrix, where two lawmakers are linked if they
have attended the same educational institution within a given time window (see Co-
hen and Malloy (2014), Battaglini and Patacchini (2018), Battaglini et al. (2020)).
    In Table 1, we compare our estimated network with the consponsorship network.
Following the seminal contribution by Fowler (2006), a large literature in politi-
cal science has used the network of cosponsorships to measure social connections
in Congress (see e.g. Kirkland (2011) and Kirkland and Gross (2014)). Cospon-
sorhip information is obtained using the Library of Congress data information sys-
tem, THOMAS (http://thomas.loc.gov). Following the existing literature, we
define two congress members as linked if they have cosponsored the same bills. No-
tice that our estimated network only uses legislators' effectiveness, which does not
contain information on cosponsorships. We should however observe correlation be-
tween the two networks if cosponsorship activity is an important factor enhancing
legislators' political agenda. For the comparison, we define different cosponsorship
networks where a link between two legislators is established if they have cosponsored
the same bills for more than Qp q times where Qp q is the  's quantile of number of
bills cosponsored between any pair of legislators in that given congress. We consider
( )=0.1, 0.3 or 0.5 (where 0.1 is the 10th percentile, 0.3 the 30th percentile and
0.5 is the median of the distribution). The different thresholds produce networks
with different densities. Table 1 compares the coverage probability of each of those
cosponsorship networks when using the Lasso-detected network and for a random
network with the same density of the given cosponsorship network. The coverage
probability when using the Lasso-predicted network is computed as the total number
of Lasso-detected links which are also in the given cosponsorship network divided by


                                         26
the total number of links in the Lasso-predicted network. The normalized cover-
age probability reported in the columns denoted by Lasso-detected is the coverage
probability divided by the coverage probability in a random network with the same
density of the given cosponsorship network.14 This ratio represents the power of
predicting the cosponsorship network using the estimated network. The table shows
values of the normalized coverage probability of our estimated network consistently
higher than one, thus dominating the random guess. This suggests the estimated
network contains information on cosponsorship activity in congress.
    For the comparison with the alumni network, we construct alumni networks by
setting a link to 1 if two legislators attend the same educational institution within
a 4-year, 8-year or 10-year time window (and 0 otherwise). This social network is
obtained retriving information on high schools and higher education institutions at-
tended for both undergraduate and graduate degrees from the Biographical Directory
of the United States Congress (available online at http://bioguide.Congress.gov/
biosearch/biosearch.asp). Although those social connections are formed many
years before election to Congress, a recent literature documents that they are still
relevant in explaining legislators' activities in Congress, such as roll call voting or
campaign contributions (Cohen and Malloy, 2014, Battaglini and Patacchini 2018).
Table 2 has a similar structure of Table 1. It compares the coverage probability of the
different alumni networks when using the Lasso-detected networks and for a random
network with the same density of the alumni network with the given graduation-time
window. Here too we find evidence that the Lasso-predicted network show a good
predictions of the alumni networks in congress 99, 104, 105 and 111. This is remark-
able not only because we are not using any information from the alumni networks in
our estimates, but also because the alumni networks are very sparse (random prob-
ability is at 1e-3 level) and only select around 50-100 links (as in Table 1). It is thus
very likely that none of the detected connection is in the alumni network (the expect
value is at 1e-1 level) even when our method is doing better than a random guess.
  14
     The coverage probability in the case of the random network is computed as the total number of
links in the given cosponsorship network divided by pN 2 ´ N q. This represents the probability that
a random guess in the network coincides with a link in the cosponsorship network. This probability
is reported in columns denoted by Random Network.


                                                27
6     Extensions
We conclude our analysis by presenting here two methodological extension of the
approach developed in the previous sections.


6.1    Endogenous and exogenous effects
A more general version of equation 6 includes spillovers from exogenous characteris-
tics:

                    Et " G01 ¨ Et ` G02 ¨ Xt ` Xt  `               t                (10)

The second term in (10) correspond to what Manski (1993) defined as exogenous
effects, such as spillovers due to exogenous interventions. For example, consider Xt
as an indicator for the treatment status at time t. In this context, Xt  represents
the direct treatment effect whereas G02 ¨ Xt represent the spillover effect of the
treatment, that is the effect due to the treatment status of own social connections.
The social network structure transmitting the treatment spillover effect G02 or its
magnitude may or may not be the same as the transmission structure and magnitude
of the endogenous spillover G01 . Observe that in this context our model allows to
estimate endogenous and exogenous treatment spillovers without observing the social
network.
    The estimation for equation 10 can be considered as an extension of the procedure
presented in Theorem 3.2. First, we can apply the same Graphical Lasso estimator
to estimate G01 . Next, we can apply the standard Lasso estimator on the reduced
form equation pIn ´ G   ^ 1 qEt " G02 ¨ Xt ` Xt  `  t to recover G02 .


6.2    Multidimensional common shocks
The composite structure of the error term in equation (9) (i.e., individual fixed effects
plus common shocks) allows us to deal with issues related to endogenous network
formation. For example, there may be an unobserved characteristic either at the
individual or group level that may be responsible for the agglomeration of similar

                                           28
outcomes. Equation (9) is based on two-dimensional error structure. We focus on
the two-dimenionsal case in order to be consistent with our empirical application (the
two-partisan structure of the U.S. Congress). A multi-dimensional error structure is
however straightforwad to include: our framework allows to include up to a finite
number of shocks affecting different individual at the same time. While we assume
that the structure of the shocks is known (i.e. we knwo who is Democrat and who is
Republican), this is not a necessary condition for identification of equation (9). Along
the line of the latent Graphical Lasso proposed by Chandrasekaran et al. (2012), one
can separate common shocks from the estimation of G0 even when the structure
or dimension of the shocks is unknown. The derivation of the statistical properties
of the latent Graphical Lasso estimator when extended to the case of simultaneous
equations, however, is not trivial. We defer that as future research topic. 15


7        Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a new approach to the estimation of networks using ob-
servable social outcomes and we apply it to the estimation of productivity spillovers
in the U.S. Congress.
    Our approach is designed to address two key problems associated with social
networks among lawmakers, but also common with other social networks. First,
social networks are not generally directly observed, their estimation therefore should
be based on the effect that they induce on observable social outcomes. The cases in
which social networks remain stable over long periods of time, moreover, are rare,
thus their effects on observable outcomes are observed only for limited amounts
of time, thus making the evaluation of their contribution and more generally their
estimation challenging. Second, theoretical work on network formation and anecdotal
evidence suggests social networks in the U.S. Congress and in other social settings
    15
     A similar framework can be found in factor models (see, Bai and Li (2012), for a review) where
one does not need to assume the factor structure is known. In this setting, the variance-covariance
matrix may exhibit certain pattern that can be explained by "low dimension" factors (e.g. block
homogeneity: a small block that has similar within block correlation). The complication in our
setting is that there exists an unknown high dimesional structure of interactions.


                                                29
are dense and prone to the formation of stars, i.e. nodes with a high density of
connections. Identification, therefore must be guaranteed in environments with these
challenging features.
    Our work extends the Graphical Lasso model to incorporate the simultaneous
equation system arising from equilibrium conditions. Compared to alternative ap-
proaches in the literature, our analysis generates an estimator with two appealing
properties. First, it is constructed for "small" asymptotics, thus requiring short pan-
els of observations. Second, our estimator requires relatively unrestrictive sparsity
assumptions for identification. The "cost" for these appealing features is that for
our theoretical derivations, we add more structure to the environment, namely the
assumption of sub-Gaussian noise. We present a battery of Monte Carlo simulations
to show that our approach works well in small sample environments, both when the
sub-Gaussian assumption is satisfied and when it is not.
    Our application of these techniques to the study of the U.S. Congress gives us new
insights about the nature and effect of social interactions among lawmakers and their
evolution over time. Many political scientists have highlighted an increase over time
of both partisanship and polarization in the U.S. Congress. This literature, based
on the study of roll call votes, has focused on the question of whether parties exert
pressure on Congress members in close votes; or whether the increase in polarization
determines changes in the Congress members' ideal points. What has not been
studied yet in the literaure is whether the rise of partisanship affects how legislators
collaborate in drafting legislation. Our analysis suggests that, in the past 50 years,
there has been a significant change in the way the U.S. Congress operates, with a
reduction in importance of direct personal connections between lawmakers; and an
increase in importance of the two leading parties, the Democratic and Republican
parties. These results suggest that the rise of partisanship is not affecting only the
ideological position of legislators when they vote, but more generally how legislation
is constructed in the U.S. Congress.




                                          30
                              Figure 4: Estimated Network Plot




                (a) 93rd Congress                             (b) 97th Congress




                (c) 109th Congress                           (d) 112nd Congress




                                                   a
This figure plots the estimated networks with  " 30 log n{T . The red dots represent the Republic
party and blue dots represent the Democratic party. Red edges represent connections within the
Republican party, blue edges represent the connections within the Democratic party and purple
edges represent the connections between the two parties. The stronger the connections are the
thicker the line is depicted.


                                               31
                      Table 1: Comparison with Cosponsorship Network
               cosponsor  Qp0.1q          cosponsor  Qp0.3q           cosponsor  Qp0.5q
                     a                          a                           a
                  " log n{T ^                " log n{T ^                 " log n{T ^
   Cong        50      30       10        50       30       10        50      30        10
   93          1.24    1.23    1.11       1.43     1.40    1.21       1.68    1.59     1.33
   94          1.15    1.11    1.06       1.20     1.25    1.12       1.68    1.67     1.31
   95          1.12    1.12    1.08       1.46     1.45    1.32       1.82    1.82     1.58
   96          1.07    1.05    1.05       1.26     1.13    1.14       1.62    1.39     1.33
   97          0.80    0.78    0.88       0.74     0.70    0.81       0.82    0.70     0.89
   98          1.04    1.03    0.98       1.26     1.21    1.08       1.45    1.57     1.32
   99          1.11    1.11    0.99       1.47     1.37    1.14       1.82    1.54     1.35
   100         0.86    0.96    0.98       0.33     0.70    0.98       0.23    0.66     1.13
   101         1.12    1.03    1.06       1.46     1.25    1.13       1.91    1.74     1.45
   102         1.11    1.12    1.02       1.48     1.31    1.20       2.07    1.84     1.50
   103         N/A     1.10    1.06       N/A      1.45    1.12       N/A     1.80     1.37
   104         1.12    1.08    1.06       1.32     1.26    1.20       1.71    1.56     1.48
   105         1.14    1.08    1.08       1.46     1.31    1.15       2.18    1.58     1.22
   106         N/A     0.38    0.77       N/A      0.00    0.70       N/A     0.00     0.72
   107         1.12    1.15    1.04       1.41     1.24    1.01       2.23    0.96     0.60
   108         1.05    0.94    1.02       0.00     0.46    1.05       0.00    0.69     1.01
   109         0.00    1.11    1.57       0.00     1.08    1.57       0.00    1.05     1.57
   110         1.27    1.51    1.73       1.12     1.56    1.74       1.23    1.53     1.73
   111         1.33    1.54    1.49       1.29     1.51    1.49       1.39    1.58     1.49
   112         2.27    1.87    1.67       2.21     1.84    1.65       2.33    1.85     1.64



This table display the odds ratio between the event a cosponsorships connection is detected by
Graphical Lasso method and the event a cosponsorships connection is detected by a randomly
generated network with the same sparsity as the Graphical Lasso detected network. We define two
congress members as linked in a cosponsorship network if they have cosponsored the same bills
for more than Qp q times where Qp q is the  's quantile of number of bills cosponsored between
any pair of legislators in that given congress. The N/A in the table is due to the empty network
detected by Lasso method as shown in table 3.




                                              32
                         Table 2: Comparison with Alumni Network
                     4 years                  8 years                  10 years
                     a                        a                        a
                    " log n{T ^              " log n{T ^              " log n{T ^
       Cong       50      30      10       50      30      10       50      30      10
       93         0.00    0.00   0.00      0.00    0.00   0.57      0.00    0.00   0.49
       94         0.00    0.00   0.58      0.00    0.00   0.69      0.00    0.00   0.59
       95         0.00    0.00   0.00      0.00    0.00   0.24      0.00    0.00   0.20
       96         0.00    0.00   0.00      0.00    0.00   0.42      0.00    0.00   0.36
       97         0.00    0.00   0.45      0.00    0.00   0.57      0.00    0.00   0.71
       98         0.00    0.00   0.00      0.00    0.00   0.88      0.00    0.00   0.75
       99         0.00    0.00   1.99      0.00    0.00   1.15      0.00    0.00   1.49
       100        0.00    0.00   1.06      0.00    0.00   0.63      0.00    0.00   0.55
       101        0.00    0.00   0.00      0.00    0.00   0.00      0.00    0.00   0.00
       102        0.00    0.00   0.76      0.00    0.00   0.93      0.00    0.00   0.79
       103        N/A     0.00   0.00      N/A     0.00   0.67      N/A     0.00   0.57
       104        0.00    0.00   3.59      0.00    0.00   2.11      0.00    0.00   1.84
       105        0.00    0.00   1.25      0.00    0.00   0.77      0.00    0.00   0.67
       106        N/A     0.00   0.00      N/A     0.00   0.00      N/A     0.00   0.00
       107        0.00    0.00   2.41      0.00    0.00   1.42      0.00    0.00   1.17
       108        0.00    0.00   0.00      0.00    0.00   0.00      0.00    0.00   0.99
       109        0.00    0.00   0.00      0.00    0.00   0.00      0.00    0.00   0.00
       110        0.00    0.00   0.00      0.00    0.00   0.00      0.00    0.00   0.00
       111        0.00    0.00   2.53      0.00    0.00   2.39      0.00    0.00   2.03
       112        0.00    0.00   0.00      0.00    0.00   0.00      0.00    0.00   0.00



This table display the odds ratio between the event a cosponsorships connection is detected by
Graphical Lasso method and the event an alumni connection is detected by a randomly generated
network with the same sparsity as the Graphical Lasso detected network. We define two congress
members as alumni if they overlapped in a 4-year, 8-year and 10-year window when attending
colleges. The N/A in the table is due to the empty network detected by Lasso method as shown in
table 3.




                                              33
                                                                       Table 3: Link Distribution
                                                    Panel A                                                                   Panel B
                               a                    a                    a                   a                   a                   a
                             50 log n{T           30 log n{T           10 log n{T          50 log n{T          30 log n{T          10 log n{T            Common Shock
          Cong     Maj      D      R    DR       D     R    DR       D      R     DR       D    R    DR       D     R    DR       D       R     DR        D         R

            93      D       108    2    24       202   6    62       858    30    268      54   0    3        148   4    43       520     14    168      0.00      0.00
            94      D       70     0    13       162   0    26       962    22    224      30   0    5        50    0    11       588     10    135      0.00      0.00
            95      D       132    0    24       234   0    47       806    8     164      54   0    8        128   0    21       582     6     124      0.00      0.00
            96      D       38     40   8        88    76   55       588    260   220      20   2    1        32    42   7        682     306   294      0.00      0.00
            97      D       24     16   36       40    64   65       316    220   262      10   4    13       26    36   49       226     230   252      0.00      0.00
            98      D       22     0    4        38    0    8        436    14    95       22   0    4        34    0    6        1390    72    315      0.00      0.00
            99      D       12     0    2        28    2    7        366    10    60       10   0    2        34    2    9        404     12    69       0.00      0.00
           100      D       0      6    6        14    10   9        262    36    88       0    6    6        18    10   10       320     38    104      0.04      0.00
           101      D       4      0    2        20    0    4        284    16    70       8    0    3        16    0    4        510     22    124      0.01      0.00
           102      D       0      2    3        8     6    5        360    26    108      0    0    2        10    6    7        178     14    65       0.02      0.00
           103      D       0      0    0        14    0    4        230    20    63       0    0    1        20    0    6        430     40    115      0.01      0.00
           104      R       0      12   5        4     24   8        20     398   85       0    8    5        2     14 8          18      266   60       0.00      0.01
34




           105      R       2      0    4        4     24   9        16     272   71       2    0    2        4     10 9          54      536   143      0.00      0.04
           106      R       0      0    0        0     6    0        6      250   60       0    0    0        0     2 0           8       322   83       0.00      0.05
           107      R       0      0    2        0     10   3        14     146   34       0    0    2        2     26 5          34      330   92       0.00      0.03
           108      R       0      0    1        0     6    3        16     184   40       0    0    0        0     4 2           18      296   70       0.00      0.06
           109      R       0      0    1        0     10   3        10     164   41       0    2    0        0     8 3           18      306   93       0.00      0.09
           110      D       0      0    1        12    4    6        244 48       58       0    0    0        2     2    3        124     40    45       0.08      0.00
           111      D       2      0    3        14    0    4        278 22       59       0    0    1        14    0    7        294     38    63       0.39      0.00
           112      R       0      4    0        0     18   5        10     132   42       0    2    0        0     16   5        44      354   136      0.00      0.03
     This table presents the detected network structures under different choice of tunning parameters. Panel A shows the baseline estimates (equations 6), whereas in panel B we
     show the estimates that control for party level common shocks (equations 9). Each panel illustrates the estimated networks by reporting the number of links distinguishing
     between the Republican party ( column R), the Democrat party (column D) and between parties (column RD). The majority party for each congress is indicated in the
     second column.
References
Anselin, L. (1988). Spatial Econometrics: Methods and Models. Boston: Kluwer.

Badev, A. (2017). Discrete games in endogenous networks: Equilibria and policy.
  https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.03137.

Bai, J. and Li, K. (2012). Statistical analysis of factor models of high dimension.
  Annals of Statistics, 40(1):436­465.

Bala, V. and Goyal, S. (2000). A noncooperative model of network formation. Econo-
  metrica, 68(5):1181­1229.

Ballester, C., Calvó-Armengol, A., and Zenou, Y. (2006). Who's who in networks.
  wanted: The key player. Econometrica, 74(5):1403­1417.

Battaglini, M. and Patacchini, E. (2018). Influencing connected legislators. Journal
  of Political Economy, 126(6):2277­2322.

Battaglini, M., Patacchini, E., and Rainone, E. (2019). Endogenous social connec-
  tions in legislatures.

Battaglini, M., Sciabolazza, V. L., and Patacchini, E. (2020). Effectiveness of con-
  nected legislators. American Journal of Political Science.

Belloni, A., Chernozhukov, V., and Hansen, C. (2014). Inference on treatment ef-
  fects after selection amongst high-dimensional controls. The Review of Economic
  Studies, 81(2):608­650.

Blume, L. E., Brock, W. A., Durlauf, S. N., and Jayaraman, R. (2015). Linear social
  interactions models. Journal of Political Economy, 123(2):444­496.

Bonaldi, P., Hortaçsu, A., and Kastl, J. (2015). An empirical analysis of funding
  costs spillovers in the euro-zone with application to systemic risk.

                                        35
Bühlmann, P. and van de Geer, S. (2011). Statistics for high-dimensional data.
  Springer.

Caner, M., Han, X., and Lee, Y. (2018). Adaptive elastic net gmm estimation
  with many invalid moment conditions: Simultaneous model and moment selection.
  Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 36(1):24­46.

Chandrasekaran, V., Parrilo, P. A., and Willsky, A. S. (2012). Latent variable graph-
  ical model selection via convex optimization. The Annals of Statistics, 40(4):The
  Annals of Statistics.

Chandrasekhar, A. G. and Lewis, R. (2016). Econometrics of sampled networks.
  https://web.stanford.edu/~arungc/CL.pdf.

Cohen, L. and Malloy, C. J. (2014). Friends in high places. American Economic
  Journal: Economic Policy, 6(3):63­91.

Cox, G. W. and Poole, K. T. (2002). On measuring partisanship in roll-call vot-
  ing: The u.s. house of representatives, 1877-1999. American Journal of Political
  Science, 46(3):477­489.

Currarini, S. and Morelli, M. (2000). Network formation with sequential demands.
  Review of Economic Design, 5(3):229­249.

de Paula, A., Rasul, I., and Souza, P. C. (2019). Recovering social networks from
  panel data: identification, simulations and an application.

Erdös, P. and Rényi, A. (1959). On random graphs. i. Publicationes Mathematicae,
  6:290­297.

Falk, A. and Kosfeld, M. (2012). It's all about connections: Evidence on network
  formation. Review of Network Economics, 11(3):Article 2.

Fowler, J. H. (2006). Connecting the congress: A study of cosponsorship networks.
  Political Analysis, 14(4):456­487.


                                         36
Fowler, J. H. and Christakis, N. A. (2010). Cooperative behavior cascades in human
  social networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107(12):5334­
  5338.

Friedman, J., Hastie, T., and Tibshirani, R. (2008). Sparse inverse covariance esti-
  mation with the graphical lasso. Biostatistics, 9(3):432­441.

Goeree, J., Riedl, A., and Ule, A. (2009). In search of stars: Network formation
 among heterogeneous agents. Games and Economic Behavior, 67(2):445­466.

Goyal, S., van der Leij, M. J., and Moraga-González, J. L. (2006). Economics: An
 emerging small world. Journal of Political Economy, 114(2):403­412.

Goyal, S. and Vega-Redondo, F. (2007). Structural holes in social networks. Journal
 of Economic Theory, 137(1):460­492.

Graham, B. S. (2016). Homophily and transitivity in dynamic network formation.
  revision requested by the Review of Economic Studies.

Jackson, M. O. and Wolinsky, A. (1996). A strategic model of social and economic
  networks. Journal of Economic Theory, 71(1):44­74.

James M. Snyder, J. and Groseclose, T. (2000). Estimating party influence in con-
  gressional roll-call voting. American Journal of Political Science, 44(2):193­211.

Jankvoá and van de Geer (2019). Inference in high-dimensional graphical models.

Jin, F. and Lee, L.-F. (2016). Lasso maximum likelihood estimation of parametric
  models with singular information matrices.

Kirkland, J. H. (2011). The relational determinants of legislative outcomes: Strong
  and weak ties between legislators. The Journal of Politics, 73(3):887­898.

Kirkland, J. H. and Gross, J. H. (2014). Measurement and theory in legislative
  networks: The evolving topology of congressional collaboration. Social Networks,
  36:97­ 109.

                                        37
Lam, C. and Fan, J. (2009). Sparsistency and rates of convergence in large covariance
  matrix estimation. The Annals of Statistics, 37(6B):4254­4278.

Lee, L. (2004). Asymptotic distributions of quasi-maximum likelihood estimators for
  spatial econometric models. Econometrica, 72:1899­1926.

Manresa, E. (2013). Estimating the structure of social interactions using panel data.
 CEMFI Working Paper.

Manski, C. (1993). Identification of endogenous social effects: The reflection problem.
 The Review of Economic Studies, 60(3):531­542.

McCarty, N., Poole, K. T., and Rosenthal, H. (2001). The hunt for party discipline
 in congress. The American Political Science Review, 95(3):673­687.

Meinshausen, N. and Bühlmann, P. (2006). High-dimensional graphs and variable
 selection with the lasso. The Annals of Statistics, 34(1436-1462).

Mele, A. (2017). A structural model of dense network formation. Econometrica,
 85(3):825­850.

Peng, S. (2019). Heterogeneous endogenous effects in networks.

Poole, K. T. and Rosenthal, H. (2007). On party polarization in congress. Daedalus,
  136(3):104­107.

Rohde, D. W. (1991). Parties and Leaders in the Postreform House. University of
  Chicago Press.

Rose, C. (2018). Identification of spillover effects using panel data.

Rosenthal, H. and Poole, K. T. (1997). Congress: a political-economic history of roll
  call voting. New York: Oxford University Press.

Sant'Anna, P. H. C. and Zhao, J. B. (forthcoming). Doubly robust difference-in-
  differences estimators. Journal of Econometrics.


                                          38
Snyder, J. M. and Groseclose, T. (2000). Estimating party influence in congressional
  roll-call voting. American Journal of Political Science, 44(2):193­211.

Souza, P. C. (2014). Estimating network effects without network data. mimeo.

Volden, C. and Wiseman, A. E. (2018). Legislative effectiveness in the united states
  senate. Journal of Politics, 80(2):731­735.

Xue, L., Ma, S., , and Zou, H. (2012). Positive-definite 1-penalized estimation of large
 covariance matrices. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 107:1480­
 1491.

Xue, L. and Zou, H. (2012). Regularized rank-based estimation of high-dimensional
 nonparanormal graphical models. Annals of Statistics, 40(5):2541­2571.

Yuan, M. and Lin, Y. (2007). Model selection and estimation in the gaussian graph-
  ical model. Biometrika, 94(1):19­35.




                                          39
A       Proofs
Lemma A.1. Let A be a symmetric, positive semi-definite matrix. Then

                 1
                   pIn b A2 ` A b Aq ´ pIn b A´2 ` A´1 b A´1 q´1  0
                 4

Proof. Denote A " LL1 as the eigenvalue decomposition, where  " diag p1 , 2 , ¨ ¨ ¨ , n q
and i  0. Thus,

      pIn b A´2 ` A´1 b A´1 q´1 " pL b Lq ¨ pIn b ´2 ` ´1 b ´1 q´1 ¨ pL1 b L1 q
            1                     1
              pIn b A2 ` A b Aq " pL b Lq ¨ pIn b 2 `  b q ¨ pL1 b L1 q
            4                     4

Since

 pIn b ´2 ` ´1 b ´1 q´1 " diag p2      ´2  ´1 ´2 ´1         ´2  ´1 ´2 ´1
                                1 {2, p2 ` 1 2 q , ¨ ¨ ¨ , pn ` 1 n q ,
                                        2 ´1 ´2 ´1 2             ´2  ´1 ´2 ´1
                                     p´
                                      1 ` 2 1 q , 2 {2, ¨ ¨ ¨ , pn ` 2 n q ,

                                      ¨¨¨
                                        2 ´1 ´2 ´1 ´2  ´1 ´2 ´1        2
                                     p´
                                      1 ` n 1 q , p2 ` n 2 q , ¨ ¨ ¨ , n {2q


and

          1
            pIn b 2 `  b q " diag p2       2                      2
                                    1 {2, p2 ` 1 2 q{4, ¨ ¨ ¨ , pn ` 1 n q{4,
          4
                                   p2              2              2
                                      1 ` 2 1 q{4, 2 {2, ¨ ¨ ¨ , pn ` 2 n q{4,

                                      ¨¨¨
                                      p2             2                    2
                                       1 ` n 1 q{4, p2 ` n 2 q{4, ¨ ¨ ¨ , n {2q


                            ´2 ´1 ´2 ´1        1   ´1             ´2  ´1 ´2
Notice that p2 i `j i q{4´pi `j i q     " pi ´
                                             j `i j ´2q{p4pi `j i qq 
        1
0, thus 4 pIn b 2 `  b q ´ pIn b A´2 ` A´1 b A´1 q´1 is postive semi-definite. As
a results, the lemma holds.




                                            40
Lemma A.2. The following minimization problem is convex.
                                               ^            
                                pIn ´ Gq2         pIn ´ Gq2
                arg min  ´ log 
                                           ` tr S
                                                             ` }G}1                  (11)
                    G, 2            2                 2

Proof. First, define
                                               ^            
                2
                                pIn ´ Gq2         pIn ´ Gq2
             q p , Gq :" ´ log 
                                           ` tr S
                                          
                                    2                 2
                                     1 `             
                      " n logp 2 q ` 2 tr S pIn ´ Gq2 ´ 2 log |pIn ´ Gq|
                                     

Taking the derivative and Hessian:

                        B q p, Gq     2
                                  " ´ 2 S pIn ´ Gq ` 2pIn ´ Gq´1
                            BG       

                            B q p, Gq   n   1 `              
                                  2
                                      " 2 ´ 4 tr S pIn ´ Gq2
                                B          
and
           ¨                                                 ´ ´          ¯¯ 
                                                         vec 2 S pIn ´Gq
                `       S
                            
               2 In b   2
                             ` 2pIn ´ Gq´1 b pIn ´ Gq´1              4
      Hn "                     ´ ´
                                    S pIn ´Gq
                                              ¯¯1        ´ ¯
                                                                 trpS pIn ´Gq2 q
                                                                                 ,
                                                           n
                            vec 2       4
                                                        ´ 4 ` 2         6


                                      1
The first order equation implies  2 " n tr pS pIn ´ Gq2 q. As T Ñ 8, S Ñ  2 pIn ´
Gq´2 , together with Lemma A.1, the determinant of Hn can be bounded as
                               ^        ,, ´ ¯                  
                               S            n  trpS pIn ´ Gq2 q
            detpHn q  det In b 2       ¨ ´ 4 `                   "0
                                                      6



Lemma A.3. Assume Y is sub-Gaussian, S is the sample variance-covariance ma-
trix and 0 is the population variance-covariance matrix. For non-random matrices
A, B P Rn^n , it holds that }Ai }2  M and }Bi }2  M for all i P 1, ¨ ¨ ¨ , p. Then for




                                            41
all t  0, with probability at least 1 ´ e´nt it holds that
                                                                   c
                                                        ?              2 logp2n2 q logp2n2 q
               }A1 pS ´ 0 qB }8 {p2M 2 K 2 q  t `           2t `                  `
                                                                            T         T

   This is Lemma 14.13 in Bühlmann and van de Geer (2011). The proof is omitted.
Lemma A.4. Define G p 2 q as

   G p 2 q " q p0
                2
                  `  2 , G0 q ´ q p0
                                   2
                                     , G0 q
                                                            ^                   
                           2         2            2                1     1           `              
                 "   n logp0   `  q ´       n logp0 q   `       2    2
                                                                       ´ 2         tr S pIn ´ G0 q2
                                                                0 `     0
           a                     ?                                         4
when 0 Á log n{T and d " oP pT {p n log nqq, there exist constant c1 " ´1{~1 `
  2   6
20  {~1 and c2  0 such that
                                                               
                         G p 2 q  nc1 p 2 q2 ´ c2 np1 ` dq0  2 

Proof. First, notice that
                        `                       `                    
                      tr S pIn ´ G0 q2 " n0
                                          2
                                            ` tr pS ´ 0 qpIn ´ G0 q2
                       ?
Since }pIn ´ G0 qi }2  1 ` d, from Lemma A.3, with probability approach to 1,
there exist c2  0, such that
                                                                                         c
           `                     2
                                                                        2                    log n
     |tr pS ´ 0 qpIn ´ G0 q              |  n}pS ´ 0 qpIn ´ G0 q }8  c2 np1 ` dq
                                                                                               T
            ´a              ¯
When d " oP     T {pn log nq , |tr ppS ´ 0 qpIn ´ G0 q2 q | " oP pnq. By Taylor expan-
                                          2           2         2
sion and mean value theorem, for some    ~1 between 0    and 0    `  2 ,
                    ^              
       2n 2  n  2 2    1 2  2  2 2
                                    ` 2     `                    
G p q " 2  ´ 4 p q ` ´ 4  ` 6 p q ¨ n0  ` tr pS ´ 0 qpIn ´ G0 q2
       0    ~1        0    ~1




                                                   42
                          4    2   6
and for constant c1 " ´1{~1 ` 20 {~1 ,
                                                     c
                                                         log n    
                 G p 2 q  nc1 p 2 q2 ´ c2 np1 ` dq              2 
                                                           T

Lemma A.5. Define  pq as

                                          1 `                                   
    pq " q p 2 , G0 ` q ´ q p 2 , G0 q "   2
                                             tr S pIn ´ G0 ` q2 ´ S pIn ´ G0 q2
                                         
          ´ 2plog |pIn ´ G0 ` q| ´ log |pIn ´ G0 q|q

For all }}F  1{p2Lq, there exists constant c3  0 and c4 " 1{2pL ` 1{p2Lqq2 ` 1{L2 ,
such that

                                                     2
              pq  c4 }}2
                       F ´ c3 p1 ` dq0 ¨ }}1 ´          | 2 | ¨ }}1
                                                     2L

Proof. The first component is
  `                               
tr S pIn ´ G0 ` q2 ´ S pIn ´ G0 q2 " 2trpS pIn ´ G0 qq ` vecpq1 ¨ pIn b S q ¨ vecpq

A second order Taylor expansion with remainder in integral form yields

       log |pIn ´ G0 ` q| ´ log |pIn ´ G0 q| " trppIn ´ G0 q´1 q
                   1
       ` vecpq ¨ p1 ´ v qpIn ´ G0 ` v q´1 b pIn ´ G0 ` v q´1 dv ¨ vecpq
                 1
                   0


Thus
          ^ ^                             
              S pIn ´ G0 q             ´1
 pq " 2tr                  ´ pIn ´ G0 q                          (12)
                   2
              ^        
            1        S
    ` vecpq ¨ In b 2 ¨ vecpq                                     (13)
                     
              ^ 1                                         
            1                             ´1           ´1
    ` vecpq ¨ 2 p1 ´ v qpIn ´ G0 ` v q b pIn ´ G0 ` v q dv ¨ vecpq
                       0
                                                                               (14)


                                         43
First consider equation 13:
                 ^       
                  S                           `                 
             1
     vecpq ¨ In b 2         ¨ vecpq " vecpq1 ¨ In b pIn ´ G0 q´2 ¨ vecpq           (15)
                 
                                              ^            
                                           1         S ´ 0
                                    ` vecpq ¨ In b            ¨ vecpq              (16)
                                                       2

On the event t}S ´ }8  u, equation 16 is in a smaller order than other term. As
min pIn b pIn ´ G0 q´2 q  ´  2                 2
                            max pIn ´ G0 q  1{L , thus equation 13 is greater than
}}2     2
    F {L . Next consider equation 14, for all }}F  1{p2Lq, a standard argument
as in Theorem 1 in Lam and Fan (2009) or Lemma 2 in Jankvoá and van de Geer
(2019) yield
      ^ 1                                          
                               ´1               ´1                         1
   min 2 p1 ´ v qpIn ´ G0 ` v q b pIn ´ G0 ` v q dv 
             0                                                       pL ` 1{p2Lqq2

Finally, consider equation 12,
     ^ ^                                     ^ ^                     
         S pIn ´ G0 q             ´1              S  0
  2tr                 ´ pIn ´ G0 q    " 2tr         ´ 2 ¨ pIn ´ G0 q
              2                                   2  0
                                         1
                                      " 2 2trppS ´ 0 q ¨ pIn ´ G0 qq               (17)
                                        ^         
                                           1    1
                                      `       ´ 2 2trp0 ¨ pIn ´ G0 qq              (18)
                                           2 0

From Lemma A.3 for a constant c3  0

   2                                      1
     | tr p  p S ´  0 q ¨ p I n ´ G0 qq|    }pS ´ 0 q ¨ pIn ´ G0 q}8 }}1  c3 p1 ` dq0
   2                                      2
                      2
Given 0 ¨pIn ´ G0 q " 0 pIn ´ G0 q´1 , thus }0 ¨ pIn ´ G0 q}8  0
                                                               2
                                                                 max ppIn ´ G0 q´1 q "
 2
0  {L. Thus equation 12 is boudned by

                                               2
                        c3 p1 ` dq0 ¨ }}1 `       | 2 | ¨ }}1
                                               2L




                                          44
As a result, define c4 " 1{2pL ` 1{p2Lqq2 ` 1{L2

                                                        2
                pq  c4 }}2
                         F ´ c3 p1 ` dq0 ¨ }}1 ´           | 2 | ¨ }}1
                                                        2L

A.1      Proof of Theorem 3.1
Proof. From Lemma A.2, define G    ^ and   ^ 2 as the solution to the minimization prob-
lem in equation 11. Then with the definition of G p 2 q and  pq in Lemma A.4
and A.5, we have
                      q p    ^ q ` }G
                         ^2, G        ^ }1  q p 2 , G0 q ` }G0 }1
                                                  0

Thus,
                                   2     ^
                      ^ 2 pq ` G0 p q ` }G}1  `}G0 }1


Therefore,

                               ^
                                                 2
        nc1 p 2 q2 ` c4 }}2
                          F ` }G}1  c2 np1 ` dq0  ` c3 p1 ` dq0 ¨ }}1
                                                    
                                     2
                                   ` 2 | 2 | ¨ }}1 ` }G0 }1
                                    ^ L

First notice that

         2      2             2 n     2 2    1      2  2 n          1
         2
            |     | ¨ }  } 1    2
                                  p    q  ` 2
                                                }  }1    4
                                                           p 2 q2 ` 2 2 }}2
                                                                          F
        ^ L                   ^              nL        ^            L
               4    2   6
Since c1 " ´1{~1 ` 20 {~1 and c4 " 1{2pL ` 1{p2Lqq2 ` 1{L2  1{p2 L2 q for 2  1
, for all  2  mintp1 ´ q0  2
                             , p1 ´ 2 q{p1 ` 2 q0
                                                2
                                                  u, we have

                               2                   1
                      ~1 " c1 ´ 4  0 and c
                      c                  ~4 " c4 ´ 2 2  0
                               ^                   L

by triangular inequality and take   2c3 p1 ` dq0

                                    ^ S c }1  2c2 np1 ` dq0  2  ` 3}S }1
                                                               
           ~1 p 2 q2 ` 2~
         2nc            c4 }}2
                             F `  }G




                                          45
Add and subtract both side with }S }1 and

                               ?                       2
   ~1 p 2 q2 ` 2~
 2nc            c4 }}2
                     F ` }}1  4 sn }}F ` 2c2 np1 ` dq0 
                                                        
                                       sn 2           4c2         2 2
                                                        2 np1 ` dq 0
                                   4         ~4 }}2
                                            `c    F `                    ~1 p 2 q2
                                                                      ` nc
                                        c
                                        ~4                   c
                                                             ~1

which implies

                                                  sn 2 4c2 np1 ` dq2 2
                 ~1 p 2 q2 ` c
                nc           ~4 }}2
                                  F ` }}1  4          ` 2            0
                                                   c
                                                   ~4         c
                                                              ~1
                    a                          a
Thus | 2 | " OP p ps0 ` nq{n ¨ d0 q, }}F " OP p ps0 ` nq ¨ d0 q and }}1 "
OP pps0 ` ndq ¨ 0 q


A.2     Proof of Theorem 3.2
The KKT condition on equation 11 gives

                               ^ q´1 ´ S pIn ´ G
                         pIn ´ G               ^q `  Z^"0
                                       ^ 2          2
                             n   1 ´            ^  2
                                                     ¯
                               ´    tr S p In ´ G q    "0
                             ^2 
                                 ^4
      ^ij " signpG
where Z          ^ ij q. Since 0 pI ´ G0 q2 { 2 " In ,
                                             0


               ^ q´1 ´ pIn ´ G0 q´1 ` 0 pIn ´ G0 q ´ S pIn ´ G
         pIn ´ G                                             ^q `  Z^"0
                                      2                2
                                      0              ^            2

which implies

            ^ q´1 ´ pIn ´ G0 q´1 ` 0 pG
      pIn ´ G                         ^ ´ G0 q
                                   2
                                   0
                       ^                         ^                             (19)
                         0     S               ^   0   S       ^q
                  "´      2
                            ´ 2 pIn ´ G0 q ´ Z ´   2
                                                     ´ 2 pG0 ´ G
                         0     ^               2   0  ^




                                           46
By the symmetric of pIn ´ G0 q´1 , we have pIn ´ G^ q´1 ´ pIn ´ G0 q´1 " pIn ´ G0 q´1 ¨
      ^ q´1 ¨ pG
pIn ´ G        ^ ´ G0 q. Equation (19) can be written as
                                    ^        
    ^            1      ^             0    S
   pG ´ G0 q " ´ pIn ´ GqpIn ´ G0 q    2
                                         ´ 2 pIn ´ G0 q
                 2                    0   ^
                                                        ^       
                      ^          ^    1      ^            0   S       ^q
             ´ pIn ´ GqpIn ´ G0 qZ ´ pIn ´ GqpIn ´ G0 q   2
                                                            ´ 2 pG0 ´ G
               4                      2                   0  ^

Thus we can define the debias estimator as
                                        ^             
                    ~   ^    1      ^ 2    S      ^ 2
                   G " G ` pIn ´ Gq ´In ` 2 pIn ´ Gq
                             2             ^

                   ~ ´ G0 yields
A decomposition of G
                               ^                                                        ^            
 ~ ´ G0 q " ´ 1 pIn ´ G0 q2
pG
                                   0   S
                                     ´ 2
                                                            1 ^
                                                pIn ´ G0 q ` pG ´ G0 qpIn ´ G0 q
                                                                                          0       S
                                                                                              ´ 2 pIn ´ G0 q
                                   2                                                       2
              2                    0  ^                     2                              0      ^
                                                            looooooooooooooooooooooooooomooooooooooooooooooooooooooon
                                                                       ^              R1
                         ´
                      ^q G ^ ´ G0 Z
                                    ¯
                                       ^ ´ 1 pIn ´ G  ^ qpIn ´ G0 q 0 ´ S pG0 ´ G                ^q
          ´ pIn ´ G                                                        2       2
           4
           looooooooooooomooooooooooooon   2                              0      ^
                                                                                 
                                           looooooooooooooooooooooooooomooooooooooooooooooooooooooon
                          R2                                           R3


From Lemma A.4 and theorem 3.1
        >         >   >        >    >         >
        > 0   S>      > 0   S>      >S    S>     a
        >   ´     >   >   ´    >  ` >   ´     > À psn ` nd2 q{n ¨ 
        > 2   ^ 2 >8 > 0
                        2
                            02>     > 2   ^ 2 >8
          0                     8     0


Further define } ¨ }op1 as the operator norm from l8 Ñ l8 , which is the maximum l1
norm of a row. Since }G  ^ ´ G0 }op1  ?n}G ^ ´ G0 }F and }In ´ G0 }op  p1 ` dq
                                            >         >
             1 ^                            > 0   S   >
      }R1 }8  }G ´ G0 }op1 ¨ }In ´ G0 }2  ¨ >
                                       op1 > 2  ´     > " OP pps0 ` nqd4 2
                                                                         0q
             2                                0   ^ 2 >8
                                                  




                                                  47
                                     ^ ´ G0 qZ^ }8 `  }pG^ ´ G0 q2 Z
                                                                   ^ }8
            }R2 }8     }pIn ´ G0 qpG
                     4                                4
                             ^ }op1 }G             ^ }8 `  }G
                                      ^ ´ G0 }op1 }Z         ^ ´ G0 }2     ^
                    }In ´ G                                           op1 }Z }8
                     4 a                                  4
                   " OP p nps0 ` nqd2 2                   3 3
                                          0 ` nps0 ` nqd 0 q



         >           ^                      >        >                       ^                     >
       1>          2   0      S          ^
                                            >      1>         ^                0    S           ^
                                                                                                   >
}R3 }8  >pIn ´ G0 q
         >
                        2
                           ´      p G0 ´ G q>   `    >p G0  ´ G qp In ´ G0 q    2
                                                                                  ´      p G0 ´ G q>
       2               0     ^2             >      2 >                              ^
                                                                                      2            >
                           >         >       8
                                                                            > 0      >              8
           1                 
                           > 0
                           >      S  >
                                                ^         1                   
                                                                            > 0
                                                                            >      S >
                                                                                                ^ 2
        }pIn ´ G0 q}2  op1 > 2 ´ 2 > }G0 ´ G}op1 ` }pIn ´ G0 q}op1 > 2 ´ 2 > }G0 ´ G}op1
                                     >                                               >
           2                 0    ^ 8                     2                   0    ^ 8
                              ?
       " OP pps0 ` nqd4 2 0`    nps0 ` nq3{2 d3 30q

                          a                  ?
Thus when taking 0 Á log n{T and s0 d4 " oP p T { log n _ T {pnplog nq2 qq and
      `?                  
d " oP p T {pn log nqq1{4
                                          ^           
                                                                           ?
              ~ ´ G0 q " ´ 1 pI ´ G0 q2
             pG
                                              0   S
                                                ´ 2      pI ´ G0 q ` oP p1{ T q
                                              2
                           2                  0  ^




                                              48
B   Additional Results

             Table B4: Average Link Strength (^0.01)
              Congress   Majority    R      D     between

                 93         D       2.89   2.44    2.40
                 94         D       3.75   4.36    3.99
                 95         D       0.90   1.08    0.86
                 96         D       1.12   1.39    0.98
                 97         D       0.73   1.76    0.88
                 98         D       1.17   2.20    1.34
                 99         D       0.51   1.19    0.67
                100         D       1.32   2.37    1.61
                101         D       1.21   1.47    1.09
                102         D       0.91   2.37    1.40
                103         D       1.23   1.42    0.90
                104         R       2.97   1.25    1.82
                105         R       2.99   1.15    1.54
                106         R       3.36   1.27    2.13
                107         R       2.82   0.82    1.45
                108         R       3.50   1.26    1.93
                109         R       4.08   1.87    2.76
                110         D       2.02 6.00      3.19
                111         D       1.79 6.81      2.96
                112         R       1.69   0.73    1.13




                                49
                             Figure 5: Bills in the U.S. Congress




This figure plots the average number of bills proposed in the House of Representatives, Congress
97th-112nd. Source: https://thelawmakers.org/data-download




                                              50
