                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

      WEALTH, RACE, AND CONSUMPTION SMOOTHING OF TYPICAL INCOME
                               SHOCKS

                                         Peter Ganong
                                         Damon Jones
                                         Pascal J. Noel
                                         Fiona E. Greig
                                          Diana Farrell
                                          Chris Wheat

                                       Working Paper 27552
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27552

                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2020

We thank Fenaba Addo, Richard Blundell, Erik Hurst, Koichiro Ito, Greg Kaplan, Dmitri
Koustas, Bruce Meyer, Scott Nelson, Matthew Notowidigdo, Cormac O'Dea, and Jon Roth for
helpful comments, and Peter Henry for discussing the paper. We thank seminar participants at
Texas A&M, UCL, and AEA CSMGEP 2020. We thank Therese Bonomo, Guillermo Carranza
Jordan, Sanhitha Jugulum, Maxwell Liebeskind, Roshan Mahanth, Peter Robertson, and Tanya
Sonthalia for outstanding research assistance. This research was made possible by a data-use
agreement between three of the authors and the JPMorgan Chase Institute (JPMCI), which has
created de-identified data assets that are selectively available to be used for academic research.
DIana Farrell, Fiona Greig, and Chris Wheat are employees of JPMorgan Chase & Co. All
statistics from JPMCI data, including medians, reflect cells with multiple observations. The
opinions expressed are those of the authors alone and do not represent the views of JPMorgan
Chase & Co. We gratefully acknowledge funding from the the UChicago Center for Data and
Computing, the UChicago Center for the Study of Race, Politics, and Culture, and the Kathryn
and Grant Swick and Fujimori/Mou Faculty Research Funds at the University of Chicago Booth
School of Business. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.¸

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27552.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Peter Ganong, Damon Jones, Pascal J. Noel, Fiona E. Greig, Diana Farrell, and Chris
Wheat. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Wealth, Race, and Consumption Smoothing of Typical Income Shocks
Peter Ganong, Damon Jones, Pascal J. Noel, Fiona E. Greig, Diana Farrell, and Chris Wheat
NBER Working Paper No. 27552
July 2020
JEL No. E21,J15,J65

                                          ABSTRACT

We estimate the elasticity of consumption with respect to income using an instrument based on
firm-wide changes in pay. While much of the consumption-smoothing literature uses variation in
unusual windfall income, this instrument captures the temporary income variation that
households typically experience. Furthermore, this estimator is precise, allowing us to address an
open question about how much the elasticity varies with wealth. We find a much lower
consumption response for high-liquidity households, which may help discipline structural
models. We then use this instrument to study how wealth shapes racial inequality. An extensive
body of work documents a substantial racial wealth gap. However, less is known about how this
gap translates into differences in welfare on a month-to-month basis. We find that black
(Hispanic) households cut their consumption 50 (20) percent more than white households when
faced with a similarly-sized income shock. Nearly all of this differential pass-through of income
to consumption is explained, in a statistical sense, by differences in liquid wealth. Combining our
empirical estimates with a model, we show that the welfare cost of income volatility is at least 50
percent higher for black households and 20 percent higher for Hispanic households than it is for
white households.

Peter Ganong                                     Fiona E. Greig
Harris School of Public Policy                   JP Morgan Chase Institute
University of Chicago                            601 Pennsylvania Avenue
1307 East 60th Street Chicago,                   Suite 07
IL 60637                                         Washington, DC 20004
and NBER                                         fiona.e.greig@jpmchase.com
ganong@uchicago.edu
                                                 Diana Farrell
Damon Jones                                      JPMorgan Chase Institute 601
Harris School of Public Policy                   Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
University of Chicago                            Washington, DC 20004
1155 East 60th Street Chicago,                   diana.farrell@jpmchase.com
IL 60637
and NBER                                         Chris Wheat
damonjones@uchicago.edu                          JP Morgan Chase Institute
                                                 chris.wheat@jpmchase.com
Pascal J. Noel
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
pascal.noel@chicagobooth.edu
   Wealth, Race, and Consumption Smoothing of Typical Income
                           Shocks 
                            Peter Ganong, University of Chicago and NBER
                            Damon Jones, University of Chicago and NBER
                                   Pascal Noel, University of Chicago
                               Diana Farrell, JPMorgan Chase Institute
                                Fiona Greig, JPMorgan Chase Institute
                                Chris Wheat, JPMorgan Chase Institute

                                                     June 10, 2020


                                                        Abstract
We study the consumption response to typical labor income shocks and investigate how these vary by wealth
and race. First, we estimate the elasticity of consumption with respect to income using an instrument based
on firm-wide changes in monthly pay. While much of the consumption-smoothing literature uses variation in
unusual windfall income, this instrument captures the temporary income variation that households typically
experience. In addition, because it can be constructed for every worker in every month, it allows for more
precision than most previous estimates. We implement this approach in administrative bank account data
and find an average elasticity of 0.23, with a standard error of 0.01. This increased precision also allows us
to address an open question about the extent of heterogeneity by wealth in the elasticity. We find a much
lower consumption response for high-liquidity households, which may help discipline structural consumption
models.
Second, we use this instrument to study how wealth shapes racial inequality. An extensive body of work
documents a substantial racial and ethnic wealth gap. However, less is known about how this gap translates
into differences in welfare on a month-to-month basis. We combine our instrument for typical income
volatility with a new dataset linking bank account data with race and Hispanicity. We find that black
(Hispanic) households cut their consumption 50 (20) percent more than white households when faced with
a similarly-sized income shock. Nearly all of this differential pass-through of income to consumption is
explained in a statistical sense by differences in liquid wealth. Combining our empirical estimates with a
model, we show that temporary income volatility has a substantial welfare cost for all groups. Because of
racial disparities in consumption smoothing, the cost is at least 50 percent higher for black households and
20 percent higher for Hispanic households than it is for white households.



      
        We thank Fenaba Addo, Richard Blundell, Erik Hurst, Koichiro Ito, Greg Kaplan, Dmitri Koustas, Bruce Meyer,
   Scott Nelson, Matthew Notowidigdo, Cormac O'Dea, and Jon Roth for helpful comments, and Peter Henry for discussing
   the paper. We thank seminar participants at Texas A&M, UCL, and AEA CSMGEP 2020. We thank Therese Bonomo,
   Guillermo Carranza Jordan, Sanhitha Jugulum, Maxwell Liebeskind, Roshan Mahanth, Peter Robertson, and Tanya
   Sonthalia for outstanding research assistance. This research was made possible by a data-use agreement between
   three of the authors and the JPMorgan Chase Institute (JPMCI), which has created de-identified data assets that are
   selectively available to be used for academic research. All statistics from JPMCI data, including medians, reflect cells
   with multiple observations. The opinions expressed are those of the authors alone and do not represent the views of
   JPMorgan Chase & Co. We gratefully acknowledge funding from the the UChicago Center for Data and Computing,
   the UChicago Center for the Study of Race, Politics, and Culture, and the Kathryn and Grant Swick and Fujimori/Mou
   Faculty Research Funds at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
1        Introduction
        Forty-two percent of Americans report in the Current Population Survey that they do
not have money set aside that could be used for unexpected expenses or emergencies. This
statistic raises concerns that it may be difficult for such households to smooth consumption in
the face of even modest amounts of income and expense volatility. Yet, perhaps surprisingly,
there is little empirical evidence on how typical month-to-month fluctuations in income affect
consumption, and even less evidence about how this consumption smoothing varies with
wealth.
        Concerns about the ability to smooth consumption are particularly pronounced for black
households. Fifty-five percent of black households say that they do not have savings for
unexpected shocks, as compared to thirty-eight percent of white households. This black-white
disparity is one manifestation of the racial wealth gap in the US. This gap has deep historical
roots. At the end of the Civil War, General Sherman promised "forty acres and a mule" to
formerly-enslaved black people. Yet his order was reversed shortly thereafter, and many
federal policies to promote asset accumulation since then have deliberately excluded black
households (Lui et al. 2006). Today, the median black household has only one-sixth the liquid
wealth of the median white household. A similarly high share of Hispanic households do not
have savings for unexpected shocks, and similar gaps exist in liquid wealth between Hispanic
and white households. Although the racial wealth gap has been extensively documented,
there is little quantitative research about whether and how this gap affects households' lives
from one month to the next.
        The goal of this paper is to make progress on these questions by constructing precise
estimates of the consumption response to typical labor income shocks and investigating
how these vary by wealth and race. This goal has been difficult to achieve in prior work
due to data and methodological challenges. First, existing datasets suitable for studying
the pass-through of income to consumption either have small sample sizes or do not include
information on both wealth and race. This has made it difficult to obtain precise estimates of
the average sensitivity of consumption to income, and especially difficult to uncover how this
varies by both race and wealth. Second, most feasible quasi-experimental research designs
for convincingly identifying this pass-through have relied on unusual income variation such
as lotteries and tax refunds. Researchers may have therefore been hesitant to extrapolate
from these estimates to make conclusions about the welfare cost of typical income shocks.
        To overcome the data challenge, we use a novel, large, de-identified dataset with informa-
tion on income, consumption, liquid wealth, and race. The first three variables come from
Chase bank account records. Self-reported race and Hispanicity information come from voter
registration records.1 These two datasets were matched using personal identifiers and then
    1
     We use 2018 voter registration records in the three states that had Chase branches in 2018 and that
collect race information during voter registration. The voter registration forms ask a single question that
offers "black" and "Hispanic" as mutually exclusive categories. Going forward, we use the shorthand "race"


                                                    1
delivered to the research team stripped of these personal identifiers. This is the first time we
are aware of that administrative bank account data have been linked with race.2 Relative
to similar data, the two key strengths of this dataset are a large sample size of nearly two
million households and employer identifiers which enable our main empirical strategy. We
compare the distributions by race of income, liquid wealth, age, and sex in the analysis sam-
ple to nationally representative surveys; racial inequality in the new dataset mirrors racial
inequality in the US as a whole.
    To overcome the methodological challenge, we instrument for changes in individual la-
bor income using employer-wide changes in monthly pay. The three most common reasons
for income volatility reported by employed households are, in descending order, irregular
work schedules, bonuses and commissions, and seasonal employment. Employer-wide pay
shocks capture all these sources of variation and can be identified using a generalization of
the classic model of firm effects by Abowd, Kramarz and Margolis (1999). Our research
design therefore captures the type of income variation that households typically experience.
Furthermore, because the instrument can be constructed for all workers in every month, it
yields more precise estimates than were usually feasible in prior work. This design builds on
prior strategies to examine the consumption response to firm-level shocks by Shea (1995),
Baker (2018) and Koustas (2018).
    We implement this research design in our new dataset and present four reduced-form
empirical results. We then examine their welfare implications using a model.
    First, we find that typical labor income fluctuations meaningfully affect consumption
for the average household. Our central estimate is that the elasticity of consumption of
nondurable goods and services with respect to income is 0.23. This estimate is precise, with
a standard error of 0.01. We show that our instrument captures temporary fluctuations in
pay, and so we interpret this elasticity as capturing the consumption response to temporary
income shocks. We analyze the impact of persistent shocks in a secondary research design
discussed below.
    Second, we find that the consumption of black and Hispanic households is 20 to 50 percent
more sensitive to income shocks than the consumption of white households. Specifically, we
estimate elasticities of 0.29 for black households, 0.24 for Hispanic households, and 0.20 for
white households. As is conventional in the literature on racial inequality, these estimates
capture heterogeneity by race in a causal estimate; they do not capture the causal effect of
race.
to describe responses to the question. We therefore use "Hispanic" to refer to respondents who have selected
that identity in response to the question, acknowledging that they may in practice self-identify with a variety
of related terms. Although the Census treats "Hispanic" solely as an ethnic group, some members of His-
panic/Latino/Latinx groups see their identity as a racial category (Parker et al. 2015). See Almaguer (2012)
for further discussion of the complex and evolving racialization of Latino populations in the US over time.
   2
     See Section 2.1 for more detail on the matching process and steps taken to protect privacy. See Akee,
Jones and Porter (2019), Chen et al. (2019) and Chetty et al. (2018) for examples of other papers that analyze
racial inequality using administrative data.




                                                      2
      Third, we find that the extent of consumption smoothing also varies dramatically with
liquid assets. We find that the elasticity declines monotonically as liquid assets increase,
ranging from 0.39 for the lowest-asset households to 0.12 for the highest-asset households.
      Fourth, we find that racial inequality in wealth can account, in a statistical sense, for the
racial disparities in consumption smoothing that we document. To investigate this link, we
estimate elasticities by race and control for liquid assets. When we control for liquid assets
at the household level, the black-white difference in elasticities falls to 0.01; this eliminates
89 percent of the raw black-white elasticity gap of 0.09. Similarly, after controlling for liquid
assets, the Hispanic households actually have a smaller elasticity than white households.
      One way to interpret this finding is as a neutrality result: when faced with the same
income shocks and financial buffers, households of all races react similarly. This suggests
that non-wealth channels through which differences in elasticities by race might arise are
either quantitatively small or cancel each other out. These may include differences in access
to credit, debt obligations, family structure, family labor supply, transfers from family and
friends, access to transfer programs, expectations, and preferences.
      However, this finding should not be interpreted to mean that race is irrelevant for inequal-
ity in consumption smoothing. Rather, it indicates that such inequality is likely mediated
through the racial wealth gap, which is caused in part (and possibly entirely) by a history
of barriers to asset accumulation for black and Hispanic households.3 Under the assump-
tion that liquid wealth has a causal impact on consumption smoothing, these results suggest
that the racial wealth gap leaves black and Hispanic households more vulnerable to income
fluctuations than white households.
      These findings also hold in a second research design using income declines arising from
unemployment. This design is a useful complement for two reasons. First, while our primary
design captures the typical sources of income volatility for employed households, transitions
between employment states are another meaningful source of volatility. Second, because
of downward nominal pay rigidity, people with stable employment rarely have large and
persistent negative shocks to earnings. Identifying such shocks requires job separations,
which we measure through the receipt of unemployment insurance benefits. White, black, and
Hispanic households experience similar income drops after involuntary job loss. Nevertheless,
as in the primary research design, we find substantially less consumption smoothing by black
and Hispanic households, less consumption smoothing by low-asset households, and that the
racial wealth gap explains most of the differences in consumption smoothing by race.
      In the final section of the paper we consider the welfare implications of our results. We
combine our reduced-form empirical estimates with a model to quantify the welfare cost of
idiosyncratic temporary income volatility, and how it differs by race. We consider a statistical
model in the spirit of Lucas (1987). Three sufficient statistics are required to calculate the
welfare cost: the elasticity of consumption with respect to temporary income shocks, the
  3
      We discuss prior literature on the determinants of the racial wealth gap in Section 3.6.



                                                        3
coefficient of relative risk aversion, and the variance of temporary income shocks.
       We find that income volatility has a substantial welfare cost for all groups, but that the
cost is substantially larger for black and Hispanic households than it is for white households.
Specifically, we calculate the welfare gain from eliminating idiosyncratic income volatility in
terms of lifetime consumption equivalents. Evaluated at our empirical estimates, we find a
gain of 1.6 percent for white households, 1.9 percent for Hispanic households, and 2.3 percent
for black households. We find qualitatively similar patterns in relative welfare gains using a
structural model, albeit with even higher baseline values. Relative to the benchmark view
in Lucas (1987) that a cost of 0.5 percent of lifetime consumption is "large", these estimates
constitute a substantial welfare cost for all groups, and an especially large cost for Hispanic
and black households.
       Methodologically, our study seeks to capture the strengths of two distinct strands of the
consumption smoothing literature. One strand, pioneered by Blundell, Pistaferri and Preston
(2008), uses all variation in income and defines income shocks by modeling the earnings
process.4 However, this methodology may suffer from concerns about the endogeneity of
labor supply, which can vary with consumption needs. In contrast, this paper's primary
research design isolates exogenous variation arising from changes in firm-wide labor demand.
       A second strand uses exogenous but unusual variation arising from windfalls. Examples
of such windfalls include life insurance dividends, restitution payments, tax rebates, veterans'
bonuses, lottery winnings, and Alaska Permanent Fund payments.5 However, the marginal
propensity to consume (MPC) out of windfall income may differ from the MPC out of other
income if recipients use a mental accounting heuristic. In fact, anomalously high spending
out of windfalls is used to motivate the canonical mental accounting papers (Thaler 1985;
Thaler 1990). The same concern may apply to modern MPC studies; for example, when
the first stimulus checks were sent out in July 2001, Time Magazine reported that White
House cabinet members "spent their time on the Sunday shows essentially calling for a mass
national shopping spree" (Pellegrini 2001). Recent evidence shows that labels can have
dramatic effects on how funds are spent (Hastings and Shapiro 2018; Beatty et al. 2014).
Because research designs that use typical variation in labor income are not subject to this
labeling concern, they are particularly useful for understanding the consequences of income
volatility.
       An added benefit of our methodology is statistical precision, which enables us to address
two types of ambiguity surrounding estimates in the prior consumption smoothing literature.
First, as noted in Kaplan and Violante (2010), reliable measures of the average consumption
response to income shocks are central for macroeconomic models. However, a recent meta-
   4
     See also Attanasio and Pavoni (2011), Choi, McGarry and Schoeni (2016), Etheridge (2015), and Guvenen
and Smith (2014). Earlier work which uses all variation in income includes Deaton and Paxson (1994),
Guvenen (2007), and Townsend (1994).
   5
     See Bodkin (1959), Kreinin (1961), Johnson, Parker and Souleles (2006), Hausman (2016), Fagereng,
Holm and Natvik (2018), and Kueng (2018), respectively.



                                                    4
analysis by Havranek and Sokolova (2020) finds that published MPC estimates dramatically
overstate the true MPC after correcting for publication bias. Such concerns may be muted
for our estimates because the standard error is less than one cent, and therefore even eco-
nomically insignificant consumption responses will be statistically significant at conventional
levels.
       Second, looking beyond the average MPC, there is even more ambiguity in the consumption-
smoothing literature about heterogeneity in MPCs by liquid assets. A central implication of
many consumption models is that there is a "tight negative correlation between the size of
the consumption response and the ratio of holdings of liquid wealth to income" (Kaplan and
Violante 2014, emphasis added).6 However, it has been difficult to statistically distinguish be-
tween high and low asset MPCs in prior work. Furthermore, recent literature using variation
from infrequent windfalls finds substantial consumption responses for high-asset households
that are nearly as high as those for low-asset households (Kueng 2018; Fagereng, Holm and
Natvik 2018). These results have spurred the development of alternative models designed
to explain excess sensitivity for high-liquidity households (Lian 2019). In contrast, we find
that the MPC out of typical income fluctuations is four times larger for low-asset households
than for high-asset households. Our estimates therefore provide renewed empirical support
for this fundamental prediction of standard models.
       Our welfare analysis revisits a classic view in macroeconomics that temporary income
shocks are irrelevant for welfare. Indeed, a standard approach in this literature is simply to
assume that these welfare costs are zero (e.g. Heathcote, Storesletten and Violante 2008).
Historically, there has been good reason for this assumption, since the standard one-asset
consumption model predicts that most agents accumulate sufficient assets to easily smooth
temporary income fluctuations. Yet empirically, low liquid asset holding is prevalent among a
substantial share of Americans. Recent work using two-asset models has sought to explain the
causes of this low liquid asset holding. In contrast, our analysis documents a consequence
of low liquid asset holding which is intuitive, yet has not been documented in prior work
to the best of our knowledge: temporary income volatility has a significant welfare cost.
This is because even temporary income fluctuations meaningfully affect consumption when
households hold few liquid assets. Furthermore, this cost is highest for groups with low
average liquid assets such as black and Hispanic households.
       Finally, ours is the first study we know of to measure consumption smoothing by race
at a month-to-month frequency. These estimates relate to a rich literature on the extent of
the racial wealth gap (e.g. Browne 1974; Oliver and Shapiro 2006); statistical correlates of
this gap (Blau and Graham 1990; Smith 1995; Barsky et al. 2002; Altonji and Doraszelski
2005); its interplay with factors such as homeownership (Charles and Hurst 2002; Aaronson,
Hartley and Mazumder 2017), marriage (Addo and Lichter 2013), and inter-household trans-
   6
    This is true in both modern two-asset models (Laibson, Repetto and Tobacman 2007; Kaplan and Violante
2014) and also in the canonical buffer stock model (Aiyagari 1994, Deaton 1991, Carroll 1997)



                                                   5
fers (Chiteji and Hamilton 2002); as well as potential policy solutions (Hamilton and Darity
2010). Most studies focus on differences in levels of wealth and longer term trends in these
gaps.7 However, less is known about how wealth gaps translate into differences in month-
to-month economic welfare. We contribute to this literature by examining the relationship
between the racial wealth gap--and by extension gaps in liquid assets--and the transmis-
sion of income volatility to consumption, thus linking the literatures on racial inequality and
consumption smoothing.
        The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the data and compares the analysis
sample to several public use datasets, Section 3 describes the empirical results using firm-
wide variation in pay and unemployment, Section 4 quantifies the welfare cost of income
volatility using a model, and Section 5 concludes.



2        Data and External Validity
        We study consumption smoothing by using a link between two administrative datasets:
bank account data from the JPMorgan Chase Institute (JPMCI) and race from voter reg-
istration files in three states. This de-identified dataset has two advantages over existing
data sources: it includes nearly two million households and plausible instruments for income
fluctuations. We describe the source datasets, show that the matching procedure is accurate,
and then use external benchmarks to explore external validity. It appears that racial gaps in
household finances in the matched data are either similar to, or a lower bound on, national
gaps by race.

2.1        Source Datasets
        The first dataset for this paper is drawn from the 20 million households each month with
a Chase checking account. The unit of observation is household-by-month, from October
2012 through April 2018.
        Our analysis centers on three variables: income, spending, and assets. JPMCI categorizes
each checking account inflow by whether it appears to reflect income. Among payments
received by direct deposit, we are able to observe several types of income, including labor
income, income from government sources, and capital income. Most of our analysis focuses
on labor income, for which we observe an encrypted version of the transaction description.
This field enables us to identify other workers with Chase bank accounts who are paid by
the same employer. This is useful because, as we describe in Section 3, we use fluctuations
in firm pay to instrument for changes in labor income.
        The second key variable is a measure of spending on nondurable goods and services.
Spending is measured from debit and credit card transactions, cash withdrawals, and elec-
tronic transactions captured through the bank account. Ganong and Noel (2019) constructs a
    7
        However, see Hardy et al. (2018) for an exception in the case of income volatility.


                                                          6
measure of nondurable spending in the JPMCI data, and we adopt that definition in this pa-
per. Examples of nondurable spending include groceries, food away from home, fuel, utilities,
haircuts, clothing, medical co-pays, and payments at drugstores. Altogether, transactions
that can be affirmatively categorized as nondurable comprise an average of 44 percent of
checking account outflows.
   Ganong and Noel (2019) shows that this measure of nondurable spending is more compre-
hensive than what can be measured in US survey data, but nevertheless has some limitations
which are relevant for this paper. First, we only observe data on bank account and credit
card spending at a single financial institution. We estimate using the Survey of Consumer
Finances (SCF) that about two-thirds of households have checking accounts at only one fi-
nancial institution; for the remaining one-third of households, we miss some spending through
non-Chase bank accounts. In addition, although the data include spending on Chase credit
cards, they do not include spending on non-Chase credit cards. Second, even if we had data
on spending from all financial institutions, we still would not observe in-kind transfers, which
may be an important source of consumption smoothing.
   The third key variable is the sum of balances in the household's Chase checking accounts.
We supplement this with external data from the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) on
comprehensive measures of total liquid assets (using the definition in Kaplan and Violante
2014) and total financial assets. Analysis of the SCF indicates that checking account balance
is a useful proxy for total assets. Although households frequently hold most of their financial
assets outside the checking account, average financial assets increase one-for-one with average
checking account balances, as shown in online Appendix Figure 1. The same figure also
demonstrates that, for a given checking account balance, black and Hispanic households
have less than white households in total liquid assets. For example, consider households
with a checking balance near the national median of $2,100: the median white household has
liquid assets of $3,100, while the median black and Hispanic households still have total liquid
assets of this same amount ($2,100). We thus use the SCF to impute assets from checking
account balances and race. See online Appendix Table 1 for the imputation factors. We also
observe age, sex, and ZIP code of residence for the primary bank account holder. Chase has
a footprint via physical bank branches in 22 states and nearly all Chase bank account holders
live in these states.
   The second dataset is voter registration files available to the public, which we use to
measure race. Although the Fifteenth Amendment gave black citizens the right to vote in
1870, Jim Crow laws and practices in Southern states prevented most black citizens from
voting for nearly a century thereafter. To address this discrimination, the US Congress
passed the Voting Rights Act of 1965, which seeks to ensure equal voting rights for black
citizens and other minorities. Today, eight Southern states collect data on race as part of
voter registration. Hersh (2015) finds that the origins of this practice in these specific states
are unclear, but notes that the set of states is similar to states subject to additional scrutiny


                                               7
under the Act as well as the set that had white-only primaries in the Jim Crow era. Online
Appendix Figure 2 shows a map of these states. The voter files also contain name, address,
and date of birth, which we use for matching.8
    Our analysis sample is drawn from three states: Florida, Georgia, and Louisiana. These
are states where the voter files contain race and there are a substantial number of people with
Chase bank accounts. The voter registration forms in these states ask respondents to provide
a single answer to a single question, which does not separately capture race and Hispanic
identity. This formulation is in line with how the Census asked about race in 1960 and 1970,
but not how the Census has asked about race since 1980. This means that we are unable
to separately analyze race and Hispanicity (e.g. we cannot distinguish Hispanic individuals
who identify as white from Hispanic individuals who identify as black). The exact wording
of the question in each state, and in the SCF, is shown in online Appendix Table 2 and the
distribution of responses is shown in online Appendix Table 3.



2.2    Matched Dataset with Bank Account Data and Voter Registration
    A JPMorganChase data team used a fuzzy matching algorithm to link bank records to
voter records. For the purposes of measuring race, this procedure treats the name listed first
on the bank account as the household head. The algorithm finds 56 percent of potential
matches.9 We discuss details of the algorithm in online Appendix B.1. The matched file
with bank records and self-reported race was then delivered to the JPMorgan Chase Institute
stripped of personal identifiers.
    The analysis sample consists of 1.8 million matched bank-voter records. The sample in-
cludes 870,000 white households, 462,000 black households, and 414,000 Hispanic households.
Until now, administrative data with information on household finances and race have largely
been limited to the analysis of mortgages.10 Thus, the number of observations in the anal-
     8
       Voter registration records contain personal identifiers, including name, address, and birthdate, which
were matched to bank records and then delivered to the JPMorgan Chase Institute stripped of these personal
identifiers. Voter registration data was obtained in 2018 for the exclusive purpose of enabling the JPMorgan
Chase Institute to conduct this research examining financial outcomes by race and not to identify party
affiliation. The matched file that contains personal identifiers, banking records, and self-reported race has
been deleted. The remaining de-identified file that contains banking records and self-reported race is only
available to the JPMorgan Chase Institute and is not being maintained by or made available to JPMC business
units or other parts of the firm.
     9
       This 56 percent estimate is the ratio of fraction of bank customers with a match (40 percent) to the
estimated fraction of bank customers registered to vote (72 percent). We estimate the 72 percent voter
registration rate for the bank customers based on CPS data which shows that 72 percent of people with bank
accounts in the three states are registered to vote. A 40 percent match rate is at the lower end of similar
studies that link administrative data to voter files (Kempf and Tsoutsoura 2018, Akee et al. (2018), Baicker
and Finkelstein 2019). One reason the match rate is lower than prior studies is that we impose stringent
similarity standards for name, address and age.
    10
       Federal law requires that mortgage lenders collect data on race. Fuster et al. (2018), Bartlett et al.
(2019), and Bhutta and Hizmo (2019) analyze discrimination in mortgage lending. We are aware of only one
prior study (Avery, Brevoort and Canner 2009) that links data on race to administrative data on a broad
set of household financial measures. In related work, Dobbie et al. (2018) documents discrimination against


                                                     8
ysis sample is orders of magnitude larger than previously-available datasets used to study
household finance and race. The analysis sample is concentrated in urban areas, reflecting
the geographic distribution of Chase branches within these three states.11
    We validate the quality of the matches using a companion sample where JPMCI directly
observes race for a subset of Chase customers. Although in general banks do not and cannot
collect information on the race and ethnicity of their customers, the one exception is that
they are required by law to ask mortgage applicants one question about their race and a
second about their Hispanicity. There are 194,000 de-identified Chase mortgage applications
that JPMorgan Chase is able to match to the voter files.12
    Race in the voter files agrees with the mortgage application files for 99 percent of people,
which gives us confidence in the accuracy of the matching procedure. Online Appendix B.2
describes how we assess whether race agrees between the two datasets. A 99 percent agree-
ment rate is remarkably high, considering that even when questions are worded consistently,
some individuals' self-reported race and ethnicity changes over time (Liebler et al. 2017).



2.3    Comparison of Matched Dataset to External Benchmarks

    One natural question is whether people in the dataset have different economic and demo-
graphic patterns by race than the US as a whole. To better understand the external validity
of estimates using these data, we decompose this question into two parts. First, how do pat-
terns by race compare between the nation as a whole and people with bank accounts in these
three states? Second, how does this three-state banked population compare to the analysis
sample, which is composed of people who have a bank account with Chase and whose race
can be ascertained from the voter files?
    We find that differences by race for banked households in Florida, Georgia, and Louisiana
generally track differences by race nationally. The best dataset for capturing a representative
banked sample from these three states is the Current Population Survey (CPS). We use the
CPS to analyze household heads who have a bank account and live in Florida, Georgia and
Louisiana. We refer to people who meet these criteria as being in the "sample frame". The
CPS also captures four statistics which we can easily compare to the matched JPMCI sample:
race, age, sex, and income.13
immigrants in the UK.
   11
      Online Appendix Table 4 and online Appendix Figure 3 demonstrate this concentration in urban areas.
Although one might have expected black and Hispanic households to be under -represented because they are
less likely to report having a bank account in the Current Population Survey, we find the opposite. Black and
Hispanic households are over -represented in the analysis sample relative to the universe of voters in the three
states. Online Appendix Table 5 shows that much of this over-representation is explained by two facts: (1)
black and Hispanic households tend to live in urban areas and (2) Chase branches tend to be in urban areas.
   12
      We do not use the mortgage application sample for our primary analysis both because the share of black
and Hispanic households in this sample is small and because applicants for mortgages tend to be economically
advantaged, which attenuates racial gaps relative to population averages.
   13
      To align with the mutually exclusive concept of race and Hispanicity from the voter files, we allocate


                                                       9
    It is unclear a priori whether black-white economic gaps in the sample frame should be
larger or smaller than national gaps. One reason they might be larger is that voter data with
race is specifically available in places where the Voting Rights Act was instituted to combat
a history of discrimination against black households. This history includes under-investment
in public goods such as education (Cascio and Washington 2014). However, there are also
some reasons why black-white gaps might be smaller. One reason is that white households
in the Deep South also have low average incomes; Georgia, Florida, and Louisiana all rank
in the bottom quarter of US states in 2017 in terms of average household income for white
households. Further, 17 percent of black households were unbanked in 2017 (compared to
3 percent of white households) and the unbanked are excluded from the sample frame by
construction.
    In practice, we find that black-white income inequality in the sample frame is quite similar
to national patterns. Figure 1a shows that nationally, the median black household earns 65
cents for each dollar earned by the median white household; in the sample frame, the ratio is
higher: 77 cents. This is because, for both black and white households, every quintile of the
national income distribution is represented in approximately equal proportions in the sample
frame (see online Appendix Figure 4a). Remarkably, this pattern holds even for the bottom
quintile of the national income distribution: 19 percent of black households and 21 percent
of white households in the sample frame have incomes below the national 20th percentile
race-specific thresholds. This pattern arises because of two offsetting forces: a geographic
screen that increases the share of low-income households and a banked screen that reduces
the share of low-income households.
    National differences between black and white households in terms of age and sex also hold
in the sample frame. One distinctive feature of the US is that black household heads are
more likely to be female than male; Figure 1b shows that this also holds in the sample frame.
In addition, Figure 1b shows that black household heads are younger than white household
heads, both nationally and in the sample frame.
    The story for Hispanic households is more nuanced, owing to the unique history of His-
panics in Florida. The majority of Hispanics in the US are of Mexican origin, but fewer
than one in five Hispanics in the three states are Mexican. This pattern arises in large part
because Florida has attracted a diverse set of Hispanic immigrants from across Latin Amer-
ica. Online Appendix Figure 6 compares the countries of origin for Hispanics across the US
to the three states. In the three states, the most common ancestry group is Cubans and
there are as many Puerto Ricans as there are Mexicans. This presumably arises because of
Florida's relative proximity to Cuba and Puerto Rico. In addition, Florida has attracted
a substantial number of Hispanics from Colombia, Venezuela, and other countries in South
America. Both Cubans and South Americans tend to be more affluent and older than other
people in the CPS to one of four mutually exclusive categories: non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black,
Hispanic, or other. This choice follows Chetty et al. (2018), Card and Rothstein (2007), and Federal Reserve
Board (2017).


                                                    10
Hispanic immigrants (Pew Hispanic Center 2013).
       We find that the broad economic and demographic contours of differences between His-
panic and white households nationally are preserved in the sample frame. Figure 1a shows
that the Hispanic-white income ratio is similar in the sample frame to the nation and online
Appendix Figure 4a shows that the distribution of income is similar. Figure 1b shows that
when using median age, Hispanic households are the youngest of the three groups, both in
the sample frame and nationally. However, older Hispanic households are over-represented
(see online Appendix Figure 4b).
       National racial wealth gaps are also preserved in the sample frame. One common way
to measure the racial wealth gap is to compare the median black (Hispanic) household to
the median white household. Using this metric, Figure 1a shows that black (Hispanic) liquid
wealth is 18 (14) cents for each dollar of white liquid wealth nationally. A slightly smaller
racial wealth gap is apparent for checking balances. These national gaps are preserved in the
sample frame for black households.14
       One striking fact visible in Figure 1a is the extent to which racial wealth gaps far exceed
racial income gaps. The fact that racial wealth gaps exceed racial income gaps is not driven
by a low level of savings among all races by households with low annual income. Rather,
black and Hispanic households have less liquid wealth than white households at every level
of the income distribution. For example, among households who say that their income in a
normal year is about $55,600 (the national household median in the SCF), black, Hispanic,
and white households have $2,000, $1,800, and $4,000 respectively in liquid wealth.15 These
racial wealth gaps mean that, for an equivalent-sized income loss, a black or Hispanic family
will have less financial buffer to smooth consumption than a white family.
       Finally, data on self-reported financial vulnerability suggest that racial differences in the
sample frame will be a lower bound on national differences by race. The CPS asks questions
about financial vulnerability as part of its Unbanked and Underbanked Supplement. As we
discuss in the introduction, 42 percent of Americans say that they do not have money set aside
that could be used for unexpected expenses or emergencies. This masks heterogeneity by
race: 55 percent of black households do not have savings for unexpected shocks, as compared
  14
      Unfortunately, the public use SCF has no geographic information and so we use the Health and Retirement
Study (HRS) to compute a regional adjustment factor. To compute the three-state banked estimates in Figure
1a, we rescale the national estimates from the SCF by the ratio of regional asset medians to national asset
medians by race from the HRS. Although the HRS is the best available public use dataset with both detailed
information on assets and place of residence, it has three limitations for this purpose. First, the survey
focuses on older people and we analyze people ages 50-65. Second, it does not distinguish between checking
and savings accounts. Third, the geographic variable corresponds to the Census division (state of residence
is suppressed). The division which most closely corresponds to the three-state sample frame is the South
Atlantic Census division; we calculate that 68 percent of the observations in this division in the HRS live in
Florida or Georgia.
   15
      One open question is the extent to which differences in permanent income (as opposed to annual income)
by race can explain the racial wealth gap. See Barsky et al. (2002), Scholz and Levine (2003), Altonji and
Doraszelski (2005), and Aliprantis, Carroll and Young (2019). The SCF's question about "income in a normal
year" is an attempt to measure permanent income in the context of a cross-sectional survey.



                                                     11
to 38 percent of white households, for a black-white gap of 17 percentage points (see Online
Appendix Figure 7a). In the sample frame, the gap is 11 percentage points. For the share
of households who report being behind on bills in the past year, the black-white gap is 17
percentage points nationally versus 11 percentage points in the sample frame (see Online
Appendix Figure 7b). Similar patterns are apparent for Hispanic households.
    Having shown that racial income and wealth gaps are similar in the sample frame to the
nation, we show that similar economic and demographic patterns by race hold in the sample
frame and in the analysis sample. Figure 1a shows that racial gaps in income and assets
are similar. Figure 1b shows that patterns of gender and age by race are similar as well.
The median age in the analysis sample is about five years younger than the sample frame,
but the ranking of median age by race is the same. Online Appendix Figure 4 compares the
distribution of income and age in the sample frame and in the analysis sample.
    To summarize, we use a novel, large de-identified dataset with information on income,
consumption, liquid wealth, and race. We accomplish this by matching bank account records
and voter files in Florida, Georgia, and Louisiana. The matching procedure is accurate. The
well-known and large racial economic gaps in the US also appear in this new dataset. The
available evidence indicates that differences in consumption smoothing by race will be similar
to--or perhaps a lower bound on--national differences by race.




3      Consumption Smoothing by Race and Assets
To assess whether and how much consumption smoothing varies by race and assets, we
first provide descriptive analysis of the matched dataset described above. After describing
our primary identification strategy, we estimate the causal impact of typical labor income
variation on consumption. We report results for the pooled sample, separately by race,
separately by assets, and by race and asset together. Finally, we report results from a second
identification strategy that uses unemployment.



3.1    Ordinary Least Squares
For our descriptive analysis, we use a first-difference ordinary least squares (OLS) specifica-
tion
                                    cit =  +  yit + it                                      (1)

where i indexes households, t indexes months, c is the log of monthly nondurable consump-
tion, and y is the log of monthly labor income. The use of logs means that  can be interpreted
as an elasticity of consumption with respect to income as in Blundell, Pistaferri and Preston
(BPP 2008). In Section 4 we show that this elasticity is one of the sufficient statistics needed


                                              12
for measuring the welfare cost of income volatility. Table 1 provides summary statistics for
our analysis sample.
This equation identifies  if
Assumption EO (Earnings Orthogonality)

                                    E (it |{yit }T
                                                 t=1 ) = 0


holds. This assumption says that income changes in every month are strictly exogenous
with respect to the unobserved error it , where the data span T months. This is the type
of assumption that is made in the literature that uses a statistical decomposition of income
shocks such as BPP. Meghir and Pistaferri (2011) describes this assumption as imposing that
"the individuals and the econometrician have the same information set."
    Changes in labor income and nondurable consumption are correlated. Table 2 column
(1) reports an estimate for ^ of 0.12, which means that a 10 percent change in income is
associated with a change in consumption of 1.2 percent. The relationship is present for both
positive and negative income changes as well as small and large income changes (see online
Appendix Figure 8a).
   This correlation between income and consumption is about twice as strong for black
households and fifty percent stronger for Hispanic households as it is for white households.
We estimate

 cit =  + 1 yit + 2 yit × Blackit + 3 yit × Hispanicit + Blackit + Hispanicit + it , (2)

with white as the omitted category. Table 2 column (2) reports estimates for ^1 of 0.09, ^2
of 0.08, and for ^3 of 0.04. Online Appendix Figures 8b, 8c, and 8d show non-parametric
binscatter plots of the same relationships.
   However, this correlation is hard to interpret because the ^ estimates from an OLS
regression will not have a causal interpretation if Assumption EO does not hold. In particular,
labor supply changes are problematic for Assumption EO because of reverse causality.     ^ will
be biased upward if a worker increases her labor supply to finance a specific consumption
need. ^ will be biased downward if leisure and market consumption are substitutes (working
additional hours lowers desired contemporaneous market consumption) or if there is classical
measurement error in income (Bound et al. 1994). The overall sign of the bias from these
different forces is ambiguous.
   The endogeneity of income and measurement error has motivated researchers to find
instruments for income that are plausibly orthogonal to it . However, many such papers rely
on sources of income that arrive infrequently and are labeled for a specific purpose. This may
limit the applicability of these estimates for measuring the consumption smoothing response
to typical income shocks.



                                              13
3.2      Firm Pay Shock as Instrument for Labor Income
       To measure the causal effect of typical income variation on consumption, we use varia-
tion in monthly firm-level pay. This strategy avoids contamination from the worker-specific
factors discussed above. It is inspired by the labor economics model of firm effects pioneered
by Abowd, Kramarz and Margolis (henceforth AKM, 1999). Consider the data-generating
process
                                         yit = i + j (i,t),t + it .                                         (3)

where i is an individual effect, j (i, t) is worker i's firm in month t, j (i,t),t is the firm effect
at time t, and it is an idiosyncratic individual shock. Equation (3) follows Lachowska et al.
(2020) in generalizing AKM to allow for time-varying firm effects (j (i,t),t ), while the most
of the AKM literature assumes time-invariant firm effects (j (i,t) ).16
       What are the important sources of variation in monthly firm pay (j (i,t),t )? External
data suggest that hours volatility is the leading source of month-to-month variation in firm
pay. The Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking (SHED) asks households
about whether they face income volatility and specific reasons for volatility. By far, the most
commonly-cited reason for income volatility is "irregular work schedule".
       A second source of volatility is from asymmetric changes in compensation such as bonuses
and commissions. Grigsby, Hurst and Yildirmaz (2019) and Lemieux, MacLeod and Parent
(2009) document that performance pay plays an important role in compensation for some
workers. If we combine the fraction of workers who cite "bonuses" or "commissions" as
reasons for volatility in the SHED, this is the second most commonly-cited reason for income
volatility. We tabulate all the responses to this question in online Appendix Table 6. We
also note that workers who are paid a higher hourly rate for additional hours ("overtime")
will generate asymmetry in the income shocks. Online Appendix Figure 9 documents this
asymmetry in the JPMCI data: positive deviations of monthly pay from the firm median are
larger than negative ones.
       Variation in firm pay arises from two types of economic fundamentals: changes in labor
demand and firm rent-sharing. A broad and active literature regresses changes in annual earn-
ings or wages on observable firm-level shocks such as value added or revenue (Guiso, Pistaferri
and Schivardi 2005; Kline et al. 2019; Lamadon, Mogstad and Setzler 2019; Friedrich et al.
2019; Juhn et al. 2018a; Juhn et al. 2018b). Some of these papers interpret the regressor as
isolating firm rents, while others interpret the regressor as capturing both rents and changes
in labor demand. Our empirical strategy captures both of these observable channels. It also
captures changes in labor demand which occur for reasons not captured by such regressors
  16
    Lachowska et al. (2020) seek to measure the stability of firm effects from one year to the next, while we
allow firm effects to vary by month and use them to instrument for individual income. They conclude that
firm effects are quite stable from year to year. One way to jointly interpret our results and this prior work is
that the month-to-month fluctuations in firm pay captured by our research design do not reflect the type of
permanent changes that would show up in a specification with time-varying firm effects estimated using data
aggregated to the annual level.



                                                      14
(e.g. when labor demand today responds to future expectations about product demand).
       We estimate firm pay shocks using a first-difference estimator that regresses changes in
a worker's own pay on the change in the average pay of their coworkers. We estimate

                                                         t-1
                        yit =  + yj (-i,t),t +                 s-t yj (-i,t),s + it                    (4)
                                                     s=t-L

                            1
where yj (-i,t),t        i1(ij )-1   i j,i =i yi t - yi ,t-1   is a leave-out mean that uses the cowork-
ers at firm j of worker i and L is the number of lags. To improve precision, coworker pay
is estimated using everyone with a Chase bank account, not just the workers for whom we
have matched race.
       This specification controls for several lags of the change in coworker pay. Without lags,
innovations in j (i,t),t would affect the regressor yj (-i,t),t twice. For example, if j (i,t),t = 0.1
at time t and j (i,t),t is zero in every other period (j (i,t),t = 0 t = t), a specification that
did not control for lags would give yj (-i,t),t = 0.1 and yj (-i,t),t+1 = -0.1. The negative
income "shock" at t +1 would simply be the reversion of the positive innovation from the prior
period.17 The inclusion of lags enables us to interpret our results as capturing innovations
in income, and not simply the reversion of innovations from the prior period. The estimates
reported in this section use five lags (L = 5). However, the paper's key quantitative results
continue to hold with other choices of lags. In Online Appendix Table 7 columns (1)-(3),
as a robustness check, we report the paper's central estimates without controlling for any
lags. In unreported results, we find that our estimates are very similar in specifications that
control for between one and twelve lags.
       Firm-level pay shocks estimated using coworkers have strong predictive power for individ-
ual pay, as shown in Figure 2a. Nearly every one of the binscatter points falls on the linear
regression line, indicating that the relationship in means is almost exactly linear. Consistent
with the asymmetry in pay fluctuations discussed above, Figure 2a shows an asymmetric
distribution in the instrument: positive shocks are larger than negative ones. We estimate ^
of 0.70, which means that a worker's own pay changes by 7 percent when their coworkers' pay
changes by 10 percent. Furthermore, the firm pay shock instrument accounts for a sizable
fraction of the total volatility of household income. We calculate that firm effects account
for between one-fourth and one-fifth of volatility in monthly take-home earnings.
       The firm pay shocks appear to be transitory innovations. We demonstrate this by ex-
amining the change in income for months around the shock. Online Appendix Figures 10
and 11 replicate Figure 2a, changing the dependent variable to lags and leads of the change
in individual pay. Here, and throughout the analysis, we require that the worker is in the
sample in the ten months prior to the coworker shock.18 We find little change in income in
  17
     BPP solve this problem in an alternative way: by assuming an earnings process with temporary and
permanent shocks and implementing an estimator that, in the context of this assumption, captures only the
innovations to earnings.
  18
     We also require that the worker be employed at the same firm in the ten months prior for computational


                                                    15
the months leading up to the shock, suggesting that our specification does in fact capture
innovations in income. We also find that income has fully reverted to its pre-shock level by
one month after the shock.
    Although most consumption smoothing research uses all variation in income or variation
in windfall income, there are at least three prior papers that instrument for individual income
using variation in firm pay. The closest antecedent of the research design described above
is the design in Koustas (2018), who also uses coworker pay as an instrument. He studies
people who use an online financial aggregator and drive for Uber or Lyft (as well as their
coworkers), and uses a panel specification with firm fixed effects to instrument for variation
in individual pay. We build on Koustas (2018) by studying a broader sample, providing
formal orthogonality conditions, reporting nonparametric and parametric estimates of the
first stage of the instrument, documenting the asymmetric distribution of the instrument,
and reporting pre-trends and post-trends for income and consumption for several periods.
In related work, Shea (1995) and Baker (2018) instrument for individual pay using explicitly
observable firm-level changes in union contracts and stock prices respectively.
    We measure the effect of transitory income shocks on consumption using a linear two-
stage least squares estimator that uses a modified equation (1) together with equation (4):

                                                 t-1
                        cit =  +  yit +                 s-t yj (-i,t),s + it                             (5)
                                                s=t-5
                                                        t-1
                        yit =  + yj (-i,t),t +                 s-t yj (-i,t),s + it .                    (6)
                                                       s=t-5


These equations identify  if  = 0 (as Figure 2a shows to be the case) and the condition
Assumption FO (Firm-pay Orthogonality)

                                        E (it |{j (i,t),t }T
                                                           t=1 ) = 0                                     (7)

holds. Assumption FO would fail if the firm is large enough that its payroll changes have a
noticeable effect on the regional economy through changes in prices (e.g. housing prices or
local prices of non-traded goods). It would also fail if households' consumption is responding
to news about the firm's future payroll. However, the fact that in a statistical sense the firm
pay shock has essentially no impact on the subsequent months suggests that there is little or
no news in the shock.19
convenience. We will drop this requirement in a future draft.
  19
     A third way that this assumption can fail is if a change in the average pay of all workers at a firm
has affects consumptions through peer effects. De Giorgi, Frederiksen and Pistaferri (2020) document that
idiosyncratic changes in the income of one peer (e.g an income shock to a "co-worker of the spouse of my
co-worker") affects consumption via peer effects. One standard story motivating such a behavioral channel is
a "keeping up with the Jones" logic where my consumption choices are driven in part by a desire to keep up
with the consumption of my higher-consuming peers. It is unclear if this story applies to the firm pay shocks
we study, where nearly everyone in the firm experienced a similar same income shock.



                                                     16
    Assumption FO is weaker than Assumption EO, which identifies the OLS model discussed
in the previous section. To understand how the two are related, note that first-differencing
of equation (3) yields yit = j (i,t),t + it and therefore the pair of assumptions

                                          E (it |{j (i,t),t }T
                                                             t=1 ) = 0

                                               E (it |{it }T
                                                           t=1 ) = 0


together imply Assumption EO. Thus, Assumption EO nests both Assumption FO and a
second assumption (E (it |{it }T
                               t=1 )). This second assumption is not satisfied in a model with
endogenous labor supply. For example, it will fail if individual consumption needs or tastes
drive individual labor supply choices.



3.3    Causal Impact of Income on Consumption
    We use the firm pay pay shock as an instrument to measure the causal effect of income on
consumption using an instrumental variables (IV) specification. Figure 2b shows a binscatter
of the reduced form and 2c shows the second stage. The relationship is precisely estimated.
One striking feature of this plot is that even large changes in income (such as a $500 decrease
or increase) cause changes in consumption. This pattern suggests that when income dips,
households either do not have or choose not to access illiquid assets to smooth consumption.
This motivates a focus on heterogeneity by liquid assets in our subsequent analysis.
   To provide a quantitative interpretation of the evidence in Figure 2, Table 2 column (3)
reports an IV estimate of an elasticity of consumption to income of 0.23 ( ^ = 0.23). This
estimate is larger than the OLS estimate. We examine the implications of this IV estimate
for the welfare cost of income volatility in Section 4.
    This elasticity is precisely estimated, with a standard error of 0.009. The comparable
MPC estimate is 21.9 cents with a standard error of 0.9 cents. In a recent meta-analysis,
Havranek and Sokolova (henceforth HS, 2020) reviews 246 estimates of the MPC for non-
durables. The mean (median) MPC in these prior papers is 29 (25) cents with a mean
(median) standard error of 19 (13) cents. Online Appendix Figure 12 plots the distribu-
tion of standard errors for MPC estimates in the HS literature review. None of the papers
reviewed by HS have an MPC less than one cent in their preferred specification.20 The stan-
dard error of our estimates is sufficiently small that even modest consumption responses that
are economically insignificant will be statistically significant at conventional levels, thereby
  20
     The most precise estimates in prior work, which have standard errors close to one cent in their primary
specification, come from papers that estimate daily or weekly MPCs using within-month variation in income.
Olafsson and Pagel (2018) and Gelman et al. (2014) examine the timing of spending relative to payday. Baker
and Yannelis (2017) and Gelman et al. (2018) examine the effects of a delayed paycheck due to the federal
government shutdown. Thus, our estimates for the monthly MPC have similar degree of statistical precision
to the literature on the daily or weekly MPC and a substantial gain in precision relative to the prior literature
on monthly MPCs.


                                                       17
allaying the publication bias concern raised by HS. Indeed, given the argument in HS, it is
not surprising that our point estimate is smaller than the average in prior studies.
   Our elasticity estimate of 0.23 implies less consumption smoothing of temporary income
shocks than the estimates in BPP, which estimates an elasticity of consumption to temporary
income shocks of 0.05. Our estimates could differ for three reasons: (1) differences between
the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) data and JPMCI data (e.g. income is measured
with error in the PSID per Bound et al. 1994 and total consumption is imputed from food),
(2) BPP uses leads of the change in income to isolate temporary income shocks, and/or (3)
the elasticity of consumption with respect to (exogenous) firm pay shocks differs from the
elasticity with respect to (potentially endogenous) household income. We run two alternative
regression specifications to test between these potential explanations. When we implement
BPP's estimator in our data using all income shocks, we estimate passthrough of 0.17. When
we implement BPP's estimator using firm pay shocks, we estimate a passthrough of 0.24;
thus, BPP's estimator applied to firm pay shocks yields the same conclusion as our preferred
specification. Our estimate of higher passthrough is therefore driven mostly by explanation 1
(having a measure of income from administrative data) and to a lesser degree by explanation
3 (using exogenous variation from firm pay shocks instead of using all variation in income).
   Just as the impact of the firm pay shock on income is temporary, so too is its impact on
consumption. Online Appendix Figure 13 and 14 replicate Figure 2b, changing the depen-
dent variable to lags and leads of the change in household consumption. This is useful for
evaluating Assumption FO. One way that this assumption could be violated is if households
modify their consumption in anticipation of the firm pay shock. The absence of pre-trends in
consumption suggests that there is not such a violation. We also find little to no consumption
response in the months following the firm shock. This suggests that that whatever fraction
of the income deviation that is not spent in the same month as the shock is saved.
   One interesting question is to what extent the firm pay shocks are predictable from the
perspective of households. We do not have a good way to answer this question with our data
and this is an important question for future research. However, we note that the predictability
of the shock does not necessarily imply a violation of Assumption FO. Johnson, Parker and
Souleles (2006) and Kueng (2018) are examples of papers with predictable income shocks
and an assumption similar to Assumption FO.
   Although we do not require that the firm pay shocks be entirely unpredictable, we are
nevertheless interested in isolating the unpredictable component of those shocks. We there-
fore construct an alternative version of the instrument, where we residualize yj (-i,t) to be
the deviation of coworker pay from its calendar month average (e.g. for each firm, compare
this February to the same firm's other Februaries). This requires firm panels of at least 24
months. This specification seeks to eliminate firm-specific seasonal variation in payroll and
annual bonuses as a source of identifying variation. As a result, this specification amplifies
the importance of hours volatility, which is the remaining source of identification. In Online


                                              18
Appendix Table 7, we report the paper's central estimates using the specification with this
alternative instrument and find similar results to our preferred specification.



3.4   Consumption Smoothing by Race
Figures 3 and 4 provide non-parametric evidence that when a firm raises or lowers its pay
for all workers, black and Hispanic households increase or cut their consumption more than
white households. To provide a quantitative interpretation of these estimates, we re-estimate
equations (5) and (6), interacting yit and yj (-i,t),t with Blackit and Hispanicit and adding
categorical dummies by race. Two features of this specification are worth noting. First, we
re-estimate the first stage equation separately by race, but the estimates are very similar
and so differences in Figures 3 and 4 almost entirely reflect differences in the reduced form
relationship between the instrument and consumption. Second, as is typical in economic
studies of racial inequality, this specification captures the causal impact of a variable (in our
case, income) for different racial groups, not the causal impact of race itself.
   We find that the causal effect of an income shock on consumption is about 50 percent
larger for black households than it is for white ones, and about 20 percent larger for Hispanic
households than for white ones. Table 2 column (4) estimates       ^ × Black of 0.09 and    ^×
Hispanic of 0.04, where ^ is 0.20, which captures the elasticity for omitted race category of
white. To give a sense of the difference in magnitudes in dollar terms, the median absolute
deviation in labor income is $1,178. Our estimates imply that a decline in income of this
size will lead to a decline in consumption of $236 for white households, $286 for Hispanic
households, and $344 for black households.



3.5   Consumption Smoothing by Assets
   As we discuss in the introduction, there are several mechanisms that might give rise to
differences in elasticities by race. In this paper, we focus on just one candidate mechanism:
differences in liquid assets. We focus on this variable because MPC heterogeneity by liquid
assets is a central implication of many consumption models. This analysis follows in a tra-
dition going back to Zeldes (1989) of measuring heterogeneity in consumption smoothing by
asset holdings. We first discuss heterogeneity in consumption smoothing by assets and relate
our estimates to those in the prior literature. Then, in Section 3.6, we investigate whether
racial inequality in assets can account for racial inequality in consumption smoothing.
   To analyze the role of liquid assets, we construct each household's financial buffer as ratio
of average checking balance to average nondurable consumption in the six months prior to
the payroll shock. We normalize assets by nondurable consumption because some households
with high assets also have high consumption, such that they have little financial buffer to
smooth consumption in response to income shocks.

                                               19
    Figure 5 shows non-parametric evidence that households with fewer liquid assets do less
consumption smoothing. We stratify households into deciles by their checking asset buffer
and re-construct Figure 2c for the bottom and top deciles. The slope is quite steep for
the bottom decile (0.39 in Figure 5a) and shallow for the top decile (0.12 in Figure 5b).
The consumption changes for low-asset households are symmetric. They cut spending when
income drops, presumably because they lack the assets needed to smooth consumption.
They also increase spending when income rises, perhaps because they have more deferred
consumption needs when a positive income shock arrives.
    One interesting pattern is that high-asset households have an asymmetric consumption
response to firm pay shocks. Visual inspection of Figure 5b shows that high-asset households
with positive income shocks increase consumption, but do not appear to decrease consump-
tion when income falls. This finding is consistent with evidence in Baugh et al. (2018).
    To compare our results to prior estimates, in the remainder of the section we report
results in terms of the marginal propensity to consume (MPC) instead of the elasticity of
consumption to income. We do this by scaling our elasticity estimates by the ratio of average
consumption to average income.21
    The extent of MPC heterogeneity by liquid assets has been difficult to precisely quantify
in prior work. Figure 6 illustrates the statistical uncertainty of estimates in Parker et al.
(2013), Fagereng, Holm and Natvik (2018), and Kueng (2018).22 Both Parker et al. (2013)
and Kueng (2018) have sufficient statistical uncertainty to be consistent with both an MPC-
asset slope that is steep and no slope at all (e.g an MPC that is constant with respect to
assets). The results from the JPMCI data show statistically precise estimates that MPCs
decline steeply as liquid wealth rises.
  21
     An alternative strategy would be to estimate equations (5) and (6) in levels instead of logs. We report
such estimates in online Appendix Table 8, and also find less consumption smoothing by black and Hispanic
households, less consumption smoothing by low-asset households, and that the racial wealth gap explains most
of the differences in consumption smoothing by race. However, these are not our preferred point estimates
because a dollar-based specification upweights the consumption response of high-wage households, whose
shocks are larger in dollar terms (but not in percentage terms). This concern arises because our research
design captures the average response to shocks of varying sizes. In contrast, previous strategies estimating
shocks that are similar in dollar terms across groups do not have this bias in estimating dollar-based MPC
measures. Similarly, our main specification in logs is not susceptible to this concern since pay shocks are
similar in percentage terms across the income distribution, and hence our preferred strategy is to scale these
elasticity measures into MPCs.
  22
     For tax rebates we use Parker et al. (2013) as the benchmark because the MPC heterogeneity estimates
in Johnson, Parker and Souleles (2006) are less precisely estimated and the estimates in Parker (2017) apply
to only expenditure categories captured in the Nielsen retail panel. Souleles (1999) shows clear heterogeneity
by liquid assets in the consumption response to tax refunds. We cannot directly compare our point estimates
to those in Souleles (1999) because that paper reports asset heterogeneity using a tax refund coefficient but
not an MPC, and furthermore the refund coefficient for our comparable outcome (nondurable spending) is
only reported for the low asset group. Jappelli and Pistaferri (2014) analyze heterogeneity in responses to
questions about MPC hypotheticals and find estimates similar to Fagereng, Holm and Natvik (2018). Misra
and Surico (2014) document heterogeneity in the MPC among people with high mortgage debt. BPP and
Fisher et al. (2019) analyze MPC heterogeneity by total wealth, but not by liquid wealth, using the PSID.
Both of those papers find that consumption sensitivity is lowest for high-asset households, which is consistent
with our findings.



                                                      20
   One lesson from our estimates is that the nondurables MPC out of typical income vari-
ation for high liquidity households is substantially smaller than the MPC of low liquidity
households. This finding contrasts with prior work studying the response of high-asset house-
holds to infrequent windfalls. Kueng (2018) emphasizes the high 21-cent MPC out of Alaska
Permanent Fund checks among top quintile households, and the lack of a steep gradient
across quintiles, as inconsistent with standard consumption models. Fagereng, Holm and
Natvik (2018) estimates a total consumption MPC of 46 cents out of lottery winnings for the
top quartile households (as compared to 62 cents for the bottom quartile households). For
comparison, we estimate a 10.6 cent MPC for top quartile households that is only one-fourth
as large as the response for bottom-quartile households. One possible reason for these dif-
ferences is that our estimates rely on typical income variation rather than income windfalls.
If households use mental accounting heuristics when deciding how much of a windfall to
spend, their MPC may differ from the MPC out of regular income. An interesting path for
future work would be to measure the response to both types of income shocks for the same
population, in the same dataset, using the same consumption measures.
   Our results are consistent with a literature documenting MPC heterogeneity in covariates
that are likely to be correlated with liquidity constraints. Gross, Notowidigdo and Wang
(2020) documents higher MPCs during the Great Recession and interpret their findings as
consistent with liquidity constraints binding for a larger share of households during this
time period. Patterson (2019) shows heterogeneity in MPCs by several covariates that are
correlated with liquidity. We discuss the relationship of our estimates to hers in Section 3.7.
   One limitation of both of our estimates and this prior work is that differences in assets
can arise for many reasons. Thus, it may not be the case that causal variation in assets
will generate the differences in consumption smoothing depicted in Figures 5 and 6. When
high-asset households have lower MPCs than low-asset households, this could reflect a causal
effect of access to assets on consumption smoothing or it could reflect a selection effect, if for
example low-asset households have a weaker preference for consumption smoothing (Parker
2017). How important is each channel? On one hand, some prior work studying other
outcomes such as health has found that the causal effect of wealth is much smaller than the
cross-sectional relationship with wealth (Cesarini et al. 2016). On the other hand, there are
strong theoretical reasons (e.g. Aiyagari 1994) to believe that households who have liquid
assets will use them to smooth consumption, while those who do not have assets will be
unable to smooth consumption. One way to assess whether these differences in liquid assets
can causally generate the differences in consumption smoothing in the data is to evaluate a
structural model which attempts to match both the liquid asset distribution and consumption
sensitivity in the data. We pursue this path in Section 4.




                                               21
3.6   Consumption Smoothing by Race and Assets
   This subsection explores the link between our first two results: can racial inequality in
wealth account for racial inequality in consumption smoothing? As discussed in Section 2
and shown in Figure 1a, black and Hispanic households have fewer liquid assets than white
households, even after controlling for income. These large racial wealth gaps are as apparent
in our sample as they are in national data. Since we find a clear link between liquid wealth
and consumption smoothing in Section 3.5, it is possible that racial wealth gaps contribute
to the racial gaps in consumption smoothing that we document in Section 3.4.
   We use a simple specification to summarize the role of assets in consumption smoothing
in columns (5)-(8) of Table 2. We re-estimate columns (3) and (4), adding a linear control
for the rank of the household's asset buffer (Buf f er = AssetRank/N - 0.5). This variable is
scaled from -0.5 for the lowest asset household to 0.5 for the highest asset household. Thus,
the coefficient on y × Buf f er, captures the change in consumption smoothing from being
the lowest-ranked household in terms of assets to being the highest-ranked household. As in
the prior columns, the coefficient on y continues to capture for the median household in
terms of assets. Thus, column (5) implies that the consumption elasticity for the median asset
household is 0.23 and that this elasticity ranges from 0.36 for the lowest-asset households to
0.11 for the highest-asset households.
   Controlling for observed asset buffers reduces racial gaps in consumption smoothing by a
factor of two. Column (6) controls for checking account balance as a measure of asset buffer.
The coefficient on y × Black falls to 0.05 (from 0.09 in column (4)) and the coefficient on
y × Hispanic falls to 0.02 (from 0.04 in column (4)).
   However, the estimates that use observed checking account balance understate the im-
portance of assets in explaining racial differences in consumption smoothing. The problem
is one of differential measurement error. The measurement error exists because the JPMCI
data do not contain all of the assets that someone might use to smooth consumption. This
measurement error differs by race because, as we show in Section 2.1, black and Hispanic
households disproportionately hold their assets in checking accounts. Thus, they have fewer
total assets than white households, even after conditioning on a level of checking account
balances.
   To estimate how incorporating a broader measure of assets affect consumption smoothing,
we control for imputed liquid assets. The imputation procedure is described in Section 2.1.
It assumes that the relationship of checking account balances to liquid assets is the same by
race in the matched JPMCI-voter sample (where we do not observe liquid assets) as in the
SCF (where we do observe liquid assets). This imputation addresses a problem of differential
measurement error: for a given level of checking assets, black and Hispanic households have
fewer assets than white households. This is analogous to the procedure in Rothstein and
Wozny (2013), which seek to measure the black-white test score gap while controlling for
permanent income, but lacks a single dataset with both variables; they use one dataset


                                             22
with test scores and annual income, and a second supplementary dataset where they impute
permanent income from annual income and race.
   Indeed, we find that all of the racial gaps in consumption smoothing are explained by
controlling for differences in liquid assets. These results can be seen in columns (7) and (8) of
Table 2. Once we control for liquid assets, the black-white gap in consumption sensitivity to
income is largely eliminated and the Hispanic-white gap is reversed. This finding is depicted
graphically in Figure 7a. A negative Hispanic-white gap means that, after controlling for
liquid assets, Hispanic households do more consumption smoothing than white households.
This may reflect Hispanic households receiving more transfers than white households from
family and friends to smooth consumption.
   We explore robustness to alternative imputation strategies. We re-estimate the specifica-
tion in Table 2 column (8) using two alternative definitions of assets. We consider financial
assets, which are substantially broader than the Kaplan and Violante (2014) definition of
liquid assets. We also consider the definition of liquid assets used by SCF summary file,
which is narrower than the Kaplan and Violante (2014) definition because the SCF summary
file excludes credit card debt. The racial wealth gap is largest for the broadest definition of
assets and smallest for the narrow liquid asset definition. Online Appendix Table 7 shows
that racial gaps in consumption smoothing are smaller when we use a broader definition
of assets and larger when we use a narrower definition. Understanding which non-checking
account assets people actually use to smooth consumption is an important topic for future
work.
   There are two related interpretations of these results. First, this finding suggests that
when faced with the same financial circumstances (i.e., same income shocks, same financial
buffer), households of all races react similarly. Second, the finding suggests that due to the
racial wealth gap, which leads to systematic differences in financial circumstances, black and
Hispanic households are more vulnerable to income fluctuations than white households. We
note that the first interpretation holds whether the relationship between assets and consump-
tion smoothing is causal or is driven by selection. The second interpretation, however, relies
on assets having a causal impact on consumption smoothing.
   In both cases, a natural underlying question is why black and Hispanic households have
lower liquid wealth than white households. We do not have any new evidence on that ques-
tion in this study, but prior studies have documented that racial gaps in assets have roots in
the long-lasting effects of structural racism embedded within government and institutional
policies and practices (Bayer, Ferreira and Ross 2018; Du Bois 1935; Lui et al. 2006; Collins
et al. 2017; Kijakazi, Smith and Runes 2019; Rothstein 2017). These structural forces not
only have a direct effect on wealth and wealth accumulation at a given point in time, but
may also drive differences in the key determinants of wealth disparities over time and across
generations, such as family transfers (e.g., Shapiro 2017; Chiteji and Hamilton 2002; McK-
ernan et al. 2014), neighborhood conditions such as poverty rates, home values, delinquency


                                               23
rates, and access to banking (Chetty et al. 2018; Perry, Rothwell and Harshbarger 2018;
Keys, Mahoney and Yang 2020; Stein and Yannelis 2019), geographic and financial barriers
to human capital accumulation (Dobbie and Fryer Jr. 2011; Jackson and Reynolds 2013;
Addo, Houle and Simon 2016), and racial segregation and discrimination in the labor market
(e.g. Grodsky and Pager 2001; Bertrand and Mullainathan 2004). As such, we do not frame
our results as a horse race between liquid assets or race as the key driver of the differences
in consumption smoothing that we document; rather, the differences in liquid assets may
themselves be determined by historical factors that are also driven by race.



3.7   Alternative Research Design: Consumption Sensitivity to Unemploy-
      ment
   One limitation of the preceding analysis is that it captures temporary income fluctuations
that last on average for only one month. Because of downward nominal pay rigidity, people
with stable employment rarely have large and persistent negative shocks to earnings. One
might imagine that households are better able to smooth larger and more persistent negative
income shocks, for example if they are able to tap into an illiquid asset. This motivates a
second research design studying unemployment. This is the same event studied in Ganong
and Noel (2019). We demonstrate that the same racial gaps exist in consumption smoothing
for this larger negative income shock.
   Figure 8a illustrates that the income shock around the onset of unemployment insurance
receipt is much larger than the shock in our primary research design. Average monthly income
drops by about 25 percent, which is similar to the average shock below the 5th percentile of
the firm pay shock distribution shown in Figure 2a. While the firm pay shock lasts for one
month on average, Figure 8a illustrates that income remains depressed in the year following
UI receipt. (In unreported results, we find that incomes recover substantially from month 12
to 24 after UI receipt.)
   The elasticity of consumption with respect to income is similar for unemployment than
it is for typical income variation. We quantify this using a linear two-stage least squares
specification:

                                   cit =  + yit + it                                       (8)
                                   yit =  + P ostit + it                                   (9)

where P ostit is the 12 month period from one month before receipt of the first UI check
(when unemployment usually begins) to ten months after receipt of the first UI check. We
estimate an elasticity of consumption to income of 0.18 (^ = 0.18), which is a bit smaller
than the elasticity estimate from the firm pay shock design.
   Figure 8a also shows that black, Hispanic, and white households experience a similar


                                             24
drop in income in the year after the onset of unemployment. This might be surprising
given the well-known fact that black workers have longer average unemployment durations
in the US as well as the results of Fryer, Pager and Spenkuch (2013), who document that
black jobseekers in the Great Recession received lower wage offers than white jobseekers.
However, these patterns do not hold in our sample. Online Appendix Table 9 shows that
average unemployment durations for banked households in the three states are similar for
black and white workers (and lower for Hispanic workers). Figure 8a shows a similar income
trajectory in the year after receipt of the first UI check. Thus, we conclude that in our sample
frame--banked households in Florida, Georgia, and Louisiana from 2012 forward--the effect
of insured job loss on household income in the year after job separation is similar by race.
    Faced with a similar-sized income shock, Figure 8b shows that black and Hispanic house-
holds cut spending more than white households. We re-estimate equations (8) and (9),
interacting yit and P ostit with Racei and adding a dummy Racei . Table 3 column (2) shows
that the elasticity is about 30 percent higher for black and Hispanic households. This racial
gap is smaller than the black-white gap and larger than the Hispanic-white gap estimated in
our prior research design. It is smaller than estimates of the racial gap in Patterson (2019)
using the PSID.23
    This difference in elasticities by race could reflect differences by race in assets, differences
by race in expectations about the long-term path of income (beyond the time horizon we
can observe), or any of the other reasons that consumption smoothing might differ by race
which we discuss in the introduction.
    Just as with firm pay shocks, it appears that liquid assets are the key channel for under-
standing racial differences in consumption smoothing during unemployment. Table 3 column
(3) shows that assets are strongly correlated with consumption smoothing. Controlling for
assets reduces or eliminates the racial gap in consumption smoothing. Table 3 column (4)
controls for checking assets and column (5) controls for imputed liquid assets. In the lat-
ter column, the racial gap in consumption smoothing is economically small and statistically
insignificant. Figure 7b provides a visualization of this finding.
    In a companion paper (Farrell et al. 2020), we provide additional details on this analysis
of spending around unemployment. The companion paper also repeats approximately the
same analysis using a third source of income variation: tax refunds.
    Across three research designs, we find substantially less consumption smoothing by black
   23
      Patterson (2019) instruments for income using unemployment, calculates the elasticity of food consump-
tion with respect to income in the PSID, and then imputes total consumption using the method of Blundell,
Pistaferri and Preston (2008). She finds that black households have an MPC that is roughly twice that of
white households during unemployment. The larger average racial gap in the PSID may be attributable to
differences in gender composition. Patterson finds a large MPC gap between black men and white men and
essentially no gap between black women and white women. The PSID data disproportionately capture men,
reflecting the fact that the PSID data go back to 1969, when most prime earners were men. In contrast,
Figure 1b shows that more than half of black households in the US and in the JPMCI data are women. To
ease comparison of our estimates to Patterson's, we will disaggregate our estimates by race and gender in a
future draft.



                                                    25
and Hispanic households, less consumption smoothing by low-asset households, and that the
racial wealth gap explains most of the differences in consumption smoothing by race. These
empirical findings suggest that income volatility will have particularly adverse consequences
for households with few assets, such as black and Hispanic households.




4       Welfare Costs of Volatility
    We have identified statistically significant differences in consumption elasticities across
racial and ethnic groups, but are these differences economically meaningful? The classic
view in macroeconomics is that temporary income shocks are irrelevant for welfare. Indeed,
a standard approach in the literature is simply to assume that these welfare costs are zero
(see e.g. Heathcote, Storesletten and Violante 2008). This assumption is rooted in the fact
that the standard model predicts that most agents accumulate sufficient assets to smooth
temporary income fluctuations. Yet empirically, low liquid asset holding (and high credit
card debt) is prevalent among a substantial share of Americans and is particularly large for
black and Hispanic households. A new generation of two-asset consumption models (Kaplan
and Violante 2014; Laibson, Repetto and Tobacman 2007) have been used to explain the
pattern of people simultaneously holding substantial illiquid assets and relatively few liquid
assets. Our analysis documents a consequence of low liquid asset holding which is intuitive,
yet has not been fully quantified in prior work to the best of our knowledge: idiosyncratic
temporary income volatility has a significant welfare cost for households with few liquid
assets. This cost is highest for groups with low average liquid assets, e.g. black and Hispanic
households.
    To get a better handle on how quantitatively important these differences may be, we
specify a statistical model of consumption, in the spirit of Lucas (1987). Suppose that
log income in each period is comprised of three orthogonal components: a deterministic
component (t ), a permanent random component (zt ), and a transitory random component
(t ):

                                       y t = t + z t +  t
                                       zt = zt-1 + t ,                                    (10)

where t and t are i.i.d. and normally distributed random variables with standard deviations
 and  , respectively. The firm component of income variation j,t is now subsumed into
the general transitory component t . We assume E e = E e = 1.
    Let log consumption be a function of the different components of income:

                                    ct = t + c
                                             ~t (t , zt , t ),                            (11)



                                               26
with an error term, t , orthogonal to (, z, ). Blundell, Pistaferri and Preston (2008) and
Kaplan and Violante (2010) show that a function where consumption is linear in temporary
income shocks is a good approximation to predictions from a structural lifecycle model. This
specification allows consumption to respond differently to predictable changes in income,
permanent shocks, and transitory ones.
       We now derive a formula, similar to that of Lucas (1987), to express the welfare gain
from shutting off the effect of transitory shocks on consumption. From (11) above, we can
write the level of consumption as:
                                                   Ct = ec
                                                         ~t t
                                                           e ,
           ~t = ec
and define C     ~t as the level of consumption, net of the impact of the transitory shocks.

We can define the welfare gain  as the percent increase in consumption in each period that
would leave the household indifferent between facing transitory shocks or having them shut
off. Assuming constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) preferences, with risk parameter  , we
have:
                                T
                                                + ) Ct )1-         T          ~ 1-
                                        t ((1                               t Ct
                           E                                 E                       .                (12)
                               t=1
                                                 1-               t=1
                                                                            1-

We show in Online Appendix C.1 that a closed form solution for  exists and, after an
approximation of the natural log function, we have:

                                                                   2
                                                    +  2 ( - 1)      .                                (13)
                                                                  2
                                                                                             2
When  = 1, this result collapses to the Lucas (1987) result that                            2 .
       In order to apply this formula in our empirical setting, we need values for  ,  , and
2.
       We use our firm pay shock estimates of  by race from column (4) of Table 2 and vary
the values of  between 1 and 4. Finally, we calibrate 2 using prior estimates of monthly

income volatility within the bank data, in combination with external estimates of the relative
variances of permanent and transitory shocks at an annual level. That is, if we simulate a
monthly earnings process with a value of 2 = 0.16 and a value of  2 = 0.0005, we match the
                                                                 
monthly coefficient of variation of 0.38 from Farrell, Greig and Yu (2019), which also uses
the administrative bank data. These estimates are similar in magnitude to survey-based
estimates by Hannagan and Morduch (2015). Next, if we aggregate the data to an annual
                                                                  2
frequency and apply a standard estimator, we arrive at a ratio of ,annual 2
                                                                          ,annual =
0.012/ 0.006 = 2, which matches the ratio of estimates from Carroll and Samwick (1997).24
       Table 4 shows that the welfare gain from eliminating transitory income volatility is sub-
  24
    This ratio of transitory to permanent shock variances is in line with other estimates using the PSID
(Blundell, Pistaferri and Preston 2008), but lower than that of Campbell and Cocco (2015); Laibson, Repetto
and Tobacman (2007); and Guvenen et al. (2015). The estimates in all of these prior studies imply a larger
monthly variance of transitory shocks than the one based on our adminstrative bank data. The welfare gains
we estimate would be larger were we match the variance of transitory shocks in these studies, or if we were
to allow for serial correlation in transitory shocks.



                                                       27
stantial: at least 1.5 percent for every racial group. Although Lucas (1987) conjectures that
the welfare costs of transitory income volatility might be large, we are unaware of any prior
estimate of these costs.25 Some prior papers assume the cost is zero (Heathcote, Storesletten
and Violante 2008) and the assumption that these costs are trivial is in line with previously-
available evidence using annual data. For example, using equation (13) with the estimates
of the passthrough of temporary income shocks to consumption in BPP, implies an estimate
of   [0.05 + 0.052 ( - 1)] 0.012
                             2 , which is equal to 0.11 percent when  is 1. This is over an
order of magnitude less than our estimate.
         Two forces contribute to our much higher estimate of the welfare impact of temporary
income volatility. First, we find a higher elasticity of consumption to income than BPP, as
discussed in Section 3.3. Second, while a welfare calculation based on evidence at an annual
frequency assumes that income is constant from month-to-month, our analysis incorporates
within-year income volatility.
         The exercise also uncovers a previously-unstudied dimension of racial inequality. We see
the largest welfare gain for black households, and the smallest for white households. Looking
at the case where  = 1, the black welfare gain is 46 percent larger than the white one. The
Hispanic welfare gain is 22 percent larger. These differences grow modestly as we increase the
value of  . Since the welfare gain is linear in the monthly transitory variance, 2 , adjusting

for differences in income volatility across racial groups would likely cause these gaps to widen
even more.
         In Online Appendix C.2 we complement this statistical model using a structural lifecycle
model of consumption and saving. While the statistical model isolates the effect of the
passthrough of income volatility to consumption on welfare gains, a structural model also
allows us to explicitly incorporate the racial wealth gap in our calculation. We estimate
separate models for each racial group, choosing interest rates and borrowing constraints that
allow us to match the elasticities estimated in Section 3 and race-specific distributions of
liquid assets, as measured in the SCF. We then use these estimated parameters to simulate
behavior in the absence of transitory shocks, and compare the relative welfare gains across
racial groups. Similar to the case of our statistical model, we find that the welfare gain of
avoiding transitory income shocks is 50 percent larger for black households and 32 percent
larger for Hispanic households than it is for white households.




5         Conclusion
         In this paper we set out to estimate the consumption response to typical month-to-
month changes in income. To overcome issues of endogeneity, we leverage firm-wide changes
in monthly pay, instrumenting for a household's pay using the pay of all other co-workers.
    25
    Hai, Krueger and Postlewaite (2013) and De Nardi, Fella and Paz-Pardo (2019) document a significant
welfare gain from eliminating all income volatility (both temporary shocks and permanent shocks).


                                                  28
This type of income variation captures the most common sources of income variation for
households, such as changes in hours, bonuses and commissions, and seasonal employment.
This approach contrasts with standard identification strategies using unusual windfalls. We
estimate an average consumption elasticity of 0.23.
   Our relatively large data set allows us to precisely explore heterogeneity in the consump-
tion responses across household race and liquid wealth on hand. We find sizable differences
in consumption elasticities across racial groups. Black and Hispanic households respectively
have elasticities that are 50 and 20 percent larger than those of white households. We likewise
find a substantial role for liquid assets in driving heterogeneity in consumption responses.
Households with the lowest asset levels exhibit sizable consumption elasticities, while those
with the highest asset levels show little response to income variation. We then explore the
interplay between these two patterns. We again compare consumption responses across racial
groups, while controlling for the level of liquid assets on hand. We find that conditional on
liquid assets, the differences in consumption elasticities across racial groups decrease by fifty
to one hundred percent, depending on the specification.
   To better interpret the differences in consumption smoothing that we find, we quantify
the welfare implications of our results. We use a statistical model of consumption and income
to calculate the welfare gain of fully insulating a household from transitory income volatility.
The welfare gain from eliminating transitory shocks to income for black households are 46
to 56 percent higher than those of white households, while the gains for Hispanic households
are 22 to 32 percent higher than those of white households. Our modeling exercises therefore
mirror our empirical estimates: larger gaps in consumption elasticities translate into larger
welfare differentials.
   Our findings complement prior research in a number of ways. First, we introduce a novel
method of identifying individual-level race in administrative data sets by linking adminis-
trative bank data to publicly available voter registration data. Second, ours is one of a few
studies to leverage firm-wide changes in monthly pay as an instrument for income volatility,
thus identifying consumption responses to typical sources of income variation. We are then
able to identify month-to-month differences in consumption smoothing across racial groups.
Likewise, our data and identification strategy allows us to estimate differences in consump-
tion responses across liquid asset quantiles with a significantly high level of precision relative
to previous studies. This precision allows us, for example, to identify a substantial role for
liquid assets in statistically explaining differences in consumption elasticities across racial
groups. Our results therefore highlight a potential focus area when considering policy ap-
proaches to mitigating the impact of income volatility on household welfare and to reducing
inequality between racial groups.




                                               29
References
Aaronson, Daniel, Daniel A. Hartley, and Bhashkar Mazumder. 2017. "The Effects
 of the 1930s HOLC "Redlining" Maps." Social Science Research Network SSRN Scholarly
 Paper ID 3038733, Rochester, NY.

Abowd, John M., Francis Kramarz, and David N. Margolis. 1999. "High Wage
 Workers and High Wage Firms." Econometrica, 67(2): 251­333.

Addo, Fenaba R., and Daniel T. Lichter. 2013. "Marriage, Marital History, and Black
 ­ White Wealth Differentials Among Older Women." Journal of Marriage and Family,
 75(2): 342­362. _eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/jomf.12007.

Addo, Fenaba R., Jason N. Houle, and Daniel Simon. 2016. "Young, Black, and (Still)
 in the Red: Parental Wealth, Race, and Student Loan Debt." Race and social problems,
 8(1): 64­76.

Aiyagari, S. Rao. 1994. "Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving." The Quar-
 terly Journal of Economics, 109(3): 659­84.

Akee, Randall, Maggie R. Jones, and Sonya R. Porter. 2019. "Race Matters: In-
 come Shares, Income Inequality, and Income Mobility for All U.S. Races." Demography,
 56(3): 999­1021.

Akee, Randall, William Copeland, E. Jane Costello, John B Holbein, and Emilia
 Simeonova. 2018. "Family Income and the Intergenerational Transmission of Voting Be-
 havior: Evidence from an Income Intervention." National Bureau of Economic Research
 Working Paper 24770. Series: Working Paper Series.

Aliprantis, Dionissi, Daniel Carroll, and Eric R. Young. 2019. "The Dynamics of the
 Racial Wealth Gap." Social Science Research Network SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3467718,
 Rochester, NY.

Almaguer, Tomas. 2012. "Race, Racialization, and Latino Populations"." In Racial For-
 mation in the Twenty-First Century. University of California Press.

Altonji, Joseph G., and Ulrich Doraszelski. 2005. "The Role of Permanent Income and
 Demographics in Black/White Differences in Wealth." The Journal of Human Resources,
 40(1): 1­30.

Attanasio, Orazio P., and Nicola Pavoni. 2011. "Risk Sharing in Private Information
 Models With Asset Accumulation: Explaining the Excess Smoothness of Consumption."
 Econometrica, 79(4): 1027­1068. Publisher: Econometric Society.

Avery, Robert B., Kenneth P. Brevoort, and Glenn B. Canner. 2009. "Credit Scor-
 ing and Its Effects on the Availability and Affordability of Credit." Journal of Consumer
 Affairs, 43(3): 516­537.

Baicker, Katherine, and Amy Finkelstein. 2019. "The Impact of Medicaid Expansion on
 Voter Participation: Evidence from the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment." Quarterly
 Journal of Political Science, 14(4): 383­400. Publisher: Now Publishers, Inc.



                                           30
Baker, Scott R. 2018. "Debt and the Response to Household Income Shocks: Valida-
 tion and Application of Linked Financial Account Data." Journal of Political Economy,
 126(4): 1504­1557.

Baker, Scott R., and Constantine Yannelis. 2017. "Income Changes and Consumption:
 Evidence from the 2013 Federal Government Shutdown." Review of Economic Dynamics,
 23: 99­124.

Bank, Chase Consumer. 2019. "Chase Announces Major Branch Expansion in 2019."

Barsky, Robert, John Bound, Kerwin Kofi Charles, and Joseph P. Lupton. 2002.
 "Accounting for the Black-White Wealth Gap: A Nonparametric Approach." Journal of
 the American Statistical Association, 97(459): 663­673.

Bartlett, Robert, Adair Morse, Richard Stanton, and Nancy Wallace. 2019.
 "Consumer-Lending Discrimination in the FinTech Era." National Bureau of Economic
 Research Working Paper 25943. Series: Working Paper Series.

Baugh, Brian, Itzhak Ben-David, Hoonsuk Park, and Jonathan A Parker. 2018.
 "Asymmetric Consumption Smoothing." National Bureau of Economic Research Working
 Paper 25086. Series: Working Paper Series.

Bayer, Patrick, Fernando Ferreira, and Stephen L. Ross. 2018. "What Drives Racial
 and Ethnic Differences in High-Cost Mortgages? The Role of High-Risk Lenders." The
 Review of Financial Studies, 31(1): 175­205. Publisher: Oxford Academic.

Beatty, Timothy K. M., Laura Blow, Thomas F. Crossley, and Cormac O'Dea.
 2014. "Cash by any other name? Evidence on labeling from the UK Winter Fuel Payment."
 Journal of Public Economics, 118: 86­96.

Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. "Are Emily and Greg More
 Employable Than Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimina-
 tion." American Economic Review, 94(4): 991­1013.

Bhutta, Neil, and Aurel Hizmo. 2019. "Do Minorities Pay More for Mortgages?" Social
 Science Research Network SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3352876, Rochester, NY.

Biggs, Andrew, and Glenn Springstead. 2008. "Alternate Measures of Replacement
  Rates for Social Security Benefits and Retirement Income." Social Security Bulletin, 68(2).
  Library Catalog: www.ssa.gov.

Blau, Francine D., and John W. Graham. 1990. "Black-White Differences in Wealth
  and Asset Composition." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105(2): 321­339. Publisher:
  Oxford University Press.

Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri, and Ian Preston. 2008. "Consumption Inequality
  and Partial Insurance." American Economic Review, 98(5): 1887­1921.

Board, Federal Reserve. 2017. "The Fed - Changes in U.S. Family Finances from 2013 to
 2016: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances."

Bodkin, Ronald. 1959. "Windfall Income and Consumption." The American Economic
 Review, 49(4): 602­614.

                                             31
Bound, John, Charles Brown, Greg J. Duncan, and Willard L. Rodgers. 1994.
 "Evidence on the Validity of Cross-Sectional and Longitudinal Labor Market Data." Jour-
 nal of Labor Economics, 12(3): 345­368. Publisher: [University of Chicago Press, Society
 of Labor Economists, NORC at the University of Chicago].

Browne, Robert S. 1974. "Wealth Distribution and its Impact on Minorities." The Review
 of Black Political Economy, 4(4): 27­38. Publisher: SAGE Publications Inc.

Campbell, John Y., and João F. Cocco. 2015. "A Model of Mortgage Default." The
 Journal of Finance, 70(4): 1495­1554.

Card, David, and Jesse Rothstein. 2007. "Racial segregation and the black-white test
 score gap." Journal of Public Economics, 91(11-12): 2158­2184.

Carroll, Chris, Nathan Palmer, Matthew N. White, Jacqueline Kazil, and David
 Low. 2018. "econ-ark/HARK: 0.8.0 (Version pre)."

Carroll, Christopher D. 1997. "Buffer-Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent Income
 Hypothesis." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(1): 1­55.

Carroll, Christopher D., and Andrew A. Samwick. 1997. "The nature of precautionary
 wealth." Journal of Monetary Economics, 40(1): 41­71. Publisher: Elsevier.

Cascio, Elizabeth U., and Ebonya Washington. 2014. "Valuing the Vote: The Redis-
 tribution of Voting Rights and State Funds following the Voting Rights Act of 1965." The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1): 379­433. Publisher: Oxford Academic.

Center, Pew Hispanic. 2013. "Diverse Origins: The Nation's 14 Largest Hispanic-Origin
 Groups."

Cesarini, David, Erik Lindqvist, Robert Östling, and Björn Wallace. 2016. "Wealth,
 Health, and Child Development: Evidence from Administrative Data on Swedish Lottery
 Players." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(2): 687­738. Publisher: Oxford Aca-
 demic.

Charles, Kerwin Kofi, and Erik Hurst. 2002. "The Transition To Home Ownership And
 The Black-White Wealth Gap." The Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(2): 281­297.
 Publisher: MIT Press.

Chen, M. Keith, Kareem Haggag, Devin G Pope, and Ryne Rohla. 2019. "Racial
 Disparities in Voting Wait Times: Evidence from Smartphone Data." National Bureau of
 Economic Research Working Paper 26487. Series: Working Paper Series.

Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Maggie R Jones, and Sonya R Porter. 2018.
 "Race and Economic Opportunity in the United States: An Intergenerational Perspective."
 National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 24441.

Chiteji, N., and Darrick Hamilton. 2002. "Family connections and the black-white
 wealth gap among middle-class families." The Review of Black Political Economy, 30(1): 9­
 28. Publisher: Springer.

Choi, HwaJung, Kathleen McGarry, and Robert F. Schoeni. 2016. "Consumption
 and the extended family." Economics Letters, 140: 34­38.

                                           32
Collins, Chuck, Dedrick Asante-Muhammed, Josh Hoxie, and Emanuel Nieves.
 2017. "The Road to Zero Wealth."

Deaton, Angus. 1991. "Saving and Liquidity Constraints." Econometrica, 59(5): 1221­48.

Deaton, Angus, and Christina Paxson. 1994. "Intertemporal Choice and Inequality."
 Journal of Political Economy, 102(3): 437­467. Publisher: University of Chicago Press.

De Giorgi, Giacomo, Anders Frederiksen, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2020. "Consumption
 Network Effects." The Review of Economic Studies, 87(1): 130­163.

De Nardi, Mariacristina, Giulio Fella, and Gonzalo Paz-Pardo. 2019. "Nonlinear
 Household Earnings Dynamics, Self-Insurance, and Welfare." Journal of the European Eco-
 nomic Association.

Dobbie, Will, Andres Liberman, Daniel Paravisini, and Vikram Pathania. 2018.
 "Measuring Bias in Consumer Lending." National Bureau of Economic Research Working
 Paper 24953. Series: Working Paper Series.

Dobbie, Will, and Roland G. Fryer Jr. 2011. "Are High-Quality Schools Enough to In-
 crease Achievement among the Poor? Evidence from the Harlem Children's Zone." Amer-
 ican Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(3): 158­187.

Du Bois, W. E. B. 1868-1963. 1935. Black reconstruction; an essay toward a history
 of the part which black folk played in the attempt to reconstruct democracy in America,
 1860-1880. Harcourt, Brace and Company.

Etheridge, Ben. 2015. "A test of the household income process using consumption and
  wealth data." European Economic Review, 78(C): 129­157. Publisher: Elsevier.

Fagereng, Andreas, Martin B. Holm, and Gisle J. Natvik. 2018. "MPC Heterogeneity
  and Household Balance Sheets." CESifo Group Munich 7134.

Farrell, Diana, Fiona Greig, and Chenxi Yu. 2019. "Weathering Volatility 2.0A
  Monthly Stress Test to Guide Savings." JPMorgan Chase Instiute.

Farrell, Diana, Fiona Greig, Chris Wheat, Peter Ganong, Damon Jones, and
  Pascal Noel. 2020. "Racial Gaps in Financial Outcomes: Big Data Evidence." JPMorgan
  Chase Instiute.

Fisher, Jonathan, David Johnson, Timothy M. Smeeding, and Jeffrey P. Thomp-
  son. 2019. "Estimating the Marginal Propensity to Consume Using the Distributions of
  Income, Consumption and Wealth." Social Science Research Network SSRN Scholarly Pa-
  per ID 3374467, Rochester, NY.

Friedrich, Benjamin, Lisa Laun, Costas Meghir, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2019. "Earn-
  ings Dynamics and Firm-Level Shocks." National Bureau of Economic Research Working
  Paper 25786.

Fryer, Roland, Devah Pager, and Jörg L. Spenkuch. 2013. "Racial Disparities in Job
  Finding and Offered Wages." Journal of Law and Economics, 56(3): 633­689. Publisher:
  University of Chicago Press.


                                          33
Fuster, Andreas, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, T. Ramadorai, and Ansgar Walther.
  2018. "Predictably Unequal? The Effects of Machine Learning on Credit Markets." Social
  Science Research Network SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3072038, Rochester, NY.

Ganong, Peter, and Pascal Noel. 2019. "Consumer Spending during Unemployment:
 Positive and Normative Implications." American Economic Review, 109(7): 2383­2424.

Gelman, Michael, Shachar Kariv, Matthew D. Shapiro, Dan Silverman, and
 Steven Tadelis. 2014. "Harnessing naturally occurring data to measure the response of
 spending to income." Science, 345(6193): 212­215.

Gelman, Michael, Shachar Kariv, Matthew D. Shapiro, Dan Silverman, and
 Steven Tadelis. 2018. "How individuals respond to a liquidity shock: Evidence from the
 2013 government shutdown." Journal of Public Economics, 103917.

Grigsby, John, Erik Hurst, and Ahu Yildirmaz. 2019. "Aggregate Nominal Wage Ad-
 justments: New Evidence from Administrative Payroll Data." National Bureau of Economic
 Research Working Paper 25628.

Grodsky, Eric, and Devah Pager. 2001. "The Structure of Disadvantage: Individual and
 Occupational Determinants of the Black-White Wage Gap." American Sociological Review,
 66(4): 542­567. Publisher: [American Sociological Association, Sage Publications, Inc.].

Gross, Tal, Matthew J. Notowidigdo, and Jialan Wang. 2020. "The Marginal Propen-
 sity to Consume over the Business Cycle." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics.

Guiso, Luigi, Luigi Pistaferri, and Fabiano Schivardi. 2005. "Insurance within the
 Firm." Journal of Political Economy, 113(5): 1054­1087.

Guvenen, Fatih. 2007. "Learning Your Earning: Are Labor Income Shocks Really Very
 Persistent?" American Economic Review, 97(3): 687­712.

Guvenen, Fatih, and Anthony A. Smith. 2014. "Inferring Labor Income Risk and
 Partial Insurance From Economic Choices." Econometrica, 82(6): 2085­2129. _eprint:
 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.3982/ECTA9446.

Guvenen, Fatih, Fatih Karahan, Serdar Ozkan, and Jae Song. 2015. "What Do Data
 on Millions of U.S. Workers Reveal about Life-Cycle Earnings Risk?" National Bureau of
 Economic Research Working Paper 20913. Series: Working Paper Series.

Hai, Rong, Dirk Krueger, and Andrew Postlewaite. 2013. "On the Welfare Cost
 of Consumption Fluctuations in the Presence of Memorable Goods." National Bureau of
 Economic Research Working Paper 19386. Series: Working Paper Series.

Hamilton, Darrick, and William Darity. 2010. "Can `Baby Bonds' Eliminate the Racial
 Wealth Gap in Putative Post-Racial America?" The Review of Black Political Economy,
 37(3): 207­216.

Hannagan, Anthony, and Jonathan Morduch. 2015. "Income Gains and Month-to-
 Month Income Volatility: Household evidence from the US Financial Diaries." NYU Wag-
 ner Research Paper.



                                           34
Hardy, Bradley, Jonathan Morduch, William Darity, and Darrick Hamilton. 2018.
 "Wealth Inequality, Income Volatility, and Race." working paper.
Hastings, Justine, and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2018. "How Are SNAP Benefits Spent? Evi-
 dence from a Retail Panel." American Economic Review, 108(12): 3493­3540.
Hausman, Joshua K. 2016. "Fiscal Policy and Economic Recovery: The Case of the 1936
 Veterans' Bonus." American Economic Review, 106(4): 1100­1143.
Havranek, Tomas, and Anna Sokolova. 2020. "Do consumers really follow a rule of
 thumb? Three thousand estimates from 144 studies say "probably not"." Review of Eco-
 nomic Dynamics, 35: 97­122.
Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2008. "Insur-
 ance and opportunities: A welfare analysis of labor market risk." Journal of Monetary
 Economics, 55(3): 501­525.
Hersh, Eitan D. 2015. Hacking the Electorate: How Campaigns Perceive Voters. Cambridge
 University Press.
Jackson, Brandon A., and John R. Reynolds. 2013. "The Price of Opportunity:
  Race, Student Loan Debt, and College Achievement." Sociological Inquiry, 83(3): 335­368.
  _eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/soin.12012.
Jappelli, Tullio, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2014. "Fiscal Policy and MPC Heterogeneity."
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 6(4): 107­136.
Johnson, David S, Jonathan A Parker, and Nicholas S Souleles. 2006. "House-
  hold Expenditure and the Income Tax Rebates of 2001." American Economic Review,
  96(5): 1589­1610.
Juhn, Chinhui, Kristin McCue, Holly Monti, and Brooks Pierce. 2018a. "Firm-level
  Shocks and the Volatility of Worker Earnings within Megafirms." Working Paper.
Juhn, Chinhui, Kristin McCue, Holly Monti, and Brooks Pierce. 2018b. "Firm Per-
  formance and the Volatility of Worker Earnings." Journal of Labor Economics, 36(S1): S99­
  S131.
Kaplan, Greg, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2010. "How Much Consumption Insurance
 beyond Self-Insurance?" American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(4): 53­87.
Kaplan, Greg, and Giovanni L Violante. 2014. "A Model of the Consumption Response
 to Fiscal Stimulus Payments." Econometrica, 82(4): 1199­1239.
Kempf, Elisabeth, and Margarita Tsoutsoura. 2018. "Partisan Professionals: Evidence
 from Credit Rating Analysts." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
 25292. Series: Working Paper Series.
Keys, Benjamin J, Neale Mahoney, and Hanbin Yang. 2020. "What Determines Con-
 sumer Financial Distress? Place- and Person-Based Factors." National Bureau of Economic
 Research Working Paper 26808. Series: Working Paper Series.
Kijakazi, Kilolo, Karen E. Smith, and Charmaine Runes. 2019. "African American
 Economic Security and the Role of Social Security." Library Catalog: www.urban.org.

                                            35
Kline, Patrick, Neviana Petkova, Heidi Williams, and Owen Zidar. 2019. "Who
 Profits from Patents? Rent-Sharing at Innovative Firms." The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 134(3): 1343­1404.

Koustas, Dmitri. 2018. "Consumption Insurance and Multiple Jobs : Evidence from
 Rideshare Drivers." working paper.

Kreinin, Mordechai E. 1961. "Windfall Income and Consumption: Additional Evidence."
 The American Economic Review, 51(3): 388­390.

Kueng, Lorenz. 2018. "Excess Sensitivity of High-Income Consumers." The Quarterly Jour-
 nal of Economics, 133(4): 1693­1751.

Lachowska, Marta, Alexandre Mas, Raffaele D Saggio, and Stephen A Wood-
  bury. 2020. "Do Firm Effects Drift? Evidence from Washington Administrative Data."
  National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 26653.

Laibson, David, Andrea Repetto, and Jeremy Tobacman. 2007. "Estimating Dis-
  count Functions with Consumption Choices over the Lifecycle." National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research Working Paper 13314.

Lamadon, Thibaut, Magne Mogstad, and Bradley Setzler. 2019. "Imperfect Compe-
  tition, Compensating Differentials and Rent Sharing in the U.S. Labor Market." National
  Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 25954.

Lemieux, Thomas, W. Bentley MacLeod, and Daniel Parent. 2009. "Performance
  Pay and Wage Inequality." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(1): 1­49.

Lian, Chen. 2019. "Consumption with Imperfect Perception of Wealth." working paper.

Liebler, Carolyn A., Sonya R. Porter, Leticia E. Fernandez, James M. Noon,
  and Sharon R. Ennis. 2017. "America's Churning Races: Race and Ethnicity Response
  Changes Between Census 2000 and the 2010 Census." Demography, 54(1): 259­284.

Lucas, Robert E. 1987. Models of business cycles. Oxford [Oxfordshire] ; New York, NY :
 B. Blackwell.

Lui, Meizhu, Barbara Robles, Betsy Leondar-Wright, Rose Brewer, and Rebecca
 Adamson. 2006. The Color of Wealth: The Story Behind the U.S. Racial Wealth Divide.
 . Copyright 2006 edition ed., New York:The New Press.

McKernan, Signe-Mary, Caroline Ratcliffe, Margaret Simms, and Sisi Zhang.
 2014. "Do Racial Disparities in Private Transfers Help Explain the Racial Wealth Gap?
 New Evidence From Longitudinal Data." Demography, 51(3): 949­974.

Meghir, Costas, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2011. "Earnings, Consumption and Life Cycle
 Choices." Elsevier Handbook of Labor Economics.

Misra, Kanishka, and Paolo Surico. 2014. "Consumption, Income Changes, and Het-
 erogeneity: Evidence from Two Fiscal Stimulus Programs." American Economic Journal:
 Macroeconomics, 6(4): 84­106.



                                           36
Mitchell, Olivia S., and John W. R. Phillips. 2006. "Social Security Replacement Rates
 for Alternative Earnings Benchmarks." Social Science Research Network SSRN Scholarly
 Paper ID 1094839, Rochester, NY.

Olafsson, Arna, and Michaela Pagel. 2018. "The Liquid Hand-to-Mouth: Evidence from
 Personal Finance Management Software." The Review of Financial Studies, 31(11): 4398­
 4446.

Oliver, Melvin L., and Thomas M. Shapiro. 2006. Black Wealth, White Wealth: A New
 Perspective on Racial Inequality. Taylor & Francis. Google-Books-ID: 4ksJuX02DNwC.

Parker, Jonathan A. 2017. "Why Don't Households Smooth Consumption? Evidence from
 a $25 Million Experiment." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 9(4): 153­183.

Parker, Jonathan A., Nicholas S. Souleles, David S. Johnson, and Robert McClel-
 land. 2013. "Consumer spending and the economic stimulus payments of 2008." American
 Economic Review, 103(6): 2530­53.

Parker, Kim, Julia Menasce Horowitz, Rich Morin, and Mark Hugo Lopez. 2015.
 "Multiracial in America: Proud, Diverse and Growing in Numbers."

Patterson, Christina. 2019. "The Matching Multiplier and the Amplification of Reces-
 sions." Society for Economic Dynamics 95.

Pellegrini, Frank. 2001. "Breaking News, Analysis, Politics, Blogs, News Photos, Video,
 Tech Reviews." Time.

Perry, Andre, Jonathan Rothwell, and David Harshbarger. 2018. "The devaluation
 of assets in black neighborhoods." Library Catalog: www.brookings.edu.

Rothstein, Jesse, and Nathan Wozny. 2013. "Permanent Income and the Black-White
 Test Score Gap." Journal of Human Resources, 48(3): 510­544. Publisher: University of
 Wisconsin Press.

Rothstein, Richard. 2017. The Color of Law: A Forgotten History of How Our Government
 Segregated America. . 1 edition ed., New York ; London:Liveright.

Scholz, John Karl, and Kara Levine. 2003. "U.S. Black-White Wealth Inequality: A
  Survey." working paper.

Shapiro, Thomas M. 2017. Toxic Inequality: How America's Wealth Gap Destroys Mobil-
  ity, Deepens the Racial Divide, and Threatens Our Future. . 1 edition ed., New York:Basic
  Books.

Shea, John. 1995. "Union Contracts and the Life-Cycle/Permanent-Income Hypothesis."
  American Economic Review, 85(1): 186­200.

Smith, James P. 1995. "Racial and Ethnic Differences in Wealth in the Health and Retire-
 ment Study." The Journal of Human Resources, 30: S158­S183. Publisher: [University of
 Wisconsin Press, Board of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System].

Souleles, Nicholas S. 1999. "The Response of Household Consumption to Income Tax
  Refunds." American Economic Review, 89(4): 947­958.

                                            37
Squires, Munir. 2016. "Kinship taxation as a constraint on microenterprise growth." PhD
  diss. The London School of Economics and Political Science (LSE).

Stein, Luke C. D., and Constantine Yannelis. 2019. "Financial Inclusion, Human
  Capital, and Wealth Accumulation: Evidence from the Freedman's Savings Bank." Social
  Science Research Network SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3302996, Rochester, NY.

Thaler, Richard. 1985. "Mental Accounting and Consumer Choice." Marketing Science,
 4(3): 199­214.

Thaler, Richard H. 1990. "Anomalies: Saving, Fungibility, and Mental Accounts." Journal
 of Economic Perspectives, 4(1): 193­205.

Thompson, Jeffrey P., and Gustavo Suarez. 2015. "Updating the Racial Wealth Gap."
 Social Science Research Network SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3072923, Rochester, NY.

Townsend, Robert M. 1994. "Risk and Insurance in Village India." Econometrica,
  62(3): 539­591. Publisher: [Wiley, Econometric Society].

Zedlewski, Sheila R, and Austin Nichols. 2012. "What Happens to Families' Income
  and Poverty after Unemployment?" Urban Institute.

Zeldes, Stephen. 1989. "Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical Investiga-
  tion." Journal of Political Economy, 97(2): 305­46.




                                          38
                 Figure 1: Economic and Demographic Variables by Race

                                  (a) Income and Asset Gaps




                                        (b) Demographics




Note: Household income, checking account balances, and liquid assets are measured using medians.
Data sources: Public use household income, age and gender are from the 2015-2017 Current Population
Survey. Public use checking account balances and liquid assets are from the Survey of Consumer Finances
for 2016 and the Health and Retirement Study. See footnote 14 for details. Bank sample is the matched
Chase-voter data described in the text.
                 Figure 2: Consumption Sensitivity to Payroll Fluctuations

                                             (a) First Stage




                                           (b) Reduced Form




                                            (c) Second Stage




Note: The top two panels in this figure show the effect of changes in firm pay on labor income (panel (a))
and nondurable consumption (panel (b)) in the matched Chase-voter data. The x-axis shows a dot for each
of 20 vingtiles of the change in log pay of all other workers at the same firm. The y-axis shows conditional
means of the change in log labor income and the change in log nondurable consumption. Panel (c) shows an
instrumental variables interpretation of the first two panels, where the x-axis is the change in labor income
(instrumented using the change in pay of all other workers at the same firm) and the y-axis is the change
in nondurable consumption. The slope in panel (c) is the elasticity of consumption with respect to income,
which is ^ from equation (5). See Section 3.3 for details.

                                                     40
              Figure 3: Consumption Sensitivity by Race: Black and White




Note: This figure shows the effect of changes in labor income on nondurable consumption by race in the
matched Chase-voter data. The x-axis stratifies the sample into 20 vingtiles of the predicted change in log
own pay, where the omitted instrument is the change in pay of all other workers at the same firm. The y-axis
shows conditional means of the change in log nondurable consumption for black and white households. This
is the second stage plot from Figure 2c, shown separately by race. See Section 3.4 for details.




                                                    41
   Figure 4: Consumption Sensitivity by Race: Hispanic and Non-Hispanic White




Note: This figure shows the effect of changes in labor income on nondurable consumption by race in the
matched Chase-voter data. The x-axis stratifies the sample into 20 vingtiles of the predicted change in log
own pay, where the omitted instrument is the change in pay of all other workers at the same firm. The y-axis
shows conditional means of the change in log nondurable consumption for Hispanic and non-Hispanic white
households. This is the second stage plot from Figure 2c, shown separately by Hispanicity. See Section 3.4
for details.




                                                    42
                  Figure 5: Consumption Sensitivity by Asset Buffer Decile

                                            (a) Lowest Decile




                                            (b) Highest Decile




Note: This figure shows the effect of changes in labor income on nondurable consumption by asset buffer in
the matched Chase-voter data. The x-axis stratifies the sample into 20 vingtiles of the predicted change in log
own pay, where the omitted instrument is the change in pay of all other workers at the same firm. The y-axis
shows conditional means of the change in log nondurable consumption separately by asset buffer decile. This
is the second stage plot from Figure 2c, shown separately by asset buffer decile. We construct asset buffer
deciles as the ratio of lagged assets to lagged nondurable consumption. Thus, households that are classified
as high assets are a mix of households with permanently high assets and households with temporarily low
consumption in prior months. The inclusion of this second group means that Figure 5b shows increasing
consumption on average, across the distribution of pay shocks. See Section 3.5 for details.




                                                      43
                Figure 6: Marginal Propensity to Consume by Asset Buffer




Note: This figure compares the estimates of heterogeneity by assets in the passthrough of income shocks to
consumption. Parker et al. (2013), Fagereng, Holm and Natvik (2018) and Kueng (2018) use terciles, quar-
tiles, and quintiles respectively. To enable comparability with these prior papers, we calculate the marginal
propensity to consume (instead of the elasticity of consumption to income) using their respective bin cutoffs.
Our paper, Parker et al. (2013), and Kueng (2018) measure the MPC on nondurables. Fagereng, Holm and
Natvik (2018) measures the MPC on total consumption. See Section 3.5 for details.




                                                     44
       Figure 7: Racial Inequality in Consumption Smoothing and Role of Assets

                                           (a) Firm Pay Shocks




                                            (b) Unemployment




Note: This figure illustrates regression coefficients from Table 2 and 3. Within each race, the figure shows three
bars. The left-most dark bar shows the difference in the elasticity of between black or Hispanic households
and white households. The middle lighter bar shows the difference when controlling for observed checking
account balance. The right-most light bar shows the difference when controlling for liquid assets, which are
imputed using checking account balance and race. This imputation addresses the problem that for a given
level of checking assets, black and Hispanic households have fewer liquid assets than white households. See
Section 3.6 for details on firm pay fluctuations and Section 3.7 for details on unemployment.




                                                       45
               Figure 8: Effect of Unemployment on Consumption by Race

                        (a) Labor Income + Unemployment Insurance




                                    (b) Nondurable Spending




Note: This figure shows the evolution of income around unemployment in the matched Chase-voter data.
Unemployment is measured using the household's first receipt of an unemployment insurance (UI) check. See
Section 3.7 for details.




                                                   46
                        Table 1: Summary Statistics for Analysis Sample
 Variable                      Race        Mean     Median    Std. Dev   N Households     N Household-Months
 Labor Income                  White      3,531.2   2,700.6    8,884.1     351,208            10,266,939
                               Black      2,242.0   1,864.3    2,489.5     183,601             4,949,641
                               Hispanic   2,674.5   2,178.3    3,359.6     162,301             4,280,128
 Coworker Pay                  White      2,986.6   2,746.3    1,813.6
                               Black      2,700.0   2,544.4    1,456.9
                               Hispanic   2,828.3   2,665.1    1,804.0
 Non Durable Consumption       White      3,229.0   2,453.8    6,692.2
                               Black      2,377.0   1,909.4    2,394.9
                               Hispanic   2,534.9   1,981.2    3,012.6
 Checking Assets               White      7,276.1   2,271.9   25,671.6
                               Black      2,509.8    837.0     8,734.4
                               Hispanic   3,459.5   1,204.7   10,604.9
 Buffer Ratio                  White        15.7      0.8      3,921.4
                               Black        4.1       0.4      1,057.4
                               Hispanic      9.4      0.6      2,444.1

Note: This table shows summary statistics for the analysis sample in our coworker pay design. See Section 3
for details. This sample, which only includes observations with at least ten months of income and consumption
history, is a bit over one-third of the size of the entire sample described in Section 2. Buffer ratio is the ratio
of checking assets to nondurable consumption.




                                                        47
                                             Table 2: Impact of Income on Consumption by Assets and Race


                                                                            Dependent Variable:  Log Non Durable Consumption
                                                    (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)
      Log Income                                   0.120          0.091          0.231          0.200          0.233           0.217          0.234          0.237
                                                  (0.003)        (0.002)        (0.009)        (0.009)        (0.009)         (0.008)        (0.009)        (0.008)

     ( Log Income) x Black                                        0.080                         0.092                          0.050                         0.010
                                                                 (0.004)                       (0.006)                        (0.005)                       (0.005)

     ( Log Income) x Hispanic                                     0.040                         0.043                          0.022                        -0.024
                                                                 (0.003)                       (0.008)                        (0.007)                       (0.007)

     ( Log Income) x Checking                                                                                 -0.252          -0.233
                                                                                                              (0.009)         (0.008)
48




     ( Log Income) x Liquid(Imputed)                                                                                                         -0.255         -0.258
                                                                                                                                             (0.010)        (0.009)

     OLS/IV                                        OLS            OLS             IV             IV              IV             IV             IV             IV
     Black and Hispanic Dummies                                   Yes                            Yes                           Yes                           Yes
     Asset Rank Control                                                                                         Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
     Observations                               19,278,989     19,278,989     19,200,198     19,200,198      19,200,198     19,200,198     19,200,198     19,200,198
     Adjusted R2                                  0.009          0.009          0.001          0.002           0.005          0.005          0.005          0.005


     Note: This table shows estimates of the elasticity of consumption with respect to income (     ^). Columns (1) and (2) show OLS estimates of the effect of income
     on consumption using equations (1) and (2) respectively. Columns (3)-(8) show IV estimates using equations (6) and (5). Standard errors are clustered at the
     firm level. Columns (5) and (6) control for a narrow measure of assets: checking account balance. Asset variables are parameterized as AssetRank/N - 0.5, so
     the variable is scaled from -0.5 for the lowest asset household to 0.5 for the highest asset household. Columns (7) and (8) control for liquid assets. Liquid assets
     are imputed using checking account balance and race. The IV specifications control for five lags of the change in coworker pay. See Section 3.6 for details.
        Table 3: Impact of Unemployment on Consumption by Assets and Race


                                             Dependent Variable:  Log Non Durable Consumption
                                             (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)
 Log Income                                0.176       0.153      0.177       0.160       0.178      0.171
                                          (0.006)     (0.008)    (0.006)     (0.009)     (0.006)    (0.009)

( Log Income) x Black                                  0.049                  0.031                  0.011
                                                      (0.016)                (0.016)                (0.017)

( Log Income) x Hispanic                               0.041                  0.032                  0.010
                                                      (0.014)                (0.014)                (0.015)

( Log Income) x Checking                                         -0.111      -0.106
                                                                 (0.020)     (0.021)

( Log Income) x Liquid(Imputed)                                                          -0.113     -0.116
                                                                                         (0.021)    (0.023)

OLS/IV                                       IV         IV          IV         IV          IV          IV
Black and Hispanic Dummies                              Yes                   Yes                     Yes
Asset Rank Control                                                 Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
Observations                               65,811     65,811      65,811     65,811      65,811      65,811
Adjusted R2                                0.170      0.179       0.184      0.198       0.177       0.198


Note: This table shows IV estimates of the elasticity of consumption with respect to income using the
unemployment design in equations (8) and (9). Columns (5) and (6) control for a narrow measure of assets:
checking account balance. Asset variables are parameterized as AssetRank/N - 0.5, so the variable is scaled
from -0.5 for the lowest asset household to 0.5 for the highest asset household. Columns (7) and (8) control for
liquid assets. Liquid assets are imputed using checking account balance and race. See Section 3.7 for details.




                                                      49
                  Table 4: Welfare Gain of Eliminating Transitory Shocks
                                                                                                      2
                                                            Welfare gain:          +  2 ( - 1)       2

                   Consumption              Monthly
                    elasticity of          transitory       Coefficient of relative risk aversion
                transitory shocks:        variance:   2     =1 =2 =3                      =4

   Black                 0.292                 0.16         2.27%    2.93%     3.59%         4.25%
   Hispanic              0.243                 0.16         1.89%    2.34%     2.80%         3.26%
   White                 0.200                 0.16         1.55%    1.86%     2.17%         2.48%

Note: This table conducts an exercise in the spirit of Lucas (1987) by calculating the welfare gain from
eliminating transitory income shocks. The gain is expressed as a fraction of lifetime consumption. The
transitory elasticity  is from column (4) of Table 2. The variance of monthly shocks is from Farrell, Greig
and Yu (2019). See Section 4 for details.




                                                    50
     Wealth, Race, and Consumption Smoothing of
      Typical Income Shocks ­ Online Appendix

 Peter Ganong, Damon Jones, Pascal Noel, Diana Farrell, Fiona Greig, and Chris Wheat




Contents

A Appendix Figures and Tables                                                                1

B Matching bank and voter records                                                            24
  B.1 Matching algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     24
  B.2 Quality of matches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   24

C Notes on welfare calculations                                                              26
  C.1 Derivation of formula for statistical welfare gain  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      26
  C.2 Structural Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   27
A     Appendix Figures and Tables

                      Figure 1: Assets and Checking Account Balances
                                         (a) Financial Assets




                                           (b) Liquid Assets




Notes: We define primary checking account balance as the sum of balances at the institution that respondents
"use the most" for checking. We stratify the sample into 20 equally-sized groups by race and show mean
assets for each bin.
Source: 2010, 2013 and 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances



                                                     1
          Figure 2: Availability of Public Race Data and Chase Bank Presence




Source: Bank presence is measured using the bank's 2017 footprint (Chase Consumer Bank 2019). The set of
eight states with race and Hispanicity data is from Hersh (2015). Pennsylvania's voter registration form also
asks for race, but the variable is rarely populated in the voter file.




                                                     2
                               Figure 3: Share of Voters Matched




Notes: This figure shows the share of registered voters that have been matched to Chase bank accounts.
Figure 4: Distribution by Race ­ National versus Sample Frame versus Bank Sample

                                        (a) Income Distribution




                                          (b) Age Distribution




Notes: This figure shows the distribution of income and age in the US as a whole (blue), in a representative
sample of banked households in the 3 states (green), and in the bank sample (red). The cutoff points for the
bins are chosen to capture the quintiles of the national, race-specific distributions. Thus, by construction, the
blue bars are all equal to 20 percent. These bars are included to ease comparison to the green and red bars.
Public Use Source: Current Population Survey (CPS) for 2012, 2014, and 2016. Banked status is measured
using the CPS Unbanked/Underbanked supplement. Household income is taken from the 2013, 2015, and
2017 CPS Annual Social and Economic Supplement where it is measured for the prior calendar year (2012,
2014, 2016). Income is inflated to 2016 dollars using CPI-U.




                                                       4
                   Figure 5: Local Race and Hispanicity Distributions

                                    (a) Share Black




                                   (b) Share Hispanic




Source: 2010 US Census




                                           5
           Figure 6: Hispanic origin in 3 state sample frame compared to US




Source: 2018 American Community Survey 1-year estimates, Table B03001.




                                                 6
            Figure 7: Financial Vulnerability ­ National and in Sample Frame

                         (a) Share Ever Behind on Bills in Last Year




                             (b) Share with no Emergency Savings




Notes: The questions are "Often times, households find that they are not able to keep up with their bills.
Over the last 12 months, was there a time when (you/ or someone else in your household) fell behind on bill
payments?" and "Did (you/ or anyone in your household) set aside any money in the past 12 months that
could be used for unexpected expenses or emergencies? I'm only asking about funds that could be easily spent
if necessary, and am not asking about retirement or other long-term savings."
Source: Current Population Survey (CPS), June 2015 and June 2017 Unbanked/Underbanked CPS supple-
ments.



                                                     7
                      Figure 8: Consumption Sensitivity by Race (OLS)

                   (a) All                                                      (b) White




                  (c) Black                                                   (d) Hispanic




Note: This figure shows Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) estimates of the effect of changes in income on changes
in consumption (equations (1) and (2)). The x-axis shows vingtiles of the change in individual pay. The y-axis
shows conditional means of the change in consumption. The slope of the line is the elasticity of consumption
with respect to income. Panel (a) shows the pooled sample, panel (b) shows white households, panel (c) shows
black households, and panel (d) shows Hispanic households. See Section 3.1 for details.




                                                      8
                          Figure 9: Distribution of Firm Pay Shocks




Note: This figure shows a histogram of deviations of firm-wide pay per worker in a given month relative to
the firm's median pay per worker across all months. To increase precision, the sample only includes firms
with at least 100 employees in every month. Differences are winsorized at +/- $2,000. The average positive
deviation is $396 and the average negative deviation is -$227.




                                                    9
                             Figure 10: Pre-trends in Firm Pay Shock




Note: This figure shows the evolution of labor income prior to a firm pay shock. Across all panels, the x-axis
plots vingtiles of the change in residualized coworker pay from t - 1 to t. The y-axis plots conditional means
of the change in pay from t - 2 to t in the top-left panel, t - 2 to t - 1 in the top-middle panel, t - 2 to t - 2
(which is mechanically equal to zero) in the top-right panel, t - 2 to t - 3 in the bottom-left panel, t - 2 to
t - 6 in the bottom-middle panel, and t - 2 to t - 6 in the bottom-right panel.




                                                       10
                             Figure 11: Persistence of Firm Pay Shock




Note: This figure shows the evolution of labor income after a firm pay shock. Across all panels, the x-axis
plots vingtiles of the change in residualized coworker pay from t - 1 to t. The y-axis plots conditional means
of the change in pay from t - 2 to t in the top-left panel, t - 2 to t + 1 in the top-middle panel, t - 2 to t + 2
in the top-right panel, t - 2 to t + 3 in the bottom-left panel, t - 2 to t + 6 in the bottom-middle panel, and
t - 2 to t + 10 in the bottom-right panel.




                                                       11
             Figure 12: Standard Error of MPC Estimates in Prior Literature




Notes: Havranek and Sokolova (2020) review 246 estimates of the MPC for nondurables. This figure plots
the distribution of standard errors for MPC estimates in their literature review. The vertical bar at one cent
reflects the standard error of our preferred MPC for nondurables from Section 3.3.




                                                     12
              Figure 13: Pre-trends in Consumption Prior to Firm Pay Shock




Note: This figure shows the evolution of consumption prior to a firm pay shock. Across all panels, the x-axis
plots vingtiles of the change in residualized coworker pay from t - 1 to t. The y-axis plots conditional means
of the change in consumption from t - 2 to t in the top-left panel, t - 2 to t - 1 in the top-middle panel, t - 2
to t - 2 (which is mechanically equal to zero) in the top-right panel, t - 2 to t - 3 in the bottom-left panel,
t - 2 to t - 6 in the bottom-middle panel, and t - 2 to t - 6 in the bottom-right panel.




                                                       13
               Figure 14: Persistence of Consumption After Firm Pay Shocks




Note: This figure shows the evolution of consumption after a firm pay shock. Across all panels, the x-axis
plots vingtiles of the change in residualized coworker pay from t - 1 to t. The y-axis plots conditional means
of the change in pay from t - 2 to t in the top-left panel, t - 2 to t + 1 in the top-middle panel, t - 2 to t + 2
in the top-right panel, t - 2 to t + 3 in the bottom-left panel, t - 2 to t + 6 in the bottom-middle panel, and
t - 2 to t + 10 in the bottom-right panel.




                                                       14
                                         Table 1: Relation of Checking Balances and Liquid Assets


                                                                           Dependent variable:
                                                            Liquid (broad)                   Liquid (narrow)           Financial
                                                (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)                (5)
            Black                               0.017           -0.685            -0.743             -0.359             -0.805
                                               (0.122)           (0.023)           (0.022)            (0.014)            (0.023)

            Hispanic                          -0.162            -0.810            -0.862             -0.470             -1.283
                                               (0.134)           (0.025)           (0.024)            (0.015)            (0.024)

            White x Log(checking)               1.103
                                               (0.006)
15




            Black x Log(checking)               1.005
                                               (0.016)

            Hispanic x Log(checking)            1.013
                                               (0.017)

            Log(checking)                                         1.083
                                                                 (0.005)

            Constant                            0.755             0.912             1.548              1.194              2.905
                                               (0.048)           (0.043)           (0.009)            (0.006)            (0.009)

            Observations                      46,637            46,637            46,637             56,028             56,028
            R2                                0.502             0.501              0.043             0.025              0.060

     Notes: This table shows the relationship of checking account balance and total liquid and financial assets by race. See Section 3.6 for
     details. Sample is 2010, 2013, and 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances.
                Table 2: Race & Hispanicity Question in Various Datasets

                                       (a) Florida Voter File
                                 Race/Ethnicity
                                 American Indian/Alaskan Native
                                 Asian/Pacific Islander
                                 Black, not of Hispanic Origin
                                 Hispanic
                                 White, not of Hispanic Origin
                                 Multi-racial
                                 Other

                                      (b) Georgia Voter File
                                 Race/Ethnicity
                                 Black
                                 White
                                 Hispanic/Latino
                                 Asian/Pacific Islander
                                 American Indian/Alaskan Native
                                 Other

                                        (c) Louisiana
                                            Voter File
                                           Race
                                           White
                                           Black
                                           Asian
                                           Hispanic
                                           American Indian
                                           Other

                                (d) Survey of Consumer Finances
Which of these categories do you feel best describe you: white, black or African-American,
Hispanic or Latino, Asian, American Indian or Alaska Native, Hawaiian Native or other
Pacific Islander, or another race?

Source: Voter registration forms in 2020 and survey text from 2016 SCF




                                                   16
             Table 3: Distribution of Race and Ethnicity in State Voter Files


                                       Florida      Georgia      Louisiana         Sample
                   White                0.6354       0.5371        0.5979          0.6026
                   Black                0.1344       0.2964        0.2754          0.1981
                 Hispanic               0.1628       0.0273         0.012          0.1055
                   Asian                 0.019       0.0204        0.0078           0.018
               American Indian          0.0032       0.0011        0.0041          0.0027
                Multi-racial            0.0066         NA            NA            0.0039
                   Other                 0.016       0.0123        0.0217          0.0157
                  Missing               0.0226       0.1054        0.0811          0.0535

Notes: Georgia asks if voter is "Hispanic/Latino". Florida asks if voter is "White, not of Hispanic Origin",
"Black, not of Hispanic Origin", and "American Indian/Alaskan Native". Georgia and Florida ask if voter is
"Asian/Pacific Islander". Exact question wording is in online Appendix Figure 2.




                              Table 4: Location of Matched Sample


                MSA              Observations       Percentage       Cumulative percentage
             Miami                   546887              32.8%                 32.8%
             Atlanta                 207341              12.4%                 45.2%
            Orlando                  176195              10.6%                  55.8%
             Tampa                   129856               7.8%                 63.6%
          New Orleans                120678               7.2%                 70.8%
          Baton Rouge                 66617               4.0%                 74.8%
            Sarasota                  36908               2.2%                  77.1%
           Palm Bay                   36786               2.2%                 79.3%
         Port St. Lucie               30440               1.8%                  81.1%
           Shreveport                 29426               1.8%                 82.9%
         Rest of Florida             145061               8.7%                  91.6%
        Rest of Louisiana            128344               7.7%                  99.3%
         Rest of Georgia              12309               0.7%                 100.0%

Notes: This table shows the number of observations in the matched sample by metro area.
Source: Matched JPMCI data and voter registration records.




                                                    17
                        Table 5: Distribution of Race and Ethnicity


                      Race       Voter     Voter (Reweighted)          Matched
                     Black       20.3%             21.5%                25.7%
                    Hispanic     10.9%             18.0%                22.9%
                     White       61.9%             52.1%                45.7%

Notes: This table describes the racial composition of registered voters in FL, GA, and LA,
both in the voter files and in the matched bank data. The first column ("Voter") shows the
racial composition in the voter files. The second column ("Voter (Reweighted)") adjusts for
the fact that bank customers are more likely to live in certain ZIP codes. Specifically, we
compute the racial composition of the voter file, weighting each ZIP code by the percentage
of registered voters successfully matched to the bank data. The third column ("Matched")
shows the racial composition of the matched bank-voter data. The rows do not sum to 100
percent because some people report a race other than white, black or Hispanic, or report no
race at all.


                             Table 6: Reasons for Income Volatility
                                        Response              Rate
                                 Irregular work schedule      41.6%
                                         Bonuses              12.4%
                                       Commissions             6.9%
                                  Seasonal employment          12%
                                Periods of unemployment       14.7%
                                    Investment income          9.2%
                                          Other               23.3%
                                         Refused               4.3%

Source: Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking, Table C.86




                                                 18
                           Table 7: Impact of Income on Consumption by Assets and Race ­ Additional Specifications


                                                                            Dependent Variable:  Log Non Durable Consumption
                                                     (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)
              Log Income                            0.169         0.185         0.205         0.117         0.129         0.150         0.227         0.242
                                                   (0.008)       (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.008)       (0.008)

             ( Log Income) x Black                  0.093         0.050         0.011         0.076         0.036        -0.005         0.031         0.007
                                                   (0.006)       (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.006)       (0.005)       (0.005)

             ( Log Income) x Hispanic               0.044         0.022        -0.023         0.021         0.001        -0.047        -0.003        -0.045
                                                   (0.007)       (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.006)       (0.007)       (0.007)

             ( Log Income) x Checking                            -0.234                                    -0.246
                                                                 (0.008)                                   (0.010)

             ( Log Income) x Liquid                                            -0.259                                    -0.270
19




                                                                               (0.009)                                   (0.011)

             ( Log Income) x Liquid(Broad)                                                                                             -0.243
                                                                                                                                       (0.009)

             ( Log Income) x Financial                                                                                                               -0.269
                                                                                                                                                     (0.010)

             OLS/IV                                  IV            IV            IV            IV            IV            IV           IV            IV
             Black and Hispanic Dummies              Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
             Asset Rank Control                                    Yes           Yes                        Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
             Controls for lagged pay changes                                                  Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
             Firm-by-calendar-month FE                                                        Yes           Yes           Yes
             Observations                        19,200,198    19,200,198    19,200,198    13,105,096    13,105,096    13,105,096    19,200,198    19,200,198
             Adjusted R2                           0.005         0.008         0.008         0.009         0.013         0.013         0.005         0.005


     Note: This table shows robustness analysis on estimates of the elasticity of consumption with respect to income (  ^). Columns (1), (2), and(3) replicate columns
     (4), (6), and (8) from Table 2 in a specification without controlling for any lags. Columns (4) through (8) include controls for 5 lags of changes in coworker pay.
     Columns (4), (5), and(6) replicate columns (4), (6), and (8) from Table 2 in a specification that adds firm-by-calendar-month fixed effects. Columns (7) and (8)
     replicate column (8) from Table 2, controlling instead for imputations of assets using the narrow SCF definition of liquid assets and the broader definition of
     financial assets, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. See Section 3.6 for details.
                           Table 8: Impact of Income on Consumption by Assets and Race ­ Specification in Levels


                                                                     Dependent Variable:  Non Durable Consumption
                                                       (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)
      Income                                          0.087             0.067             0.166             0.156              0.176             0.184
                                                     (0.010)           (0.010)           (0.008)           (0.008)            (0.008)           (0.010)

     ( Income) x Black                                                  0.147                               0.051                               -0.008
                                                                       (0.015)                             (0.011)                              (0.012)

     ( Income) x Hispanic                                               0.080                               0.029                               -0.034
                                                                       (0.013)                             (0.010)                              (0.011)
20




     ( Income) x Checking                                                                -0.375            -0.357
                                                                                         (0.020)           (0.020)

     ( Income) x Liquid(Imputed)                                                                                             -0.386             -0.403
                                                                                                                             (0.019)            (0.022)

     Spec                                               IV               IV                 IV               IV                 IV                IV
     Black and Hispanic Dummies                                          Yes                                Yes                                  Yes
     Asset Rank Control                                                                   Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes
     Observations                                 19,416,653         19,416,653        19,416,653        19,416,653        19,416,653         19,416,653
     Adjusted R2                                    0.041              0.034             0.082             0.078             0.080              0.082
     Note: This table replicates the IV estimates from Table 2 using income and consumption measured in levels rather than logs. See footnote 21 for additional
     discussion.
                       Table 9: Unemployment Experiences by Race
                                                          White   Black   Hispanic
                 3 state (public use)
                    Individual UI recipiency rate         0.2%    0.6%      0.3%
                    Unemployment rate                     2.9%    5.7%      3.4%
                    Mean unemployment duration (weeks)     24       25       21
                 Bank sample
                    Household UI recipiency rate          1.3%    1.2%      1.5%
                    Mean completed UI duration (weeks)     15       15       15

Public use sources: UI recipiency rate is from Department of Labor, unemployment statistics are for
banked households in 2017 Current Population Survey




                                                    21
                                 Table 10: Structural Model Results

                                                            (1)                  (2)                (3)
                                                           Black              Hispanic             White
                                                         Households          Households          Households
A. Target moments
                                                       Data      Model     Data      Model      Data      Model
Average elasticity:                                    0.29       0.27     0.24       0.23      0.200      0.18
Liquid assets ($)
  30th percentile                                        85       91        1.5       1.7        920        920
  50th percentile                                      1,000      810       950      1,100      7,200      6,900
  70th percentile                                      3,700     3,400     4,500     3,200     32,000     32,000
B. Estimated parameters

Borrowing constraint (relative to income): a  -0.16       -0.30                                       -0.22
Low interest rate: r1                        -7.3%       -7.7%                                       -8.4%
Medium interest rate: r2                     -2.4%      -0.53%                                       0.19%
High interest rate: r3                       0.27%       0.23%                                       0.35%
C. Welfare gain from eliminating temporary income volatility

Average gain (consumption equivalent): ¯g                    5.7%                5.0%                3.8%

 Note: This table shows estimates from the model in Section 4. Panel A shows the empirical moments from the
 data, which we use to estimate the parameters of the model. The definition of liquid assets follows Kaplan and
 Violante (2014), who subtract credit card debt from assets held in checking and savings accounts; this explains
 why the 30th percentile of the liquid asset distribution for Hispanic households is approximately zero. Panel
 B shows the estimated model parameters. Panel C shows the results from from eliminating temporary income
 volatility and calculating the welfare gain in lifetime consumption equivalents. All numbers are rounded to
 two significant digits.




                                                       22
                                                       Table 11: Structural Model Parameters

     Parameter                                                                                                                                    Source
     A. Common Parameters                                                       All Households

       Coefficient of relative risk aversion:                                        1.0                                                         N/A
       Monthly discount factor:                                                     0.997                                  Kaplan and Violante (2010)
       Implied annual ratio of transitory to permanent in-
                               2          2
                                                                                     2.03                                  Carroll and Samwick (1997)
       come shock variance: ,annual      ,annual
                                         2 y
       Monthly coefficient of variation: y ¯                                        0.38                                  Farrell, Greig and Yu   (2019)
       Unemployment replacement rate: U I                                           0.575                                 Mitchell and Phillips   (2006)
23




       Social Security replacement rate:                                             0.45                                 Mitchell and Phillips   (2006)
       Retirement age: TR                                                             62                                 Biggs and Springstead    (2008)
       Maximum age: T                                                                 85                                                            N/A

     Group-Specific Parameters                                       Black        Hispanic         White
                                                                   Households    Households      Households

       Unemployment probability: U                                   0.0693         0.0364         0.0344                            CPS (2015-2018)
       Monthly variance of permanent shocks (when working): 2       0.00044        0.00047        0.00047     Calibrated to Carroll and Samwick (1997)
                                                               2                                              & Farrell, Greig and Yu (2019)
       Monthly variance of transitory shocks (when working):         0.142          0.148           0.148
       Lifecycle income growth: t                                       -              -              -                              CPS (2014-2016)
       Probablity of death: t                                           -              -              -                             CDC (1999-2016)
       Average monthly income at time of elasticity estimate         $2,008         $2,378         $3,211                   Administrative Bank Data
B       Matching bank and voter records
B.1     Matching algorithm
    We draw on standard fuzzy matching algorithms to match bank customers to voter
records. The match uses name, address and age. Exact date of birth is available for matching
in the bank data. In the voter records, exact date of birth is available in Florida and Georgia,
but in Louisiana age is only available in years. Our algorithm first blocks on street name,
street number, and ZIP code. Then, within each block, the algorithm uses a fuzzy match.
We measure name similarity and address similarity using a Jaro-Winkler distance metric.
The matching algorithm is implemented by a third-party, so we as the researchers never see
personally identifiable information.
    The exact algorithm used for matching is the following:

    1. Starting with customer data, construct a list of candidate matches by left-joining voter
       data using house number, street name, and ZIP.

        (a) Choose "best" voter record. How? Choose record with highest address score. If
            address scores are a tie, then choose record with highest name.
        (b) Accept candidate match if either of two conditions are met
               i. Address similarity > 0.97 and full name similarity > 0.97
              ii. Address similarity = 1, full name similarity < 0.97, first name similarity >
                  0.97, and birth year differs by no more than one year2

    2. With customers who were not matched in step 1, join to voter data using house number,
       street name, and city. Repeat steps (a) and (b).

    3. With customers who were not matched in step 1 or step 2, join to voter data using ZIP
       and birth year. Repeat steps (a) and (b).

This procedure yields about 6.5 million customers across all product types with accepted
matches to the voter data. The analysis sample is drawn from the 1.8 million accepted
matches that have checking accounts with Chase.


B.2     Quality of matches
    We validate the quality of accepted matches using data from mortgage applications. The
Home Mortgage Disclosure Act requires lenders to ask two race & ethnicity questions: one
is about race (American Indian or Alaska Native, Asian, Black or African American, Native
Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander, or White) and one about Hispanicity (Hispanic or Latino,
or Not Hispanic or Latino). We classify a voter record and a mortgage application record
as in agreement if the household reports: (i) black in the voter record and race as Black in
the mortgage application, (ii) white in the voter record and race as White in the mortgage
application, or (iii) Hispanic in the voter record and Hispanicity as Hispanic or Latino in the
mortgage application. Among households that identify as black, white or Hispanic in the
voter record, the agreement rate is 98.9 percent. The agreement rate is 93.7 percent for voters
that identify as black, 99.5 percent for voters that identify as white, and 90.4 percent for
    2
    If a customer's birth year is not available in the bank records, then this condition is address similarity =
1 and first name similarity  0.97.


                                                      24
voters that identify as Hispanic. The 98.9 percent overall agreement rate is better than the
agreement rate we would achieve by assigning all customers with race white (89.5 percent),
Hispanic (10.7 percent), or black (10.0 percent).




                                            25
C     Notes on welfare calculations
C.1    Derivation of formula for statistical welfare gain 
    We beginning with equation (12) from Section 4:

                                       ((1 + ) Ct )1-                          ~ 1-
                                                                               Ct
                            E      t                       E            t           .
                                            1-                                 1-

Passing the expectations operator through the summation operator, and using the definitions
of Cit and C~it above, we have:

                                       ~t 1- E et (1- )
                            (1 + )1- E C                                                  ~t 1-
                                                                                        E C
                        t                                                           t
                                                                    =            
                                           1-                                            1-
Subtracting the left-hand side from the right, we have:
                                       ~t 1-
                                                                                              
                                     E C                                                      
                    0=           t               1 - (1 + )1- E et (1- )
                                       1-                                                     

                                                                                 ~t 1-
                                                                                              
                                         1-
                                                                               E C            
                                                    t (1- )                t
                     = 1 - (1 + )             E e                                                ,
                                                                                 1-           

which leaves us with:

                             1 - (1 + )1- E et (1- ) = 0

                                               (1 + ) -1 = E et (1- )                                (14)

For the term on the right, recall that we have assumed that E e = 1, which means that
E [] = -   2 /2. Also, recall that var [ ] =  2 . It follows that E [(1 -  )  ] = - (1 -  )  2 /2
                                                                                            
and var [(1 -  ) ] = (1 -  )2  2     2 . Thus, we have:

                                                                                   2
                                                               2               2 2 
                                E et (1- ) = e-(1- ) /2+(1- )                    2

                                                                        2
                                                    ( -1)[ + 2 ( -1)]   
                                               =e                       2



Taking logs of both sides of (14), we have
                                                                                          2
                        ( - 1) log (1 + ) = ( - 1)  +  2 ( - 1)
                                                                                         2
                                                                            2
                                 log (1 + ) =  +  2 ( - 1)
                                                                           2
Finally, if we use the approximation log (1 + )                , we have:
                                                                    2
                                                +  2 ( - 1)                                          (15)
                                                                   2
Note, when  = 1, the expression collapses to the Lucas (1987) result:
                                                           2
                                                       
                                                          2

                                                     26
As we can see from (15)  is increasing in 2 . We can also rewrite equation (15) as follows:


                                             (1 -  ) 2  2
                                         +                ,
                                                       2
which makes it clear that  is also increasing in  . Finally, we have:

                                                    2
                                    = [1 + 2 ( - 1)] 
                                                     2

When   1,  is unambiguously increasing in  . Otherwise, when  < 1, / > 0
whenever  < 1/ (2 (1 -  )).


C.2    Structural Model
   The advantage of our statistical model in Section 4 is that it only requires estimates of
differences in consumption elasticities to capture heterogeneity in welfare costs. We now
turn to estimating a structural, lifecycle model of consumption and saving, which, among
other things, allows households to fully reoptimize under different volatility scenarios and
incorporates wealth into the consumption decision. This has several advantages, including
capturing a broader measure of welfare and tying more directly into our discussion of the
racial wealth gap. To be useful in our setting, the model needs to match two sets of moments
in the data: (1) differences in the distribution of liquid assets across racial groups and
(2) variation in consumption elasticities across these groups. Once we are able to fit the
data, we can shut off transitory income volatility and calculate the expected lifetime welfare
improvement for each agent. Once again, we compare these welfare gains across racial groups.
   Our baseline model is a standard buffer-stock model of consumption and saving (Carroll
1997). In each period, a household chooses how much to consume, ct , in order to maximize
expected lifetime utility. The household may save assets in each period, at , in a liquid savings
account, which earns a gross return R at the beginning of the next period. Households may
borrow at the same rate, up to a borrowing limit a. Labor income, Yt , follows the same process
as in (10) above, when one is employed. In addition, there is a probability U I of entering
into unemployment for one period, with a household-level unemployment replacement rate
of U I . Upon reaching the retirement age, TR , households receive a stream of Social Security
payments, which replace a fixed percentage of income prior to retirement.
   The household lives for T periods and there is a time-varying probability of dying at the
beginning of each period, it . By the end of the last period, T , household assets must be




                                               27
non-negative. The optimization problem can be summarized as follows:

                                                  T -t
                                          max E           n u (ct+n )
                                          {ct }
                                                  n=0

                                   s.t.     ct + at+1 = Rat + Yt ,
                                                              ct  0,
                                                           at+1  a,
                                              RaT + YT - cT  0,

                                                                                          c1-
where  is the per-period discount factor and utility takes a CRRA form: u (c) =           1- .   The
parameter  captures risk aversion and intertemporal substitution. The expectation is taken
over the permanent and transitory income shocks, and the unemployment and death proba-
bilities. We solve the problem using dynamic programming, building off of the Heterogenous
Agents Resources & toolKit (HARK) package (Carroll et al. 2018). We estimate the model
at a monthly frequency to mirror our empirical estimates in Section 3.
      We calibrate several parameters based on our administrative bank sample or represen-
tative survey data. Unemployment rates and lifecycle income growth patterns by race are
taken from the CPS, while the level of mean monthly income by race is set to match that
in the JPMCI data. The variances of monthly transitory and permanent income shocks
while working are calibrated, conditional on unemployment rates and UI replacement rates,
to match a monthly coefficient of variation of 0.38, estimated previously using JPMCI data
(Farrell, Greig and Yu 2019). We set the Social Security replacement rate to 45 percent, which
matches average replacement rates (Mitchell and Phillips 2006), and household income falls
to 57.5 percent during unemployment (Zedlewski and Nichols 2012). The retirement age
is set to 62, which reflects the median retirement age of initial benefit receipt (Biggs and
Springstead 2008).
      Our remaining parameters are set based on prior literature. Monthly discount factors
are set to 0.99 (Kaplan and Violante 2010). Because the monthly coefficient of variation is
not enough to separately calibrate monthly permanent and transitory shock variances, we
rely on prior estimates based on annual income patterns to set their relative magnitudes.
Specifically, we find values for the monthly variances that, conditional on the unemployment
probability and unemployment replacement rate, generate annual income patterns consistent
with Carroll and Samwick (1997), whose estimates imply a ratio of transitory to permanent
shock variances of 2. Each agent lives to at most age 85, with the first period in the model
representing the beginning of one's working life, i.e. age 25. We set the CRRA parameter
to 1, i.e. a log utility functional form.3 See online Appendix Table 11 for a complete list of
calibrated parameters and their sources.
  3
   We could have also chosen a higher CRRA parameter. In our model, this results in the need for even
more negative interest rates in order to continue to match the distribution of liquid assets.



                                                  28
   In order to capture the high overall consumption sensitivity and the strong asset gradient
that we document empirically, the model differs from prior work analyzing buffer stock
models in two ways. First, we target the distribution of liquid assets, while the standard
approach targets total wealth. Second, to match these liquid asset targets, we estimate
interest rates, while the standard approach calibrates them. This achieves the same end as
Laibson, Repetto and Tobacman (2007) and Kaplan and Violante (2014), albeit with less
structure. Those two-asset models seek to explain the causes of both low liquid and high
illiquid asset holdings. In contrast, because we are focused on exploring the consequences of
low liquid asset holding, a one-asset model suffices.
   We estimate the model three times, once for each racial group in our sample, in order to
match differences in liquid wealth accumulation over time and consumption elasticities. To
match liquid asset levels, we allow for a different distribution of interest rates within each
racial group. In particular, households in each group draw from one of three interest rates,
with equal probability. The variation in interest rates within- and across groups is meant to
capture differences in returns to assets, access to credit, investment opportunities, and other
financial frictions that may affect the accumulation of liquid wealth. To further model these
differences, we also allow the borrowing constraint to vary by race. An alternative approach
would be to allow for heterogeneity across racial groups in preference parameters, such as
discount factors or risk preferences. Because interest rates and discount factors effectively
perform the same role in the economic model, it is not surprising that we can achieve sim-
ilar results with this alternative approach. Without any strong reason to choose a model
of discount factor heterogeneity over one with interest rate heterogeneity, we proceed with
the latter. Moreover, survey evidence from Thompson and Suarez (2015) suggests that if
anything, black and Hispanic households are less risk tolerant than their white counterparts,
while our model would estimate the opposite in order to fit the data using preference het-
erogeneity.
   Using the simulated method of moments, we estimate the borrowing constraints and
interest rate distributions to match the actual 30th, 50th, and 70th percentile of liquid assets
and the average consumption elasticities for each racial group. In particular, our simulated
asset distributions and elasticities are calculated during age 40 in the model. We choose this
age because it is sufficiently old that in one-asset lifecycle models there is little sensitivity of
consumption to temporary income shocks. Our target asset distributions are obtained from
the Kaplan and Violante (2014) definition of liquid assets in the SCF, while the consumption
elasticities come from the estimates in Table 2, column (2).
   A summary of our model fit and parameter estimates is presented in Table 10, Panels A
and B. We find that a three-point distribution of interest rates is able to capture the distri-
bution of liquid assets fairly well, and equally so across racial groups, with our poorest fit in
the case of 70th percentile ofHispanic liquid assets. We are also able to capture the quali-
tative patterns in consumption elasticities across the racial groups. We estimate borrowing


                                                29
constraints among Hispanic and white households of 30 percent and 22 percent of current
income, respectively. Our model produces a smaller borrowing limit for black households,
16 percent of income, in order to help fit the relatively high consumption elasticity for this
group.
   The interest rates we infer from the data are non-standard, in that they are negative in
many cases. The level of liquid assets, relative to income, tend to be lower than a standard
buffer-stock model would predict given our other calibrated parameters. Our model therefore
uses negative interest rates to fit the bottom and medians of the asset distributions. We
interpret these estimates as capturing general differences in frictions in financial markets.
More concretely, negative interest can arise in cases where financial costs, such as ATM
fees, account maintenance fees, and overdraft fees, effectively impose negative real returns
on cash balances. Likewise, a negative interest rate may capture cases where liquid assets
are at risk of being borrowed by friends or family members who face negative shocks, i.e.
kinship taxation (Chiteji and Hamilton, 2002; Squires, 2016). The lowest interest rates are
particularly negative, which is needed to match the lowest level of assets relative to income
in each group.
   With our model parameters in hand, we can now construct measures of the welfare
benefits of consumption smoothing. Our measure of welfare gain is derived by comparing
the same agent in two different settings, indexed by j  {1, 2}. The first case (j = 1) is
our baseline structural model. In the second case (j = 2), we set the standard deviation
of monthly transitory shocks and the unemployment probability to zero. We then re-solve
the model with an agent that is fully aware of the elimination of uncertainty. Relative to
our statistical model above, we allow the new consumption path to endogenously adapt to
the new economic environment. In each case, we can calculate lifetime expected utility,
Vij (ci ), and cj
                i  (ci1 , . . . ciT ), the stream of consumption over time. We then calculate the
proportional increase in consumption in each period that would leave the agent indifferent
between a setting with and without uncertainty:

                                  Vi1 (1 + i ) c1
                                                i = Vi
                                                      2
                                                        c2
                                                         i


Finally, we calculate the average welfare gain, ¯g            i , among households within each
                                                         ig
racial group g  {black, Hispanic, white}.
   In Table 10, Panel C, we report the average value of consumption smoothing, ¯ g , for
each racial group. We find that eliminating transitory income volatility for black households
leads to a 5.7 percent gain in welfare. The welfare gain for Hispanic households is a bit
lower, at 5.0 percent, and white households enjoy the smallest gain, of only 3.8 percent.
Overall, we find that welfare impact of differences in liquid assets and, by extension, the
ability to consumption smooth largely mirror the differences in elasticities that we estimate.
For example, black households have consumption elasticities that are 50 percent larger that
those of white households, and the implied welfare costs of transitory shocks are likewise

                                               30
50 percent larger for black households. Similarly, we estimate consumption elasticities for
Hispanic households that are 20 percent larger than those of white households, and the
associated welfare cost of transitory shocks is 32 percent larger for Hispanic households.




                                             31
