                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               A BRIEF INTRODUCTION TO HUMAN CAPITAL MEASURES

                                           Gang Liu
                                      Barbara M. Fraumeni

                                       Working Paper 27561
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27561


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Gang Liu and Barbara M. Fraumeni. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
A Brief Introduction to Human Capital Measures
Gang Liu and Barbara M. Fraumeni
NBER Working Paper No. 27561
July 2020
JEL No. J24,O57

                                         ABSTRACT

There are six major measures of human capital, each of which covers at least 130 countries, all of
which are described in this paper. These measures are of two distinct types: monetary and index-
based. The two monetary versions are those by the World Bank (Lange et al., 2018) and by the
United Nations Environmental Program and the Urban Institute of Kyushu University (Managi
and Kumar et al., 2018). The four indicator versions are by the Institute of Health Metrics and
Evaluation of the University of Washington (Lim et al., 2018), the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP, 2019), the World Bank (International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development and the World Bank, 2018), and the World Economic Forum (World Economic
Forum, 2017). In addition to describing each of these six measures, this paper compares them
using ranking (Spearman) and level (Pearson) correlations. This paper was written as an
introduction to a forthcoming book (Fraumeni, Barbara M., ed., Measuring Human Capital,
Academic Press, Cambridge, MA) on human capital in order to help statisticians, researchers,
analysts, policy-makers and government officials make an informed choice about which to use as
this decision can matter.

Gang Liu
Statistics Norway
Akersveien 26
0177 Oslo
Norway
Gang.Liu@ssb.no

Barbara M. Fraumeni
Central University of Finance and Economics
770 Middle Road
Dresden, ME 04342
and NBER
Barbara_Fraumeni@hotmail.com
Human capital can be regarded as `the knowledge, skills, competencies and attributes embodied in
individuals that facilitate the creation of personal, social and economic well-being' (OECD, 2001). The
notion of human capital being equally essential as conventional tangible capital can at least be traced
back to Adam Smith's work in the 18th century (Smith, 1776), but it was not widely recognized until
around the 1960s, when economists began to use it to investigate income and growth differentials
(e.g. Mincer, 1958, 1962; Schultz, 1961, 1962; Becker, 1962, 1964).

In the 1980s and 1990s, human capital regained its importance both within the neoclassical growth
accounting framework (e.g. Jorgenson and Fraumeni, 1989, 1992a, 1992b) and through the
endogenous growth models (e.g. Romer, 1986; Lucas, 1988; Mankiw et al. 1992). It was also
employed regularly in the development accounting works (e.g. Klenow and RodriguezClare, 1997;
Hall and Jones, 1999).

Measures of human capital can serve many purposes as human capital is a key indicator of the
current and future potential of a country and its individuals. In most countries, human capital is the
largest form of wealth. In others where natural resources are the largest form of wealth, human
capital is often a growing source of wealth (Lange et al., 2018; Managi and Kumar, 2018). Countries
with a relatively young population can have significant advantages over countries with older
populations over the longer term. Within the context of sustainable development human capital
measures can be used to gauge how well a country is managing its total national wealth, with the
purpose of assessing its long-term sustainability (e.g. UNECE, 2009). There are both monetary and
non-monetary, including subjective, ramifications of the level of human capital (Dolan et al., 2008).
Most recently, human capital is frequently applied to inform `beyond GDP' discussions, since its
distribution across households and individuals and the non-economic benefits due to its investment
are among the crucial determinants of people's `quality of life' and well-being (e.g. Stiglitz et al.,
2010; OECD, 2011, 2013, 2015, 2017).

The forthcoming book (Fraumeni, ed.) is about measuring human capital.1 Currently existing human
capital measures can be divided into two broad categories: the indicators-based and the monetary
measures.2 Except for the Introduction chapter, all the other six chapters collected in the
forthcoming book reflect this division, with two chapters applying the indicators-based approach,
while the other four using monetary measures. The monetary measures emphasize demographics
such as age and education with underlying gender break-outs, as well as income, while the indicator-
based measures have a wide-array of types of components in addition such as health, standard of
living, deployment, and know-how.

Another distinct feature of the forthcoming book is its global perspective, with four chapters focusing
directly on large projects for international human capital comparisons that have been undertaken by




1
 This paper is a modified version of the introduction to the forthcoming book. It omits a discussion of the two
country study chapters, one, which is about human capital in China and the other, which is about human
capital in the United States.

2
 For an overview of the different measures of human capital within and across the two broad categories,
please refer to e.g. Liu and Fraumeni (2016).


                                                       1
several international organizations and/or universities.3 Each covers at least 130 countries. While the
other two chapters are single-country studies, the two countries respectively addressed are the
United States of America and the People's Republic of China, nowadays two of the three largest
economies in the world.

With various human capital measures being discussed, the forthcoming book does not take the stand
that there exists one specific measure that should be used under any circumstances, rather, it is
intended to serve as one of the valuable resources for statisticians, researchers, analysts, policy-
makers, and government officials in searching for comparable information, so as to make their own
decisions on what human capital measures are best suitable for their purpose.

In the following, a brief description of different methodologies applied in the projects for human
capital comparisons is provided. However, readers are strongly encouraged to read every and each
individual chapter in the forthcoming book in order to have a more comprehensive and deeper
understanding of why and how the different detailed methodologies were implemented in practice.
A simple comparison of the results is then discussed, with the purpose of giving a flavor of taste of
the rich information that can be drawn from these studies.



I.1 Monetary-based measures projects

The first two chapters are excellent examples of comparing human capital across countries by
applying the monetary measures. In both examples, human capital is measured together with non-
human capital (such as conventional fixed capital and natural capital) within a consistent framework
of comprehensive wealth accounting, with the goal being to help governments plan for a more
sustainable economic future.

Chapter 1 is about the World Bank's latest wealth accounts that cover the period 1995­2014 for 141
countries (Lange et al., 2018). Plenty of data from the accounts, including country human capital
measures in constant 2014 US$, were presented in the 2018 report: The Changing Wealth of Nations
2018: Building a Sustainable Future (CWON hereafter).

In the World Bank's previous works, human capital was not measured explicitly but included in a
residual resulting from deducting produced capital, natural capital, and net foreign assets from total
national wealth that was calculated as the present value of future consumption (World Bank, 2006,
2011). Although a large part of this residual could be attributed to human capital (e.g. Ferreira and
Hamilton, 2010; Hamilton and Liu, 2014), the non-explicit measure of human capital makes it difficult
for policy-making.

Human capital in the new CWON wealth accounts was measured by applying the well-known
Jorgenson-Fraumeni lifetime income approach (Jorgenson and Fraumeni, 1989, 1992a, 1992b), based
on a unique database developed by the World Bank, the International Income Distribution Database,
which contains more than 1,500 household surveys. When a household survey is not available for
any country for a given year, previous or later surveys that are controlled by country-wide totals for
the non-survey years are then used as the basis for these years.



3
 Originally the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) of the University of Washington was going to
contribute to this book, however, IHME withdrew from this project when its priorities had to be re-organized
due to the COVID-19 virus. See Lim et al. (2018) for a description of the IHME human capital measures.


                                                       2
First, for each country and year covered by the CWON project, wage profiles by age, education, and
gender were derived by applying the estimated parameters from Mincer equations (Montenegro and
Patrinos, 2016). Then, the estimated wage profiles were benchmarked to the total employment and
the compensation of employees that are drawn from UN, ILO databases, the Penn World Table
(Feenstra et al., 2015), and other sources.

For an individual in the working age population (aged 15-65), the lifetime income is calculated as:

                       +1                +1
(I.1)   , = , , + (1 - ,  )    +1  +1, + ,     +1  +1,+1 ,

where

        ,        =        lifetime income for an individual with age of `a' and education of `e';
        
        ,        =        probability to be employed;
        
        ,        =        received compensation of employees when employed;
        +1
        ,        =        school enrolment rate for taking one more year's education from education
                          of `e' to one-year higher level of `e+1' (assuming equal to 0 for those aged 25-
                          65);

                 =        adjustment factor;4

        +1       =        survival rate (probability of surviving one more year).

Equation (I.1) indicates that the lifetime income of an individual is estimated as the sum of two parts:
                                                                                                    
the first part is the current labor income, adjusted by the probability of being employed (,     ,     );
the second part is the expected lifetime income in the next year, which can be elaborated on as the
following: in the next year the individual will be confronted to two courses of action: the first is to
continue to work (holding the same education level as before) and earn income of   +1  +1, ,
                                 +1
with the probability of (1 - ,      ); the second is to take one more year education and (after
                                                                               +1
finishing) to receive income as   +1  +1,+1 , with the probability of ,            .

Chapter 2 is about the biennial Inclusive Wealth Report (IWR hereafter), the latest of which was
published in 2018, with annual data (in 2005 PPP US$) covering the period 1990-2014 for 140
countries (Managi and Kumar, 2018). The IWR project has built up its comprehensive wealth
accounting by following a framework developed by Arrow et al. (2012, 2013) and Klenow and
Rodríguez-Clare (1997).5

Within this framework, for each country and year, human capital per capita due to education is
measured as:




4
 The adjustment factor () is defined in terms of the real rate of labor income growth () and a discount rate
(), i.e.  = (1+ )/(1+ ).

5
  The 2018 IWR project calculated two different versions of wealth: conventional and frontier, the latter
including health capital as a component of human capital wealth. In the forthcoming book and in this paper,
conventional wealth is described and used in comparisons as it is most similar in coverage to the World Bank
CWON monetary measure (Lange et al. 2018).


                                                      3
                              
(I.2)    = (   5+  0
                     () - ) /,

where

                =        human capital per capita with the average years of total schooling `E';

                =        rate of return on education (assumed to be 8.5%);

        5+      =        population who has had education equal to or greater than `E';

                =        average compensation to employees;

                =        expected working years;

                =        discount rate (assumed to be 8.5%);

                =        total population.

Equation (I.2) shows that human capital per capita is calculated as the total human capital divided by
total population, while the former is measured as a multiplication of one unit of human capital (),
the corresponding population (5+ ), and the shadow price of one unit of human capital
    
(0 ()- ). E is the average years of school completed by the population. The shadow price is
calculated by the present value of lifetime income, which is proxied by that of the average
compensation to employees (w) over the expected working years (T).

Note that both the CWON and IWR projects make the estimates of human capital per capita,
indicated by Equations (I.1) and (I.2) respectively. However, the CWON project makes use of
household surveys data which offer detailed information at disaggregated level, while the IWR
project does not depend on such detailed survey data, and therefore, is less data demanding. The
IWR project computes human capital for the whole population, while CWON estimates human
capital for those who earn labor income. The IWR project uses a snapshot of the average level of
education for the country as a whole, while CWON allows for additional education of individuals over
their lifetime because of the more extensive data base it has.

Monetary measures are being considered as a basis for incorporating human capital into expanded
accounts of the System of National Accounts (SNA) (Smedes forthcoming).6

I.2 Indicators-based measures projects

Chapters 3 and 4 are two outstanding examples of comparing country human capital by using the
indicators-based measures, i.e. by constructing various composite indexes for human capital.

Chapter 3 is about the World Bank's Human Capital Index (WB HCI hereafter) (see IBRD and World
Bank, 2018). Chapter 4 presents the United Nation's Human Development Index (UN HDI hereafter)
published in the Human Development Report that has been issued by the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) since 1990 (see e.g. UNDP, 2019).

Table I.1 lists a number of selected characteristics among three human capital indexes compiled
internationally, including that constructed by the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME

6
 Two possible approaches to integrating human capital into the SNA have been developed (Liu 2015; chapter 6
of UNECE 2016).


                                                     4
         HCI hereafter) at University of Washington in the US (see Lim et al., 2018). As shown, the WB HCI and
         the IHME HCI are built upon two basic dimensions: education and health, because the two indexes
         focus on how human capital can be expected to enhance productivity through these two most
         important investment channels.

          Table I.1 Comparison of selected characteristics among different human capital indexes
                                           WB HCI                           IHME HCI                                  UN HDI
Latest publication date                      2018                              2018                                    2019
Coverage (year)                              2018                           1990-2016                               1990-2018
Coverage (country/economy)                    157                              195                                      189
Coverage (gender)                            Both                              Both                                    Both
Definition of index             The amount of human            Expected years lived from age 20 to        A summary measure of
                                capital a child born in 2018   64 years, adjusted for educational         achievements in three key
                                can expect to acquire by age attainment, learning, and                    dimensions of human
                                18                             functional health status                   development: a long and
                                                                                                          healthy life, access to
                                                                                                          knowledge and a decent
                                                                                                          standard of living
Value range of index                         [0-1]                               [0-45]                                [0-1]
Components of Index
    1. Education
Quantity of Education            Expected years by age 18 of      Average years of completed              Expected years with range =
                                 those who start preschool        schooling, by 5-year age groups,        [0-18]
                                 earliest at age 4; range = [0-   from 5 to 24; range = [0-18]            Mean years with range = [0-
                                 14]                                                                      15]
Quality of Education             Harmonized average test          Harmonized average test score,
                                 score (out of a benchmark        relative to highest national average
                                 score of 625)                    score, by 5-year age groups, from 5
                                                                  to 19, scaled [0-1]
    2. Health
Health indicators (Adults)       Share of 15-year-olds who        Expected years lived from age 20 to     Life expectancy; range = [20-
                                 survive until age 60             64; Prevalence of health conditions     85]
                                                                  linked to productivity/learning:
                                                                  anemia, cognitive impairment,
                                                                  hearing loss, vision loss, infectious
                                                                  diseases, by 5-year age groups,
                                                                  from age 20 to 64, scaled [0-1]
Health indicators (Children)     Stunting and mortality rates     Stunting and wasting rates among
                                 among children under age 5       children under age 5
    3.   Standard of living                                                                               Ln (Gross National Income
                                                                                                          per capita in 2011 PPP $);
                                                                                                          range = [ln(100)-ln(75,000)]
Data sources                   Various UN databases;            Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries,      ICF Macro Demographic and
                               UNICEF-WHO-World Bank            and Risk Factors Study 2016; 2522         Health Surveys; Various
                               Joint database; Data             censuses and household surveys            databases from UN, World
                               provided by World Bank           from 194 countries; 1894 student          Bank, IMF and OECD; Barro
                               staff; Student achievement       achievement tests from 132                and Lee (2018)
                               tests from 162 economies in countries and 163 subnational
                               Patrinos and Angrist (2018)      locations
         Source: IBRD and World Bank (2018); Lim et al. (2018); UNDP (2019)

         In addition to education and health, the UNDP HDI has one more dimension in its index construction:
         standard of living, which is represented by the indicator of gross national income per capita in a
         country. The reason is that the UN HDI aims to illustrate the current state of development of a
         country/economy.


                                                                  5
Both the WB HCI and IHME HCI have indicators for addressing the quality of education, while these
are missing in the UN HDI. In terms of heath indicators, the IHME HCI has much richer information
that are drawn from a unique and profoundly comprehensive database: The Global Burden of
Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors Study 2016 (Murray et al., 2017).

Besides the differences and similarities as listed in Table I.1, how the human capital index is
practically constructed also differs across projects. The composite index of the WB HCI is compiled as
follows:
                                                    
(I.3)     =    ( - )   ( - ) ,

where

                =          probability that a child born today survives;

                =          benchmark of complete survival, equal to 1;

                =          increase in productivity per additional year of school, equal to 8%;

                =          expected future education;

                =          benchmark of complete quality-adjusted schooling, equal to 14 years;

                =          estimated return to productivity per unit increase in each health indicator

                           (0.65 for adult survival rate and 0.35 for not-stunted rate);

                =          expected future health;

               =           benchmark of complete health, equal to 1.

In Equation (I.3), the WB HCI index measures the human capital of the next generation, which is the
amount of human capital that a child born today can expect to achieve in view of the risks of poor
health and poor education currently prevailing in the country where that child lives. Therefore, the
WB HCI is designed to highlight how investments that improve health and education outcomes today
will affect the productivity of future generations of workers. In addition, it is a measure of
productivity relative to the benchmark of full health and complete education, an ideal scenario.

The composite index of the IHME HCI is compiled as follows:

                           64
                           =20              24
                                            =5  
(I.4)     = (                  0
                                       )(              18
                                                                ),

where

                   =       expected years lived in age group x for year t;

                   =       functional health status in age group x in year t, transformed to a 0 to 1 scale;

        0          =       starting birth cohort;

                    =      years of education attained during age group x for year t;

         =                 average standardized test score in age group x for year t, transformed to a 0
                           to 1 scale.

                                                            6
Equation (I.4) gives an index measure of expected human capital for each birth cohort, which is
calculated as the expected years lived from age 20 to 64 years and adjusted for educational
attainment, learning or education quality, and functional health status using rates specific to each
time period, age, and sex for all countries covered by the project. The functional health status
combines seven health status outcomes into a single measure using principal components analysis.

It is worth mentioning that uncertainty analysis was undertaken in both the IHME HCI and the WB
HCI projects and the corresponding estimated uncertainty in the measure of human capital are
reported.

The composite index of the UNDP HDI is compiled as the geometric mean of normalized indices for
each of the three dimensions: Health, Education, and Income.

(I.5)     = (     )1/3,


where  ,  , and  are three normalized dimensional indexes and each of them,
with defined minimum and maximum values, is calculated as:
                               - 
(I.6)     =  -  .


As shown in Equation (I.5), the three dimensions of Health, Education, and Income are equally
weighted. On the one hand, such a construction reflects that the UN HDI focuses on the snapshot
illustration of the current state of development of a country/economy, in which all the three
dimensions are considered equally important.

On the other hand, the UN HDI is distinctively different from the WB HCI and IHME HCI, because the
latter two place their focuses on the extent to which education and health can impact on the
potential productivity largely as a means, while the UN HDI treat education and health not only as a
means but also as an end-in-itself.

It is worth noting that there also exist a variety of UN HDI by taking inequality, gender, and poverty
into considerations, such as the Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index (IHDI), Gender
Development Index (GDI), Gender Inequality Index (GII), and Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI).
In addition, there are also five Human Development Dashboards which extend to address
environmental and socioeconomic sustainability (see UNDP, 2019).

Although not included in a chapter in the forthcoming book, there exists another Global Human
Capital Index which has been constructed by the World Economic Forum since 2015 (WEF GHCI
hereafter). The latest data based on updated methodologies was published in The Global Human
Capital Report 2017, covering 130 countries/economies for 2017 (World Economic Forum, 2017).

The WEF GHCI assesses the degree to which countries have optimized their human capital for the
benefit of their economies and of individuals' themselves. By emphasizing both employment and
education, it provides a means of measuring a country's human capital - both current and expected -
across its population. Moreover, it measures the quantifiable elements of countries' talent resources
holistically according to individuals' ability to acquire, develop and deploy skills throughout their
working life rather than simply during the formative years. Thus, it treats human capital as a dynamic
rather than fixed concept.



                                                   7
In addition, the WEF GHCI has a number of subcomponents dependent upon the WEF's Executive
Opinion Survey. Another unique feature of the WEF GHCI project is that it measures the skill diversity
of recent tertiary graduates with a Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) of concentration among the
broad fields of study. 7
The composite index of the WEF GHCI is compiled based on four dimensions, for each of them, there
is a subindex. The four dimensions are Capacity, Deployment, Development, and Know-how. Each
corresponding subindex is constructed by using a number of indicators and following basically the
same formula as shown in Equation (I.6). The four thematic subindexes are weighted equally in the
aggregate overall GHCI, while the age-group specific data within these subindexes is weighted by
population (see World Economic Forum, 2017).

Essentially, the WEF GHCI shares a common feature with the WB HCI, the IHME HCI, and the UN HDI
in that the WEF GHCI holds all countries to the same standard, measuring countries' `distance to the
ideal' state, or gap in human capital optimization. To arrive at this score, the Index examines each
indicator in relation to a meaningful maximum value that represents `the ideal'. Every indicator's
score is a function of the country's `distance from the ideal' for the specific dimension measured.

I.3 Comparison of human capital estimates among projects

It is interesting and informative to make some comparisons based on the results from the above-
mentioned different human capital projects, both in terms of either the monetary or the index
measures and of the rankings thereof. Such comparisons can be implemented by means of
correlation analysis which shows whether these measures tend to change together, if yes, to what
extent.8

To serve the purpose, two frequently applied correlation measures, describing both the strength and
the direction of the relationship, will be applied here. One is the Pearson correlation9, and the other
is the Spearman correlation10. Both the Pearson and Spearman correlation coefficients have the
value range from -1 to +1.

Since the available projects that have been discussed in the forthcoming book and this chapter have
different country and year coverage, the comparison will be undertaken between each two of them,
based on mutually the same selected countries and in the same, or the closest year.

The first comparison is between the two monetary measures covered, i.e. human capital per capita
measure by the World Bank's CWON project compared with that by the IWR project in year 2014. If
the comparison was done with total human capital for each country, the rankings could differ as the

7
 The Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) is a commonly accepted measure of market concentration and is often
used to determine market competitiveness. In the WEF GHCI project, the HHI is applied for measuring the
concentration of the distribution of graduates among various disciplines (World Economic Forum, 2017).
8
    Another way that the various measures could be compared is to track changes in the measures over time.

9
  The Pearson correlation evaluates the linear relationship between two continuous variables. A relationship is
linear when a change in one variable is associated with a proportional change in the other variable.

10
  The Spearman correlation evaluates the monotonic relationship between two continuous or ordinal
variables. In a monotonic relationship, the variables tend to change together, but not necessarily at a constant
rate. The Spearman correlation coefficient is based on the ranked values for each variable rather than the raw
data.


                                                        8
proportion of the population working can differ by country. CWON estimates the human capital of
the working population only, while IWR estimates the human capital of the total adult population.
Among the 123 countries compared, the Slovak Republic is the outlier. With the Slovak Republic
included, the calculated Pearson correlation is 0.15, albeit positive, but a low value.

Figure I.1 demonstrates the relationship of the human capital per capita measure between the
CWON and the IWR project for 122 countries when the Slovak Republic is removed from the
comparison. As visualized, the CWON human capita per capita measures for the majority of the
countries covered are higher than their corresponding IWR measures. Moldova is an outlier among
the countries shown. Further, without the Slovak Republic, the calculated Pearson correlation has
increased substantially from 0.15 to 0.60.

Figure I.2 displays the relationship based on the rankings of the two monetary human capital per
capita measures from the CWON and IWR projects. The calculated Spearman correlation, also based
on 122 countries, is 0.81, which means that there is a high positive correlation between the two
rankings, despite the existence of several outliers, such as Moldova, Vietnam, Kyrgyz Republic,
Tanzania, Turkey, and Cote d'lvoire. In addition to the Slovak Republic, all these countries just
mentioned have much higher rankings of human capital per capita in the CWON project than in the
IWR project, which merits further investigations.11

Note that although the comparison as shown in Figures I.1 and I.2 is carried out based on the same
Figure I.1 Comparison of human capital per capita measure between CWON (2014) and IWR (2014)

               CWON measure (X-axis) vs IWR measure (Y-axis) (122 countries, US$ in thousands)

     1400


     1200      Moldova


     1000


     800


     600      Vietnam
              Kyrgyz Republic                                                                           Switzerland
                                                                                                       Norway
                                                  Belgium Denmark
                                        United Arab
     400                                              United
                                                   France     Kingdom
                                                        Ireland
                                                      Finland
                                                            Netherlands         United States
                                                   Austria
                                               Japan
                                          Emirates     Germany   Sweden
                                                                  Australia
           Tanzania               Spain                                       Canada
                                    Italy
                              Portugal
                                                       Singapore                         Luxembourg
     200              Croatia      Slovenia                     Qatar
                       Greece
                       Hungary           Korea, Rep.
                             Saudi Arabia
                        Poland                                                Iceland
            Turkey
           Cote     d'Ivoire Bahrain
                           Chile       Kuwait
              Tunisia Russian
                       Lithuania
                  Mexico    Estonia
                        Latvia
                         Costa
                    Argentina
                    Dominican
                     Colombia Uruguay
                         Brazil Federation
                                  Malta
                               Malaysia
                                Rica
                                 Republic
                 Venezuela,
                 Romania
                  Gabon
                Jamaica
                South
                 Bulgaria
                 Namibia
              Jordan
                 Mauritius
            Morocco
             Albania
           Central
              El
               Sri       Africa
                       Panama
                 Ecuador
                      African
                    Kazakhstan
              Swaziland
              Guatemala
                  Salvador
                   Lanka        RB
       0     Ukraine
              Honduras
              Armenia
            Yemen,
              Congo,
             Egypt,
             Indonesia
            Mauritania
            Pakistan
            Iraq
             Nicaragua
              Bolivia
            Cameroon
             Philippines
             Zambia
           India
             Mongolia
            Ghana
           Senegal
            Zimbabwe
             Belize
            Togo
            Kenya
           Bangladesh
             Guyana
           Mali
             Nigeria
           Haiti
           Congo,
           Sierra
            Rwanda
           Mozambique
           Tajikistan
           Niger
           Uganda
            Papua
           Cambodia
            Lao
           Malawi
               Thailand
               Maldives
           Gambia,
           Nepal
           Burundi
                 Botswana
                Peru
                 Paraguay
           LiberiaChina
                   PDR  Rep.
                         Rep.
                       Arab
                      Dem.
                     Leone
                      New
                        The   Rep.
                              Rep.
                             Guinea
                Republic
         0                  200              400              600              800              1000             1200


Source: Authors' own calculations. Note: Pearson correlation = 0.60.




11
  Since the value of ranking is given according to the descending order of country human capital per capita, a
country with lower value in ranking has actually higher ranking status.


                                                                   9
Figure I.2 Comparison of human capital per capita ranking between CWON (2014) and IWR (2014)

                               CWON ranking (X-axis) vs IWR ranking (Y-axis) (122 countries)

     140

                                                                                                                  Central African
                                                                                                               Liberia
     120                                                                                                     Burundi
                                                                                                         Nepal    Gambia,  The
                                                                                                                     Republic
                                                                                          Lao PDR    Cambodia Malawi
                                                                                               Papua   New Guinea
                                                                                                       Uganda     Niger
                                                                                           Rwanda          Tajikistan
                                                                                                                 Mozambique
                                                                                                            Sierra Leone
                                                                                                               Congo,
                                                                                                           Haiti       Dem. Rep.
                                                                                 Nigeria                      Mali
                                                                                                      Bangladesh
                                                                                 Guyana          Kenya
                                                                                              Togo
     100                                                                     Belize             Zimbabwe  Senegal
                                                                                         Ghana
                                                                                  Mongolia          India
                                                                                     Zambia
                                                                                    Philippines
                                                                                        Cameroon
                                                                   MaldivesBolivia Nicaragua
                                                                                       Iraq Pakistan
                                                                                                  Mauritania
                                                        Paraguay              Indonesia
                                                                                Egypt, Arab Rep.
     80                                               China              Congo, Rep.              Yemen, Rep.
                                                                      Armenia
                                                                      Honduras
                                                                   Thailand
                                                                  Peru
                                                               Botswana           Ukraine
                                                                    Sri Lanka
                                                                     El Salvador
                                                                          Guatemala
                                                          Ecuador Swaziland
                                                    Kazakhstan                 AlbaniaMorocco
                                                            MauritiusJordan
                                               Panama Namibia
     60                                                       Bulgaria
                                                                South
                                                                 JamaicaAfrica
                                                       Gabon
                                                         Romania
                                                             Venezuela, RB
                                           Brazil
                                      Uruguay Colombia  Mexico
                                                     Dominican    Republic  Tunisia
                                            Costa
                                     Malaysia         Argentina
                                                   Rica
                                   Malta     Latvia
                                         Estonia
                                          Chile  Lithuania
                                                  Russian  Federation
     40                         Kuwait Bahrain                                                     Cote d'Ivoire
                 Iceland                      Poland                                         Turkey
                               Korea,   Saudi
                                       Rep.    Arabia
                                                Hungary
                     Qatar                     Greece
                                                   Croatia
                Luxembourg
                         SingaporeSlovenia
                                     Portugal
                                 Italy
                                    Spain
     20           Canada Japan                                                                          Tanzania
                        Germany
                   AustraliaAustria
                    Sweden      United Arab
                      Netherlands
                          Finland
                 UnitedIreland
                             France
                         States   Emirates
                           United
                     Denmark       Kingdom
                              Belgium
                Norway
               Switzerland
                                                                                   Moldova Vietnam Kyrgyz Republic
      0
           0              20              40              60              80              100             120             140


Source: Authors' own calculations. Note: Spearman correlation = 0.81.

(122) countries and for the same year (2014), the human capital per capita is measured in constant
2014 US$ by means of the market exchange rates in the CWON project, while it is measured in 2005
US$ by using the Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) exchange rates in the IWR project. As a result, the
differences between the two monetary measures come from at least two sources: one is the choice
of the base year, i.e. 2014 vs. 2005, and the other is the choice of exchange rates, i.e. market
exchange rates vs. PPPs. Therefore, if all these issues are taken into consideration and are addressed
properly, the comparison results could have been different.12

In this Introduction, two human capital measures by applying the indicators-based approach, i.e. the
WB HCI and the IHME HCI, are selected for presenting the visual relationship between the two
human capital index measures. Figure I.3 and Figure I.4 are based on these two index measures and
on the rankings thereof, respectively. As shown, both the calculated Pearson and Spearman
correlations are as high as 0.95, based on the selected 151 countries/economies.
Figure I.3 Comparison of human capital index measure between WB HCI (2018) and IHME HCI (2014)

                     WB HCI measure (X-axis) vs. IHME HCI measure (Y-axis) (151 countries)




12
  There are some differences in the 2014 rankings of these countries in GDP per capita, constant 2010 US
dollars used by CWON versus GDP per capita, PPP, constant 2011 international dollars used by IWR.




                                                                       10
 30,0
                                                                                                        Finland
                                                                                              Iceland
                                                                                                   Denmark
                                                                                                      Netherlands
 25,0                                                                                   Luxembourg
                                                                                                 France
                                                                                                Belgium
                                                                                                  Norway
                                                                                                      CanadaKorea, Rep.
                                                                                                  Switzerland
                                                                                                      Sweden
                                                                                                       Ireland
                                                                                                            JapanSingapore
                                                                                       Greece  Estonia
                                                                                                     Austria
                                                                                                Cyprus
                                                                                            Latvia   Germany
                                                                                                    Slovenia
                                                                                                      Australia
                                                                                                 United
                                                                                                    Czech
                                                                                                    United
                                                                                               Poland     States
                                                                                                           Republic
                                                                                                             Kingdom
                                                                                            Croatia
                                                                                         Hungary  New
                                                                                                  Italy Zealand
                                                                                        Slovak
                                                                                         Malta   Republic
                                                                                                 Israel
                                                                                          LithuaniaPortugal
 20,0                                                                                         Spain
                                                                                      Bulgaria Serbia
                                                                                  Ukraine
                                                                                TurkeyChina
                                                                              Montenegro
                                                                                      Chile  Russian Federation
                                                                   Macedonia,
                                                                    Lebanon
                                                                         Moldova   FYR and
                                                                             Romania
                                                                                Bosnia
                                                                              Georgia
                                                                        Armenia
                                                                         Kuwait                Kazakhstan
                                                                          Saudi
                                                                       Jordan    Arabia
                                                                              Argentina
                                                                               Herzegovina
 15,0                                                           TunisiaBrazilThailand
                                                                                 Islamic Rep. Emirates
                                                                               Costa
                                                                             UruguayUnited
                                                                                      Rica
                                                                               Malaysia
                                                                           Iran,            Arab
                                                                   Panama
                                                                     JamaicaColombia Vietnam
                                                                               Albania
                                                                              Qatar   Seychelles
                                                                                     Bahrain
                                                                   Paraguay
                                                                Tonga
                                                                  AlgeriaKyrgyz
                                                                           PeruOman
                                                                                  Republic
                                                                            Azerbaijan
                                                                             Mexico
                                                                          Sri Lanka
                                                               El Salvador    Trinidad
                                                                                Mongoliaand Tobago
                                                                                Mauritius
                                                                             Ecuador
                                                             Egypt,
                                                         Gabon        Arab Rep.
                                                                   Tajikistan
                                                                   Nicaragua
 10,0                                                         Dominican
                                                               Morocco      Republic
                                                              Honduras
                                                              Guyana  Philippines
                                                                    Indonesia
                                                  IraqTimor-Leste
                                                           Vanuatu
                                                          Guatemala
                                                            Myanmar
                                                                 Kenya
                                            MauritaniaBotswana
                                                        Solomon
                                                     Congo,
                                                   South      Rep.
                                                          Africa
                                                        Haiti
                                                    Comoros
                                                         Lao       Islands
                                                            Kiribati
                                                              PDR
                                                 Cameroon
                                             Angola
                                               Sudan   Namibia
                                                       India
                                                       Ghana  Cambodia
                                                              Nepal
                                                    Togo
                                                 Pakistan
                                               Rwanda       Bangladesh
  5,0                                             Tanzania
                                                  Gambia,
                                                Uganda
                                           Nigeria
                                              Congo,   Zimbabwe
                                                            The
                                                       Dem. Rep.
                                                Ethiopia
                                               Guinea
                                            SierraZambia
                                                     Senegal
                                               Madagascar
                                                Burundi
                                                   Benin
                                                    Leone
                                                Papua
                                              Yemen,    New Guinea
                                                        Rep.
                                        Liberia    Malawi
                                              Lesotho
                                             Mozambique
                                            Côte Afghanistan
                                                   d'Ivoire
                                       Mali Burkina Faso
                                     Chad
                                      South
                                       NigerSudan
  0,0
        0,00   0,10     0,20      0,30       0,40        0,50        0,60         0,70        0,80         0,90        1,00


Source: Authors' own calculations. Note: Pearson correlation = 0.95.

In Table I.2, both the Pearson and Spearman correlations among the two monetary and the four
indicators-based measures are reported with each other. Note that for data used by the WB HCI,
2018 is the only year available. As for the WEF GHCI, data for 2017 is used. There exist data for 2015,
however, the estimating method was quite different from the latest one as applied by the WEF GHCI
for 2017.

As shown in Table I.2, the positive correlations are found among different measures of human capital
discussed, both in terms of the measures and of the rankings. The range of the calculated Pearson
correlation is between 0.27 and 0.95 with the mean equal to 0.70, while the range of the calculated
Spearman correlation is between 0.70 and 0.95 with the mean equal to 0.86.

Figure I.4 Comparison of human capital index ranking between WB HCI (2018) and IHME HCI (2014)

                  WB HCI ranking (X-axis) vs. IHME HCI ranking (Y-axis) (151 countries)




                                                          11
 160
                                                                                                                                  Niger
                                                                                                                              South
                                                                                                                          Burkina    Sudan
                                                                                                                                   Chad
                                                                                                                                  Faso
                                                                                                                  AfghanistanCôteMali
                                                                                                                                   d'Ivoire
                                                                                                                             Mozambique
 140                                                                                                      Malawi         LesothoLiberia
                                                                                                                           Yemen,  Rep.
                                                                                                            Benin Papua
                                                                                                                     BurundiNew
                                                                                                                       Madagascar
                                                                                                                       Guinea
                                                                                                                                Guinea
                                                                                                                              Sierra Leone
                                                                                                        Senegal    Ethiopia
                                                                                                                Zambia  Congo,  Dem.   Rep.
                                                                                                                    Uganda
                                                                                                               Gambia,
                                                                                                             Tanzania    The   Nigeria
                                                                                                 ZimbabweTogo           Rwanda
                                                                                                                  Pakistan
 120                                                                                       Bangladesh
                                                                                                   Ghana
                                                                                        Nepal IndiaNamibia            Sudan
                                                                                                                 Cameroon   Angola
                                                                                      Cambodia Lao PDRComoros
                                                                                          Kiribati
                                                                                                Haiti      South
                                                                                                       Congo,      Africa
                                                                                                                 Rep.         Mauritania
                                                                                  Kenya Myanmar Solomon     Islands
                                                                                                      Botswana
 100                                                                                                Timor-Leste
                                                                                             Guatemala
                                                                                            Vanuatu           Iraq
                                                                            Indonesia
                                                                          Philippines Guyana
                                                                                         Honduras Republic
                                                                                     Morocco
                                                                                       Dominican
                                                                                Nicaragua     Gabon
                                                   Mauritius Ecuador          Tajikistan Egypt,  Arab   Rep.
                                                  MongoliaTrinidad   and
                                                                    Sri   Tobago El Salvador
                                                                        Lanka
  80                                                       Mexico Peru
                                                               Azerbaijan        Algeria
                                                     Oman                          Tonga
                                                                      Kyrgyz Republic
                                                                               Paraguay
                                                Bahrain
                                            Seychelles   Qatar
                                                      Albania
                                                Vietnam         Colombia  Jamaica
                                                     Malaysia
                                                      Costa      Iran, IslamicPanama
                                                               Uruguay
                                                             Rica               Rep.
  60                                             United Arab  Emirates
                                                            Thailand     Brazil     Tunisia
                                                        Bosnia  and
                                                           Argentina
                                                                   SaudiJordan
                                                                          Arabia
                                                                       Kuwait
                                  Kazakhstan             Georgia
                                                              Romania
                                                       Herzegovina      Armenia
                                              Chile                  Moldova
                                                                           Lebanon
                                                                             Macedonia, FYR
                                    Russian   Federation
                                             Bulgaria
                                               China    Montenegro
  40                           Serbia               Turkey
                                                  Ukraine
                      Portugal     Spain
                                       Lithuania
                                         Malta
                            Israel
                        Italy             Slovak Republic
                                        Hungary
                           New
                      United    Zealand
                                      Croatia
                                 Poland
                              Kingdom
                     Czech
                Australia
                    SloveniaRepublic
                             United   States
  20               Germany           Latvia
             Japan              Estonia Greece
                    Austria Cyprus
               Ireland
                 Sweden
           Singapore
                  Canada  Switzerland
                        Norway
            Korea,   Rep.     Belgium Luxembourg
                           France
                  Netherlands
              Finland  Denmark Iceland
   0
       0             20              40              60              80             100             120             140             160


Source: Authors' own calculations. Note: Spearman correlation = 0.95.


Table I.2 Correlation of human capital estimates among international projects in 2014
 Pearson/Spearman CWON              IWR      WB HCI    IHME HCI     UN HDI      WEF GHCI
     correlation
        CWON               -    0.60/0.81 0.67/0.85 0.69/0.86 0.67/0.94 0.66/0.80
                                   (122)      (131)       (140)       (139)        (117)
         IWR                         -      0.55/0.78 0.37/0.79 0.27/0.80 0.53/0.70
                                              (129)       (139)       (138)        (123)
        WB HCI                                   -     0.95/0.95 0.94/0.95 0.89/0.91
                                                          (151)       (153)        (125)
      IHME HCI                                              -      0.93/0.94 0.86/0.88
                                                                      (183)        (130)
        UN HDI                                                          -        0.85/0.87
                                                                                   (129)
      WEF GHCI                                                                       -
Source: Authors' own calculations.
Notes: 1. Data used by WB HCI and WEF GHCI are for 2018 and 2017, respectively; 2. The number of selected
countries/economies for each comparison is in parenthesis.

The ranking correlation (indicated by the Spearman correlation) is not lower than the corresponding
level correlation (indicated by the Pearson correlation), with only one exception where the former is
slightly lower than the latter between the WB HCI and the IHME HCI. This finding indicates that
policy-makings related to human capital based on the rankings might be more suggestive than those
based on pure level or index measures.

As also shown in Table I.2, the correlations within the indicators-based measures are higher than
within the monetary measures. All the correlations are higher between the CWON measure, than
between the IWR measure, and any of the indicators-based measures. In addition, the correlations
are higher between each of the WB HCI, the IHME HCI, and the UN HDI, than between the WEF GHCI,
and the CWON measure. Moreover, among the indicators-based measures, the correlations between


                                                                    12
each pair of the WB HCI, the IHME HCI, and the UN HDI are higher than between any of the first
three indexes and the WEF GHCI.

Conclusion

The six measures of human capital differ from each other because some are monetary measures and
some are indicator-based measures, and their methodologies employed even within these types
differ in significant ways. Whether or not the strength of the correlations matter depends on how
they are to be used. In any case, individual country results may be particularly important to a
consumer of these measures.

References
Arrow, K. J., P. Dasgupta, L. H. Goulder, K. J. Mumford, and K. Oleson (2012). `Sustainability and the
     Measurement of Wealth', Environment and Development Economics, 17(3), 317-353.

Arrow, K. J., P. Dasgupta, L. H. Goulder, K. J. Mumford, and K. Oleson (2013). `Sustainability and the
     Measurement of Wealth: Further Reflections', Environment and Development Economics,
     18(4), 504-516.

Barro, R.J., and J.-W. Lee. (2018). Dataset of Educational Attainment, February 2016 Revision.
      www.barrolee.com. Accessed 15 June 2019.

Becker, G. S. (1962). `Investment in Human Capital: A Theoretical Analysis', Journal of Political
     Economy, Vol. 70(5, Part 2, Supplement), pp. 9-49.

Becker, G. S. (1964). Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with Special Reference to
     Education, New York. Columbia University Press.

Dolan, P., T. Peasgood, and M.P. White, M. P. (2008). `Do We Really Know What Makes Us Happy? A
      Review of the Economic Literature on the Factors Associated with Subjective Wellbeing',
      Journal of Economic Psychology, (29): 94-122.

Feenstra, R. C., R. Inklaar, and M. P. Timmer (2015). `The Next Generation of the Penn World Table',
      American Economic Review 105 (10): 3150­82.

Ferreira, S., and Hamilton, K. (2010). `Comprehensive Wealth, Intangible Capital, and Development',
       Policy Research Working Paper 5452, The World Bank.

Fraumeni, Barbara M. (forthcoming) Human Capital Measurement, Academic Press, Cambridge, MA.

Hall, R. and C. Jones (1999). `Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output Per Worker
       Than Others?' Quarterly Journal of Economics. 114(1):83116.

Hamilton, K. and G. Liu (2014). `Human capital, tangible wealth, and the intangible capital residual',
      Oxford Review of Economic Policy, Vol. 30, No. 1, pp. 70-91

IBRD (International Bank for Reconstruction and Development) and World Bank (2018). The Human
      Capital Project, The World Bank, Washington D.C.




                                                   13
Jorgenson, D.W. and B.M. Fraumeni (1989). `The Accumulation of Human and Non-Human Capital,
      1948-1984', in R.E. Lipsey and H.S. Tice (eds.), The Measurement of Savings, Investment, and
      Wealth, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Jorgenson, D.W and B.M. Fraumeni (1992a). `The Output of Education Sector', in Z. Griliches (ed.)
      Output Measurement in the Service Sectors, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Jorgenson, D.W and B.M. Fraumeni (1992b). `Investment in Education and U.S. Economic Growth',
      Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 94, Supplement, 51-70.

Klenow, P. and A. RodriguezClare (1997). The Neoclassical Revolution in Growth Economics: Has It
     Gone Too Far? NBER Macroeconomics Annual.

Lange, G., Q. Wodon, and K. Carey eds. (2018). The Changing Wealth of Nations 2018: Building a
      Sustainable Future, The World Bank, Washington D.C.

Lim, S. S., R. L. Updike, A. S. Kaldjian, R. M. Barber, K. Cowling, H. York, J. Friedman, R. Xu, J. L.
       Whisnant, H. J. Taylor, A. Leever, Y. Roman, M. F. Bryant, J. Dieleman, E. Gakidou, C. J. L.
       Murray (2018). `Measuring human capital: a systematic analysis of 195 countries and
       territories, 1990­2016', The Lancet, Vol 392 October 6.

Liu, G. (2015). `A Stylized Satellite Account for Human Capital,' Statistics Norway Discussion Paper No.
       816, August.

Liu, G and B. M. Fraumeni (2016). `Human capital measurement: country experiences and
       international initiatives', in D. W. Jorgenson, K. Fukao and M. P. Timmer (ed.), The World
       Economy - Growth or Stagnation? Cambridge University Press.

Lucas, R. E. Jr. (1988). `On the mechanics of economic development', Journal of Monetary Economics,
      22(1), 3-42.

Managi, S. and P. Kumar eds. (2018). Inclusive Wealth Report 2018: Measuring Progress towards
    Sustainability, UNEP and Kyushu University Urban Institute, by Routledge, London and New
    York.

Mankiw, N. G., D. Romer, and D. N. Weil (1992). `A Contribution to the Empirics of Growth', Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 107, 2, 408­437.

Mincer, J. (1958). Investment in Human Capital and Personal Income Distribution, Journal of Political
     Economy, Vol. 66(4), pp. 281-302.

Mincer, J. (1962). On-the-job Training: Costs, Returns and Some Implications, Journal of Political
     Economy, Vol. 70. No. 5 (Part 2). pp. 50­79.

Montenegro, C. E., and H. Patrinos (2016). `A Data Set of Comparable Estimates of the Private Rate of
     Return to Schooling around the World, 1970­2014', Unpublished, World Bank, Washington,
     DC.

Murray, C. J. L. et al. (2017). `Global, regional, and national under-5 mortality, adult mortality, age-
     specific mortality, and life expectancy, 1970­2016: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden
     of Disease Study 2016', The Lancet, 2017; 390: 1084­150.




                                                     14
OECD (2001). The Well-being of Nations: The Role of Human and Social Capital, OECD Publishing,
     Paris.

OECD (2011, 2013, 2015, 2017). How's Life? Measuring well-being, OECD Publishing, Paris.
     http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264121164-en

Patrinos, H.A. and N. Angrist (2018). `A Global Dataset on Education Quality: A Review and an Update
      (1965­2018)', World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 8592.

Romer, P.M. (1986). `Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth', Journal of Political Economy, 94,
     1002-1037.

Schultz, T. W. (1961). Investment in Human Capital, American Economic Review, Vol. 51. No. 1. pp. 1­
      17.

Schultz, T. W. (1962). Reflections on Investment in Man, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 70 (5, Part
      2, Supplement), pp. 1-8.

Smedes, M. (forthcoming). Guidance Note of the Labour, Human Capital and Education Sub-group on
     Well-being and Sustainability, draft.

Smith, A. (1776). An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, Book 2. W. Strahan
      & T. Cadell, London.

Stiglitz, J. E., A. Sen, and J. Fitoussi. (2010). Mismeasuring Our Lives: Why GDP Doesn't Add Up. New
        York and London: New Press.

UNDP (2019). Human Development Report 2019 - Beyond income, beyond averages, beyond today:
     Inequalities in human development in the 21st century, Published for the United Nations
     Development Programme.

UNECE (2016). Guide on Measuring Human Capital, New York and Geneva: United Nations.

UNECE (2009). Measuring Sustainable Development, Report of the Joint UNECE/OECD/Eurostat
     Working Group on Statistics for Sustainable Development (WGSSD), New York and Geneva.

World Bank (2006). Where is the Wealth of Nations? The World Bank, Washington D.C.

World Bank (2011). The Changing Wealth of Nations: Measuring Sustainable Development in the New
     Millennium, The World Bank, Washington D.C.

World Economic Forum (2017). The Global Human Capital Report 2017 - Preparing people for the
     future of work, https://www.weforum.org/




                                                  15
