                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            OCCUPATIONAL LICENSING AND LABOR MARKET FLUIDITY

                                     Morris M. Kleiner
                                        Ming Xu

                                     Working Paper 27568
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27568


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2020




We thank Mons Chan, Hwikwon Ham, and Brad Larsen for comments on earlier versions of the
paper. We also thank the participants at the Annual Knee Center Occupational Licensing
Conference, George Washington University, Midwest Economic Association, Stanford Institute
for Theoretical Economics, and the W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research for their
suggestions, discussion, and useful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Morris M. Kleiner and Ming Xu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Occupational Licensing and Labor Market Fluidity
Morris M. Kleiner and Ming Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 27568
July 2020
JEL No. H1,J01,J18,J24,J38,J4,J44,J62,J8,J88,K0,K2,K31

                                         ABSTRACT

We show that occupational licensing has significant negative effects on labor market fluidity
defined as cross-occupation mobility. Using a balanced panel of workers constructed from the
CPS and SIPP data, we analyze the link between occupational licensing and labor market
outcomes. We find that workers with a government-issued occupational license experience churn
rates significantly lower than those of non-licensed workers. Specifically, licensed workers are
24% less likely to switch occupations and 3% less likely to become unemployed in the following
year. Moreover, occupational licensing represents barriers to entry for both non-employed
workers and employed ones. The effect is more prominent for employed workers relative to those
entering from nonemployment, because the opportunity cost of acquiring a license is much higher
for employed individuals. Lastly, we find that average wage growth is higher for licensed
workers than non-licensed workers, whether they stay in the same occupation in the next year or
switch occupations. We find significant heterogeneity in the licensing effect across different
occupation groups. These results hold across various data sources, time spans, and indicators of
being licensed. Overall, licensing could account for almost 8% of the total decline in monthly
occupational mobility over the past two decades.


Morris M. Kleiner
University of Minnesota
Humphrey School of Public Affairs
260 Humphrey Center
301 19th Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
kleiner@umn.edu

Ming Xu
Queen's Economics Department
Queen's University
ming.xu@queensu.ca
1       Introduction

Over one-fifth of all U.S. workers are employed in licensed occupations--jobs that require
a government license. This number was only 5% about 70 years ago (Kleiner and Krueger
(2013)). The increase in the number of licensed occupations and workers was generally
motivated as a consumer protection measure. However, for workers who are trying to en-
ter or change a profession, increased licensing may also result in barriers such as restricted
geographical and occupational worker mobility; decreased worker welfare; increased con-
sumer prices; and ultimately, impaired economic growth (Chetty (2009), Johnson and Kleiner
(2017), and Kleiner and Soltas (2019)).

    We use public individual-level survey data from the Current Population Survey (CPS) and
the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), as well as a newly constructed data
set on licensing requirements ­ the Occupational Licensing Law Research Project (OLLRP),
to investigate the relationship between occupational licensing and labor market fluidity, de-
fined as cross-occupation movement. The OLLRP contains a detailed range of occupational
licensing requirements for all of the universally licensed1 occupations across every state from
the 1980s to 2016. We employ this detailed long panel dataset on licensing requirements to
document the trends in licensing across different states and occupations. Our paper is one of
the first to examine the effects of licensing on occupational switching rates, to examine the
movement out of unemployment to licensed and unlicensed occupations, and to document
the wage growth associated with switching and licensing. One of our key interests in this
paper is the relationship between licensing and labor market fluidity. Davis and Haltiwanger
(2014) argue that reduced fluidity has harmful consequences for productivity, real wages,
and employment. Lower fluidity among licensed workers could be harmful for individual
labor market outcomes as well as for the aggregate economy. Figure 1 shows that while the
licensing rate (the fraction of the workforce that is licensed) has trended up steadily, the
occupational mobility or switching rate has declined over the past two decades. This sug-
gests that there may be a link between workers' licensing status and occupational switching
decisions. Using the CPS to focus on occupational-level data, we find that occupations with
higher licensing shares are experiencing relatively lower churn rates.2 Figure 2 shows the
relationship between the licensing share and the switching-out rate, while Figure 3 shows the
    1
     A universally licensed occupation is one that requires a license in every state in the U.S. The full list of
these occupations is presented in Appendix A
   2
     The licensing share in an occupation is defined by the share of the total working population that holds
a government-issued license in a given occupation.




                                                       2
relationship between the licensing share and the switching-in rate. The negative correlation
between the share of workers who are licensed and the occupational churn rate suggests that
licensing may have a negative effect on individuals' labor market transition decisions.

    Much of the previous literature investigates the relationship between occupational licens-
ing and labor market outcomes. Kleiner and Krueger (2013) and Kleiner and Vorotnikov
(2017) show that occupational licensing is associated with higher average wages and has
implications for wage inequality and income distribution. Kleiner (2000) shows that occu-
pational licensing reduces labor supply while increasing labor prices. Wiswall (2007) focuses
on the market for teachers and finds that licensing reduces the supply of teachers and the
quality of teaching, while increasing the average length of teaching careers. These papers
focus generally on cross-sectional employment outcomes rather than worker employment dy-
namics. Recent papers have expanded this area of research. Gittleman, Klee and Kleiner
(2018) investigate the effect of licensing on the probability of being employed as well as of
receiving employer-sponsored health insurance. Johnson and Kleiner (2017) show the impact
of occupational licensing on reducing interstate migration rates. Another set of studies has
focused on the declining trend in labor market dynamism. For example, Hyatt (2015) shows
that the rate at which workers switch jobs has been trending down over the last few decades.
Hiring and job creation rates have also been declining. Moscarini and Vella (2008) use the
CPS to document the declining trend in occupational switching frequency, while Xu (2019)
investigates how much of this trend is due to increases in occupational switching costs (such
as occupational licensing). This paper connects these two literatures. We focus on worker
employment dynamics and investigate how licensing affects occupation switching probabil-
ities as well as wage changes associated with occupational switches. This connection will
help us investigate, through an endogenous career-choice dynamic structural framework, the
impact of licensing on workers' lifetime welfare changes, as well as the overall welfare effects
of occupational licensing, similar to Kleiner and Soltas (2019).

    One of our contributions is a detailed analysis of the Occupational Licensing Law Re-
search Project (OLLRP) data set, which establishes new historical data patterns and trends
in occupational licensing. Specifically, we measure the degree to which occupational licensing
costs have changed (increased) for workers over time and across different states and occupa-
tions. Our second contribution is to examine the relationship between licensing, occupational
switching, and the wage changes associated with these transitions. Using propensity score
matching (PSM), we compare the switching patterns and wage changes of those who are
licensed with those of workers who are not. The matching criteria are based on a series of




                                               3
observable worker characteristics as well as the occupations' skill requirements, which are
determined by applying principle component analysis to O*NET data on the occupation
task-skill mix. Before applying PSM, we first employ a coarsened exact matching (CEM)
strategy to ensure that our sample is balanced. The preliminary findings show that occupa-
tional licensure has significant negative effects on occupational mobility when switching both
into and out of licensed occupations. Specifically, we find that workers who are licensed are
23.6% (9.7 percentage points) less likely to switch to another occupation next year and 3%
(0.5pp) less likely to become unemployed. Workers who are licensed are 24.1% (9.6pp) less
likely than other workers who are not licensed to have just switched into their occupation.
After controlling for observable heterogeneity, we find that those switching into a licensed
occupation experience higher wage gains (5.4 percentage point higher growth rate, or an ad-
ditional $1,8343 for average workers4 ) than those switching into a non-licensed occupation.
Workers who are currently licensed experience higher wage growth next year regardless of
whether they stay in the same occupation (on average, 6.3 percentage points higher in log
wage changes or $2,208 more than non-licensed workers) or switch occupations (on average,
3.8 percentage points higher or $1,251 more than non-licensed workers). Furthermore, we
find that compared with employed workers, licensing presents less of a barrier to entry for
the unemployed, possibly because of differences in the opportunity cost of time to meet
government requirements between the two groups. We use various strategies including eval-
uating the parameter stability due to omitted variable bias, following Altonji, Elder and
Taber (2005) and Oster (2017), as well as different datasets to confirm the robustness of
the licensing effect on worker mobility and wage growth. Finally, we do a back-of-the enve-
lope calculation and find that licensing can account for at least 7.7% of the total decline in
occupational mobility over the past two decades. These results suggested that in addition
to static general equilibrium welfare effects that Kleiner and Soltas (2019) suggests, licens-
ing also has significant lifetime welfare effects for workers through impacting their dynamic
occupational career choices.

   The paper proceeds as follows. In section 2, we present a simple dynamic model of occu-
pational choice which we use to investigate how licensing may affect occupational switching
decisions. This model guides our empirical analysis. In section 3, we introduce the various
data sources that we use in our analysis, and we provide details on the sample selection and
   3
     All dollar amounts in this paper are in 2000 real dollars.
   4
     The licensing dollar effect is calculated using the group mean wage multiplied by the marginal licensing
effect within the group. In this case, the group consists of workers who have just switched into their current
occupation.




                                                      4
data cleaning steps. Section 4 outlines our empirical analysis, and section 5 contains the
baseline results. Section 6 focuses on the heterogeneous effects of licensing across different
occupation groups, and we summarize and conclude in section 8.



2    Theoretical Model

In this section, we build a simple recursive dynamic discrete-choice model and use it to
discuss how licensing may affect workers' occupation choices and switching decisions. We
then discuss how one can extend this model and use it to estimate the lifetime welfare effects
of occupational licensing.

    Consider a world in which workers choose a sequence of occupations over their career in
order to maximize their expected lifetime discounted utility. Workers receive utility from con-
sumption and nonpecuniary preference shocks for each occupational choice. The discounted
stream of utility being maximized by the worker is

                                   A
                                         a-1 u(cija ) + ija ,
                                  a=1


where the subscripts denote worker i in occupation j at age a, and A is the age at retirement.
Workers receive job-specific preference shocks ija , with  representing the relative impor-
tance between the monetary and nonpecuniary components of worker utility. A worker's
consumption from a particular job can be written as

                                    cija = wija - Costioja ,

where wija denotes worker i's wage in occupation j at age a. The Costioja term represents
the costs incurred at age a for a worker in occupation j who has switched from occupation
o in the previous period (a - 1). We can then specify the switching cost term as
                         
                         ( +  w
                           1 3 ioa-1 )1ojL + (2 + 4 wioa-1 )1ojN          if o = j
            Costioja   =
                         0                                                if o = j

The switching cost is zero if the worker does not switch occupations in the next period
(o = j ). When o = j , the switching cost consists of two parts that differ depending on
whether the destination occupation is licensed (subscript L) or non-licensed (subscript N ).



                                                5
1 and 2 capture the entrance fees for licensed and non-licensed occupations, respectively.
3 and 4 take values between 0 and 1 and are multiplied by the current wage to capture
the opportunity costs of switching to licensed and non-licensed occupations. We describe a
worker's state as a vector x of the state variables (other than their current occupation) that
workers take into account when they make their occupational decisions for the next period.
The vector x may include age, previous wage wioa-1 , tenure, occupational skills, and so on.
We then write the worker's problem recursively as

                                 W (x, o,  ) = max(V (x, o, j ) +  j ),
                                                  j J


where J is the set of possible occupational choices and

                       V (x, o, j ) =u(x, o, j ) +          p(x |x, j )E W (x , j,  ).
                                                        x


Note that the first two arguments of V denote the worker's current state, x, and previous
occupation, o, while the third argument denotes the worker's occupation choice for the cur-
rent period, j . For simplicity, we assume linear utility, so u(x, o, j ) = w(x, j ) - Cost(x, o, j ).
We also assume  j is drawn from a type I extreme value distribution. In this case, following
Rust (1987), the probability of choosing occupation j in state x is

                                                   exp(V (x, o, j )/)
                                 q (x, o, j ) =                         .
                                                  kJ exp(V (x, o, k )/)


This is convenient, since it allows us to integrate out over the preference shock, and it greatly
simplifies the solution to the worker's problem.

    The problem described above can then be solved recursively by starting from age a = A
and working backwards. Depending on the choice of state variables and wage structure,
solving the general problem can be complicated and is beyond the scope of this section.5 For
illustrative purposes, we simplify the problem using the following assumptions. First, we
assume there are only three occupational choices: a licensed occupation (L), a non-licensed
occupation (N), and unemployment (U).6 Second, we assume there is a single market wage
for each occupation and we assume wL > wN > b, where b denotes unemployment income.
   5
    See Xu (2019) for a similar analysis with full structural estimation.
   6
    We follow Traiberman (2019) and treat non-employment as a voluntary choice of workers. Doing so
greatly simplifies the occupational choice problem, so we interpret workers going to unemployment as workers
receiving a very positive preference shock for unemployment or very negative preference shocks for all the
potential occupations.




                                                        6
This means that in the example, we do not consider the wage effects of factors such as
idiosyncratic tenure or skill accumulation. Our final assumption is that a worker's state
contains only their past occupation and age. Later, we will discuss how we can relax these
assumptions and what the implications are for each.

   Given the above simplifications, we are now ready to solve the worker's occupational
switching decision for the last period. When a = A,7 we can write all of the possible worker
values as

        V (A, L, L) = wL ,              V (A, L, N ) = wN ,                   V (A, L, U ) = b
        V (A, N, N ) = wN ,              V (A, N, L) = wL - 1 - 3 wN , V (A, N, U ) = b
        V (A, U, L) = wL - 1 ,           V (A, U, N ) = wN ,                  V (A, U, U ) = b.

Recall that in this value function, the first element denotes the worker's state (in the current
case, this is just age). The second and third elements denote the worker's previous and
current occupation. Note that in the last period, there is no continuation value for workers
so workers consider only the wages (and nonpecuniary shock) that come with the occupa-
tion they choose and the switching costs associated with it. Furthermore, without loss of
generality, we have normalized the switching cost parameters 2 and 4 to be equal to zero.
This means that 1 and 3 should be interpreted as the additional costs for entering the
licensed occupation relative to the non-licensed occupation. We also assume workers who
move to unemployment do not pay any costs, and unemployed workers entering licensed
occupations need to pay only the entry cost, not the opportunity cost, since workers do not
lose unemployment insurance even when they are training for a new occupation. We are now
ready to investigate how licensing affects worker entry decisions in this simple model. We
focus first on workers who are currently employed. The probability of a non-licensed worker
switching to a licensed occupation in the last period is



                                          exp((V (A, N, L))/)
       P robN L =
                    exp(V (A, N, L))/) + exp(V (A, N, N ))/) + exp(V (A, N, U ))/)
                                                   1
                  =          1                               1                       .
                    1 + exp(  ((1 + 3 )wN + 1 - wL )) + exp(   (b + 1 + 3 wN - wL ))
   7
    Workers retire after a = A. We do not model the retirement problem here, since it is beyond the scope
of this paper.




                                                   7
Similarly, we get the probability of licensed workers entering a non-licensed occupation:

                                         exp((V (A, L, N ))/)
       P robLN =
                    exp(V (A, L, N ))/) + exp(V (A, L, L))/) + exp(V (A, L, U ))/)
                                      1
                  =          1                  1            .
                    1 + exp(  (wL - wN ) + exp(   (b - wN ))

Note that the switching cost parameters 1 and 3 (which are a function of the relevant
licensing policies) are crucial in determining the probability of worker entry into licensed
occupations. When 1 and/or 3 increases--that is, when the licensing cost increases--the
probability of worker entry declines. Furthermore, if we assume that the average wages
for licensed and non-licensed occupations are similar (wL  wN ), then the entry rate into
the licensed occupation is always smaller than the one into the non-licensed occupation
(P robN L < P robLN ).

    The problem becomes more complex if we consider the effect of occupational licensing
in general equilibrium. Generally, licensing costs are introduced as a consumer protection
measure. Suppose service or product quality is tied to worker ability. Then, if the training
requirements to obtain a license increase (3 goes up), the average quality of the service
or product may grow as lower-ability workers choose not to enter the occupation, thereby
increasing the demand and wages (wL ) for that occupation's output, which in turn increases
incentives to obtain the license. The overall effect of switching costs on the probability
of workers moving into a licensed occupation then depends on a comparison between the
marginal costs and marginal benefits of obtaining the license:

    dP robN L  1           1
                             ((1+3 )wN +1 -wL (3 ))     1                       dwL
              = P rob2
                     N L e
                                                    + e  (b+1 +3 wN -wL (3 )) (     - wN ).
        d3                                                                      d3

Notice that the expression takes the same sign as the last term, so the sign of ( dw d3
                                                                                       L
                                                                                         - wN )
determines whether workers are more or less likely to switch into licensed occupations when
the training cost increases. If the forgone income from training is outweighed by the increased
wage premium of licensing, then workers will be more willing to switch. The empirical work
on how licensing affects worker entry probabilities will inform us on the relative values of
these marginal costs and benefits. The simple model above also has an interesting implication
for how age interacts with licensing and switching costs. Younger workers will have greater
incentives than older workers to pay licensing costs, because the marginal benefit for younger
workers is much larger because of their longer career prospects. Finally, we see that licensing
entrance fees (1 ) always decrease the probability of workers' getting licensed.



                                              8
    We then investigate how licensing affects worker job security. One caveat is that in our
model, workers voluntarily switch into unemployment. However, we can interpret this as the
probability of workers getting large negative shocks for working and therefore "voluntarily"
moving into unemployment. We compare the probability of switching into unemployment
for non-licensed and licensed workers:

                                         exp((V (A, N, U ))/)
       P robN U =
                    exp(V (A, N, U ))/) + exp(V (A, N, N ))/) + exp(V (A, N, L))/)
                                            1
                  =          1                             1
                    1 + exp(  (wL - 3 wN - 1 - b) + exp(     (wN - b))
                                         exp((V (A, L, U ))/)
       P robLU =
                    exp(V (A, L, U ))/) + exp(V (A, L, N ))/) + exp(V (A, L, L))/)
                                      1
                  =          1                1           .
                    1 + exp(  (wN - b) + exp(   (wL - b))

Note that in the case that 3 and 1 are greater than zero, we always have P robN U >
P robLU . This is true regardless of 3 's effect on wL . The intuition is that to switch to
unemployment, licensed workers have to have much larger negative shocks than non-licensed
workers. In other words, the model implies that licensed workers always have better job
security, since the relative value of unemployment is always lower. These are implications
that we can directly test in the data.

    This simple model allows us to establish some intuition about how licensing will affect
worker welfare and occupation entry and exit. However there are some key limitations
relative to what we will look at in the data. First, having only two occupations (and non-
employment) implies that we cannot say much about how licensing affects flows between non-
licensed or licensed occupations. In this example, every job-to-job transition into L is also an
exit out of N. Relaxing this assumption by having an arbitrary number of occupations would
allow workers to flow between different licensed or non-licensed occupations. This would
allow us to gain intuition separately for the effects of licensing on exit and entry probabilities
within and between classes of occupations, which are what we investigate in our empirical
section. We could also relax our second assumption and allow wages to depend on individual
idiosyncratic characteristics. This would allow the model to better fit wage patterns in the
data and also gain more intuition on how licensing affects wages. Our simple example focuses
only on the mean wage differentials between licensed and non-licensed occupations and how
this affects worker flows. In our empirical analysis, we also investigate how licensing affects
worker wages. The general model outlined at the beginning of this section has both of these




                                                9
features and could be taken directly to the data. One could also expand our model into a
general equilibrium framework similar to Traiberman (2019) to measure the potential benefits
of licensing (wage growth, higher product or service quality) and costs of licensing (higher
output prices and switching costs, labor misallocation, decreased output) and evaluate the
lifetime welfare effects on workers.8



3         Data

In this section, we describe the data we use in our analysis, as well as the data cleaning
and sample selection procedures. Until recently, data on occupational licensing have been
limited. No nationally representative survey in the United States has asked questions about
occupational licensing (Kleiner and Soltas (2019)). However, this situation has recently been
dramatically improved, thanks to new questions in both the Current Population Survey and
the Survey of Income and Program Participation.

    Starting in 2015, the CPS has included three new questions directly related to occupa-
tional licensing. First, workers who are 16 years old and over are asked whether they have
a professional certification or state- or industry-level license, not including business licenses.
If the answer to this first question is yes, then workers are further asked if their professional,
state, or industry license was issued by the federal, state, or local government. These two
questions were asked in every interview in 2015, but from 2016 on, these questions have been
asked only in the first and the fifth interviews. The third question asks whether a worker
has a government-issued certification or license (provided the worker answered yes to the
first two questions) or whether he or she is currently unemployed but has previously worked.
The question asks whether the respondent's government-issued professional, state, or indus-
try license was required for his or her job. Unemployed respondents who worked in the past
were asked about their last job. This third question was added in 2016 and is asked only in
the first and the fifth interviews. To match the U.S. government's definition of occupational
licensing, in our baseline analysis, we define a "licensed" worker as a respondent who answers
yes to the first two questions.9

        The SIPP also has information on occupational licensing in two separate panels: 2008 and
    8
     We will leave to future work the theory of the general equilibrium effects of licensing.
    9
     We use an alternative definition and define a respondent who answers yes to all three questions as a
"licensed" worker, and the results from this analysis are qualitatively and quantitatively very similar to our
baseline analysis. The results are available from the authors.




                                                     10
2014. The 2008 SIPP panel has 16 waves from May 2008 through November 2013. The 13th
wave, collected from September to December of 2012, contains a "Professional Certifications,
Licenses, and Educational Certificates" topical module, which contains licensing information
that can be linked with core interview data in the same wave. This questionnaire is more
detailed than what is found in the CPS. To construct an occupational license indicator, we
use three key questions that are comparable to the ones in the CPS. The first question is
"Do you have a professional or state or industry certificate?" The second question is, "Is
(the) certification or license required for current or most recent job?" The third question
is, "Who awarded this certificate or license?". If a respondent answers yes to the first two
questions, and answers "Federal government, state government, or local government" to the
third question, then we regard him or her as licensed. The most recent SIPP panel (2014)
also includes questions about licensing in the core data rather than the topical module.
Respondents who are 18 years old and over and whose educational attainment is high school
graduate or higher are asked, "Has...earned a professional certification or license?" Those
who answered yes to the previous question are further asked, "Is the certification or license
issued by the federal, state or local government?" These two questions in the 2014 SIPP are
essentially the same as the first two questions in the CPS, though the 2014 SIPP doesn't ask
if the license is required for the respondent's job.

    In this paper, we use both the CPS and SIPP for our analysis. We use the CPS to
deliver our baseline results, using the licensing definition above. We then use the SIPP as
a robustness check to strengthen and verify our results and analysis. Our analysis with the
SIPP starts with waves 12, 13, and 14 of the 2008 panel, since they contain the most reliable
definition of licensure linked to employment dynamics. We then use an additional 20 years
of data from the other SIPP panels with an alternative definition of being licensed.10 The
results for this analysis are shown in Appendix C. Note that because of the differences in
the survey design, the definition of licensing and the timing of the interviews, the results
from the CPS and SIPP are not directly quantitatively comparable. However, they both
provide qualitative evidence of occupational licensing effects on labor market outcomes that
are consistent with each other. We do not use panel 2014 of the SIPP in this paper since only
one panel of data is currently available. However, since the licensing-related questions are
included in the core data, it will be a rich and valuable source for future work on occupational
licensing.
  10
     Other than in the wave 13 topical module, there is no information in the SIPP about an individual's
licensing status. In this analysis, we use a much more relaxed definition as the licensing indicator. We
provide more details about this analysis in the SIPP sample selection subsection.




                                                  11
3.1    CPS Sample Selection

In this section, we describe how we select and clean our CPS sample. As mentioned in the
previous section, we use the three newly added survey questions to construct the licensing
attainment indicator, which is considered to be the most reliable licensing indicator in the
literature. We use data from the IPUMS CPS (Flood et al. (2015)) for 2015 through 2018.
We keep respondents from age 20 to 65 who are not enrolled in school; not out of the labor
force or retired; not in the military; not disabled; and not family workers, self-employed, or
unpaid workers.

    The CPS has several advantages for our analysis. It is a nationally representative survey
and has a relatively large sample size. It is also recorded monthly, so we can observe how
licensing affects monthly occupational transitions. The CPS also has two major drawbacks:
First, the questions about licenses and certification are asked only in months 1 and 5 for
each individual, with values in other months being imputed. This imputation could be
problematic ­ for example, people who were not licensed in month 1 but later acquired a
license and switched to a different occupation in month 4 should have their licensing status
changed between month 1 and 4, but the imputation often misses this change. Using the
IPUMS imputed licensing status indicator, we measure the rate of change for worker monthly
licensing status. Table 1 presents these results for first round interviewers (interview months
1 to 4, Panel A) and second round interviewers (interview months 5 to 8, Panel C). It is
clear from the table that the licensing status change rate is significantly higher between the
interview months and imputed months (M1-M2 and M5-M6) than between two imputed
months (M2-M3, M3-M4, M6-M7, and M7-M8). This high rate in licensing status changes
in month 1 and 5 suggested that there might be errors in the original imputation process.
Moreover, wage data are available only for the Outgoing Rotation Groups (i.e., only in
months 4 and 8). This limitation leads us to restrict our wage-related analysis to an annual
rather than monthly frequency. To be consistent in our analysis, our baseline results are all
in annual frequencies, but in the robustness section, we show monthly frequency results for
worker occupational mobility.

    The most reliable licensing indicator is provided in months 1 and 5, while wage data
are available for months 4 and 8. Both variables are at the center of our analysis, and this
discrepancy in the timing of data collection means that some adjustments to the existing
imputation are required. We impute data in two ways. First, we keep worker observations
from months 4 and 8 so we have the most reliable data on wages. We then use workers em-




                                              12
ployment status information to modify the spurious licensing status. In the second method,
we keep observations from months 1 and 5 and impute wage values using data from months
4 and 8. We leave the details of our imputation strategy to Appendix B. Panel B and panel
D in Table 1 show our imputation results: after the imputation process, the licensing status
change rate is uniformly distributed across all the interview months ­ this reassures us that
our imputation improves the reliability of the licensing indicators.


3.2    SIPP Sample Selection

The SIPP collects information on up to two jobs for each individual. We first define an
individual's primary job as the job at which he or she works the most hours. If information
on hours is not provided, then the primary job will be defined as the one where he or
she receives the highest monthly payment or highest hourly rate. Our analysis using the
SIPP is based on a worker's primary job. Similar to the CPS cleaning criteria, we drop
individuals who are younger than 20 or older than 65. In addition, we drop individuals
who are members of the armed forces, disabled, family workers, unpaid workers or enrolled
students. Furthermore, because of the well-known seam bias in the SIPP, we keep individuals
only in their interview month. Therefore, our sample is at a four-month frequency.

    As mentioned earlier, we use two different licensing indicators in our analysis. The first
licensing indicator is constructed using the 13th topical module from the 2008 SIPP panel.
We use the three questions provided in the topical module to construct the indicator ­ if an
individual has a professional license that is issued by the government and required for the job,
then we say he or she is licensed. This is comparable to the licensing indicator we construct
using the CPS. We also include the core data from panels 12 to 14 for employment dynamics
analysis. The second licensing indicator we construct is not as strict as the first one. This
licensing indicator is defined based on whether an occupation is universally licensed. The list
of universally licensed occupations is provided in the Appendix A. This non-strict definition
allows us to conduct some analysis using the long SIPP panels and large sample size, despite
the lack of direct licensing questions in those years. In the paper, we use all available data
from the SIPP from 1991 to 2013 and this second definition of licensure as a robustness
check, and in Appendix C, we show the results.




                                              13
3.3       Supplementary Datasets

The third dataset we employ is Occupational Licensing Law Research Project (OLLRP).
OLLRP is newly constructed detailed data set on occupational licensing and requirements
for all universally licensed occupations across states and time, available at the Minnesota
Population Center. The requirements recorded include monetary costs such as initial li-
censing fees and renewal costs, as well as time costs such as required hours of training and
education or experience requirements. While the data are very detailed, the dataset is not
yet complete for all occupations, and so we cannot present a complete aggregate analysis
using it. However, what we have so far shows clear evidence regarding trends in occupational
licensing requirements. Based on the completed data, we see that both the licensing fees and
renewal costs have increased for almost all occupations. The national average increases in
licensing fees range from $0 for occupations such as truck drivers to over $300 for occupations
such as funeral directors.11 Licensing requirement changes are not universal across states.
Dentists see an increase in licensing costs of $950 in Alabama but no change in Arizona.
In Table 2 present a few more summary statistics on licensing requirement changes. The
first two columns show the education requirements of an occupation. The third and fourth
columns shows the initial cost of licensing, which is the initial amount that must be paid to
receive a license. The fifth and sixth columns show the renewal cost, which is the amount
charged to renew a license. Many other types of requirements are available in this dataset
such as an experience or exam requirements. Despite the significant heterogeneity across
occupations and states, the overall increase in licensing requirements is very clear. This is
one of the key motivations for our analysis.

    Besides the newly constructed licensing data, we also use O*NET in our regression analy-
sis. Our primary interest is in the effect of licensing on employment dynamics and outcomes.
One challenge is to separate the licensing effects from other potential confounding factors.
For example, workers who are licensed may tend to be more educated. Both the SIPP and
CPS record detailed information on individual characteristics. This information enables us
to carefully control for worker heterogeneity, which might be correlated with licensing status.
Furthermore, we want to control for occupational characteristics. In our analysis, we use
O*NET to separate the effect of working in the occupation requirements from that of licensing
requirements. O*NET, also known as the Occupational Information Network, is a database
describing occupations in terms of skill or knowledge requirements and worker practices.
We use all measures of occupational requirements from the following panels: knowledge,
 11
      To recap, all dollar amounts in the paper are in USD deflated to constant 2000 dollars.




                                                      14
abilities, skills, and work activities. We reduce this large set of occupational requirements
to three dimensions by applying principal component analysis (PCA). We then follow Lise
and Robin (2017) and recover the cognitive, manual, and interpersonal skill requirements for
each occupation. For each occupation, we map the skill requirements acquired from ONET
into the occupations we observe in the SIPP and CPS.


3.4    Switching Rates for Licensed and Non-Licensed Workers

First, we calculate the basic economy-wide switching rates for each occupation in the SIPP.
We divide all workers into licensed workers and non-licensed workers. We then calculate the
average worker mobility rates in each group and present the data in figures 4 through 7. An
examination of the figures shows that licensed workers experience far less churn than non-
licensed workers. The rate at which people switch into licensed occupations is lower (Figure
4 shows workers who switched in from a different occupation, and Figure 6 shows workers
who switched in from unemployment), as is the rate at which people switch out (Figure 5
shows workers switching to a different occupation, and Figure 7 shows workers switching
into unemployment.). This result holds even when we use different licensing indicators. We
use universally licensed occupations as the licensing indicator and, the SIPP from 1990 to
2013 which shows that workers who are working in universally licensed occupations (regard-
less of licensing attainment status) experience far less churn than other occupations (see
figures C.1 through C.4 in Appendix C). However, this difference in switching rates between
licensed and not licensed workers may be due to a number of factors not directly related to
licensing. If licensing is somehow correlated with other characteristics of the occupation that
are themselves correlated with switching rates, or if the people who are licensed tend to be
older or more educated and therefore less inclined to switch, we may incorrectly associate
lower occupational mobility with licensing, when in fact no causal relationship exists. In the
following sections, we detail our empirical strategy to identify these possibly confounding
factors separately from the direct effect of licensing on mobility and wages.



4     Empirical Analysis

A primary goal of this analysis is to determine whether occupational mobility is different for
workers who are licensed and those who are not and to measure the specific effect of licensing
on mobility. To do this, we use data from both the CPS and SIPP as described above. Our



                                              15
baseline results are from the CPS data. In the CPS, we use monthly data on individual
occupation, employment status, demographics, and other characteristics. These data allow
us to construct measures of mobility at the individual and occupational level. Our baseline
strategy is to construct measures of mobility into and out of each occupation and determine
the link between whether those individuals are licensed and the probability of switching.

    Our first specification, examines the probability of switching out of an occupation, condi-
tional on that occupations being licensed or not. Let an individual's sequence of occupation
choices be {. . . , Oit-1 , Oit , Oit+1 , . . . }. The switching out measure is Yit = 1 if Oit = Oit+1
and 0 otherwise. The basic regression is then the following linear probability model:

                                          Yit = 0 + 1 Lit + it ,                                            (1)

where Lit = 1 if the individual is licensed in period t, and Lit = 0 otherwise. The parameter
of interest, 1 , will tell us the conditional probability of a worker who is licensed, switching
occupations versus that of a worker who is not licensed.

    This regression is potentially problematic. First,individuals who are licensed may be more
or less likely to switch out of those occupations for reasons besides licensing. For example,
licensed workers may tend to be in higher-skill occupations. If switching occupations leads
to relative losses of human capital, workers in occupations that require more human capital
or occupation-specific skills may be less likely to switch out. We control for these potential
differences in the characteristics of occupations by including a set of occupation-specific skill
requirements as independent variables in the linear probability model. In particular, for
each occupation j, we use principal component analysis and detailed data on occupational
skill requirements from O*NET to construct a three-dimensional skill requirement vector
Sj = (Cj , Ij , Mj ): cognitive skill (Cj ), interpersonal skill (Ij ), and manual skill (Mj ).12
Furthermore, we include in our baseline analysis a set of individual observable character-
istics, occupation fixed effects, occupation employment shares, and occupation state fixed
effects interactions. 13 Moreover the treatment of being licensed versus not licensed is not
  12
     The skills are constructed over 440 occupation categories. Here, we include skill levels rather than the
full set of occupation fixed effects because our sample size is greatly reduced after applying the CEM and
PSM matching methods.
  13
     Occupational fixed effects and the state-occupation fixed effects that are included in the analysis include
17 coarsely defined occupation groups: 1. Executive, Administrative, and Managerial Occupation; 2. Man-
agement Related Occupations; 3. Professional Specialty Occupations; 4. Technicians and Related Support
Occupations; 5. Sales Occupations; 6. Administrative Support Occupations; 7. Housekeeping and Cleaning
Occupations; 8. Protective Service Occupations; 9. Other Service Occupations; 10. Farm Operators and
Managers; 11. Other Agricultural and Related Occupations; 12. Mechanics and Repairers; 13. Construc-




                                                      16
random. To get the proper treatment effect of licensing, we implement a propensity score
matching strategy (PSM) that not only enables matching at the mean but also balances
the distribution of observed characteristics across treatment (licensed workers) and control
groups (non-licensed workers).14 We match individual characteristics15 on the probability of
being licensed, then use the generated propensity scores as weights in the linear probability
regression model. Our baseline specification is then

                          Yit = 0 + 1 Lit + Xit  + 2 Oit × Sit + t + it .                                (2)

As before, Lit is the indicator of a worker's being licensed, and 1 is a measure of the effect
of licensing on the probability of switching occupations in the next period. Xit is a vector of
individual characteristics in period t, including age, education, gender, race, marriage status,
union status, log wage, the skill vector for the individual's occupation in period t, and the
occupational employment shares. Oit denotes the occupational fixed effects16 and Sit denotes
the state fixed effects. t is a set of year and month fixed effects. For this regression model
, we restrict the sample to individuals who were employed in both periods t and t + 1.

    One of the key goals of using matching methods is to prune observations from the data
so that the remaining data provide a better balance between the treated and control groups.
Propensity score matching, however, does not guarantee any level of imbalance reduction and
may even increase imbalance and model dependence (Iacus, King and Porro (2012)). One
typical way of addressing the imbalance issue is to check the estimation results and, if needed,
repeatedly re-calibrate the method, which can be time consuming and less reliable. In this
paper, we apply a coarsened exact matching method and restrict the data to the common
support every time before we apply the propensity score matching.17 This approach ensures
balance in the data and improves the reliability of our results.

   We also analyze how licensing relates to the probability of switching into an occupation.
Since licensing represents a barrier to entry, one might expect that being licensed will drive
down switching rates for licensed occupations, but by how much? To answer this question
tion Trades; 14. Extractive Occupations; 15. Precision Production Occupations; 16. Machine Operators,
Assemblers, and Inspectors; 17. Transportation and Material Moving Occupations
   14
      We recognize that PSM does not fully deal with the biased estimation coming from unobservable vari-
ables. We address this issue in Section 7.
   15
      The characteristics included in the matching step are: age, gender, race, education, marriage and union
status, income level, occupational skills, year, and 17 coarsely defined occupational fixed effects.
   16
      We use the 17 occupation groups defined previously in the paper.
   17
      CEM is a monotonic imbalance reducing matching method, in which the balance between the treated
and control group is chosen ex ante (Blackwell et al. (2009)).




                                                     17
we use a modified version of the first linear probability model. Here, the dependent variable
Yit-1 is an indicator that equals 1 if the worker switched into his or her current occupation
between the previous and current periods and equals 0 otherwise. We employ the same
strategy as above, where we control for the individual's current characteristics, his or her
current occupation's skill requirements, occupational and states fixed effects, and weight.
We use the same matching strategy as above:

                        Yit-1 = 0 + 1 Lit + Xit  + 2 Oit × Sit + t + it .                           (3)

This regression gives us the probability of switching into an occupation conditional on in-
dividual and occupation characteristics. The interpretation of the 1 parameter in this
regression is the effect of being licensed now on the probability of having just switched into
current occupation from the previous period. Similar to the above specification, the sample
for this regression is all individuals who were employed in both period t - 1 and period t.
One natural question regarding this analysis is whether we are mixing the licensing effect
with the impact of limited employment opportunities. For example, if we find that workers
are less likely to switch occupations and become a lawyer (a universally licensed occupa-
tion), is it because licensing makes it difficult to switch into that job, or is it because there
simply are not a lot of job opening opportunities to become a lawyer? To address this, we
include the occupational employment share18 to absorb the effect of limited opportunity on
the switching rate.

    We are also interested in how licensing may affect mobility for unemployed workers--
that is, the probability that an individual switches from unemployment into an occupation
or vice versa, conditional on the occupation being licensed. To do this, we run the same
two regressions as above, but instead of Yit being 1 for anyone who had a job-to-job switch,
we set it to 1 for those who switch from unemployment to employment and vice versa for
Yit-1 . The sample for the former is all individuals who were employed or unemployed in the
second period and employed in the first period. For the latter, it is all those employed or
unemployed in the first period and employed in the second period.

    Compared with those who are employed, is licensing more or less of a barrier for individ-
uals who are unemployed? To investigate this, we estimate the following linear probability
model using the subsample of workers who are working in this period but have switched
into current occupation from either unemployment or a different occupation (i.e., we are
  18
    We use the 2010 Census occupation classification, the same classification we use in constructing the
indicator for occupation switching.




                                                  18
excluding occupational stayers from t-1 to t).

                       Yit-1 = 0 + 1 Lit + Xit  + 2 Oit × Sit + t + it .                        (4)

This model is identical to the previous one but has a different sample and interpretation.
Here, Yit-1 = 1 if the worker switched from unemployment in the last period into their
current occupation and 0 if he or she switched from another occupation into the current
occupation. The coefficient on Lit can then be interpreted as the difference in the probability
for licensed versus non-licensed occupations that a worker who switched into his or her
current occupation came from unemployment. If 1 > 0, then workers who have just switched
into a licensed occupation are more likely than workers who just switched into a non-licensed
occupation to have come from unemployment, suggesting that licensing is less of a barrier
for the unemployed than for the employed.

    Finally, we look at the effect of licensing on wage changes for job switchers. There is a
significant literature on how occupational licensing affects wages (see Gittleman and Kleiner
(2016) for a recent example) but far less work on how it affects changes in wages for those
who stay in or switch between occupations. Our strategy is to look at how changes in wages
for stayers and switchers relate to licensing.

    We first calculate raw economy-wide average weekly wages for licensed workers versus
non-licensed workers, without any controls. Figure 8 confirms the previous literature that
states that licensed workers on average enjoy a wage premium compared with non-licensed
workers. This wage difference widens as age increases. Figure 9 shows that the average wage
gap between licensed workers and non-licensed workers increases as workers grow older. Note
that this is a cross-sectional analysis rather than a longitudinal life-cycle analysis, so the wider
wage gap for older workers may be due to cohort effects rather than age. To further compare
wage growth rates for licensed workers and non-licensed workers, we separate workers into
two groups: occupation stayers and occupation switchers. Figure 10 shows the result for
workers who stay in the same occupation during a year, while Figure 11 shows the result for
occupation switchers. We see in Figure 10 that when workers stay in the same occupation,
licensed workers have lower wage growth rates relative to workers who are not licensed.
However, many factors may contribute to wage growth rates, so a simple summary of the
data may confound licensing effects with other factors. One plausible explanation for licensed
workers having on average lower wage growth rates is the age composition effect ­ workers
without licenses are on average younger. Since younger workers have wage growth rates that
are generally higher than those of older workers, this may lead workers without licenses to



                                                19
have higher than average wage growth rates. On the other hand, the occupational switcher
exercise shows the opposite: licensed workers have higher wage growth rates even when they
switch out of their occupation in the next period. As mentioned earlier, all of these exercises
are simply summaries of the data ­ many factors that are directly or indirectly related to
licensing could contribute to the differences in wage growth and levels. If licensed workers
are systematically older, more experienced, or more educated, they may enjoy higher wages
and wage growth rates. To separately identify these confounding factors from the direct
effect of licensing, we use the following specification:

                      wit = 0 + 1 Lit + Xit  + 2 Oit × Sit + t + it ,                       (5)

where wit = log(Wit+1 ) - log(Wit ) is the difference in log wages. Here, 1 can be interpreted
as the differences in wage growth if the worker is licensed versus not licensed. We estimate
the regression separately for workers who stay in the same occupation and for workers who
switch occupations between two periods. For workers who switch occupations between two
periods, we control for both the new occupation and their old occupational skill levels, as
well as both their new and old occupational employment share. Furthermore, to look at how
licensing affects wages for those switching into licensed versus non-licensed jobs, we shift the
timing of the regression and estimate the following model

                     wit-1 = 0 + 1 Lit + Xit  + 2 Oit × Sit + t + it .                      (6)

Here, 1 is the gain in log wage for those switching into licensed occupations relative to those
switching into non-licensed occupations.



5    Baseline Results

Our baseline results on occupational mobility are summarized in tables 3 to 7. For each
regression model, column A shows the results without any controls; Column B shows the
results with basic controls for observable individual characteristics; Column C further adds
the occupational skill levels as well as the occupational employment share controls; Column
D adds in state-occupation and time fixed effects; Column E is the same specification as
column D but weighted using the weights acquired from the CEM and PSM strategy. From
this point forward, and Column E's results are referred to as our preferred results.




                                              20
5.1    Switching Out

Table 3 shows the results from estimating equation 2. Recall that the dependent variable
here is an indicator for whether an individual switched out of his or her current occupation
in the next period. The results across all five specifications show that individuals who are
currently licensed are much less likely to switch out of an occupation than those who are are
not licensed. The regression sample includes individuals who are working in both month 4
and month 8. Our baseline analysis here focuses on annual switching results, but we also
show monthly results in the robustness section. The results show that the estimates of 1 are
biased away from zero when we do not include any individual or occupational controls other
than licensing status. Without any controls, the estimate implies that compared with workers
who are not licensed, being licensed is associated with workers about 15.8 percentage points
less likely to switch out of their occupation. Gradually adding in controls, we see this effect of
licensing on the occupational switching rate decline. With the full set of controls, this effect
reduces to a 8.9 percentage point difference. However, even with the full set of controls, the
distributional balance of measured covariates between the treated and non-treated group is
not guaranteed. Therefore, in the last column, we consider only the controlled workers who
are matched to treated workers, resulting in a much smaller sample size. We find that the
licensed workers are 9.7 percentage points less likely to switch occupations than other non-
licensed workers who are otherwise very similar in all controlled observables. This represents
a 23.63% reduction in the average occupational exit rate (the average switching rate within
the sample is 41.6%). Note that all of these estimates are highly statistically significant. The
negative coefficient on the licensing indicator suggests that there is something inherent about
being licensed outside of their occupations' skill requirements that reduces worker mobility
out of those occupations. The direction of the bias suggests that workers who self-select into
licensed jobs tend to already be less mobile than the average worker. Looking at the rest
of the coefficients, we find that non-white workers and workers with no college degree tend
to switch out of occupations with a higher probability. Being married, older, in a union,
and having a higher income decreases the probability of switching out. Females tend to
switch less than males in general, though this difference becomes statistically insignificant
once we control for sample matching balance. This finding suggests that gender has no
direct correlation with occupational switching rates. Occupation characteristics play a large
role in predicting occupation switching rates. Working in a job that requires a high level of
interpersonal skills dramatically reduces the probability of switching to another occupation,
whereas working in a job that requires high levels of cognitive skill increases that probability.




                                               21
Manual skill, however, does not have a significant relationship with occupational mobility.
Lastly, the higher an occupation's total employment share, the less likely a worker is going
to switch out of that occupation.


5.2    Switching In

Much of the discussion around occupational licensing concerns the costs of entry, which can
be framed as either a barrier that increases incumbent rents or a filter that improves the
quality of service. Either way, jobs that require workers to be licensed appear to have less
entry as well as exit. We show in Figure 3 that the raw relationship between an occupation's
licensing share and its entry rate is negative, meaning workers are less likely switch into a
licensed occupation. To further investigate the effect of licensing occupation entry rates,
we estimate equation 3 and show the results in Table 4. As in the switching-out case, we
find that conditional on being employed in both periods, the probability that the worker
switched into the occupation in period t from a different occupation in t - 1 (as opposed
to having the same occupation in both periods) is much lower if the worker's current (new)
occupation requires licensing. Recall that our sample selection is such that we are looking
at workers from months 4 and 8 of the CPS, so the switching-in rate is the annual switching
rate. However, this may include workers who have gone through multiple jobs in between
these two periods, or those who have gone through one or more unemployment spells. We
do not take a stand on whether this annual occupational status change represents the true
annual occupational switching rate. Instead, our focus is simply looking at workers who are
working in both months across two consecutive years and investigating the impact of licensing
on worker occupational entry probabilities. Similar to the previous switching out analysis,
we look first at the effects of licensing without taking into account any observable controls
(column A). The estimate implies a worker in a licensed occupation is 17.3 percentage points
less likely than those in unlicensed occupations to have switched into that job from another
occupation. The direction of bias that arises from ignoring other effects is the same as in
the switching out analysis for similar reasons: those who self-select into licensed jobs have
overall lower occupational mobility, which biases the estimate of 1 downward and away
from zero. We then gradually and column-by-column add relevant observable controls into
our regression and finally add the PSM weights in column E. Our baseline analysis shows
that licensed workers are 9.6 percentage points less likely than workers who are not licensed
to have just switched into their current occupation. This represents a 24.08% of reduction
relative to the average occupational entry rate. As in the switching-out specification, we



                                             22
find that individuals who are older, in unions, or married are less likely to have recently
switched into their current job. Having a higher income in this period is correlated with a
lower probability of having switched in the last period, since higher incomes are probably
associated with a tighter labor market. The cognitive skill requirements of the current
job are significantly positively related to the switching-in rates while the interpersonal skill
requirement shows the opposite relationship. One possible explanation is that job markets
that rely on relationships are relatively more rigid, while job markets that rely more on
merit or intelligence are more fluid. Another possible explanation is that cognitive skills are
more general and transferable across firms and occupations, while interpersonal skills are
more often embodied in the specific culture of a firm or occupation and so represent less
transferable, firm-specific skills. Lastly, workers in occupations with a higher employment
share are less likely to have recently been switched into.


5.3    Switching In and Out of Unemployment

We have established that occupational licensing has significant effects for workers switching
between occupations for employed individuals. In this section, we investigate how licensing
affects labor market transitions in and out of unemployment. Table 5 and Table 6 show the
results for those switching into or out of unemployment. The two tables replicate the first two
exercises, with the exceptions that we now include workers who are unemployed preceding
or following the employment observation, and the dependent variables are indicators of
switching from any occupation into unemployment (J2N) and switching from unemployment
into any occupation (N2J). In our analysis, we include only unemployed workers and discard
workers who are not in the labor force, since non-participation could be due to many reasons
that are not labor market-related.

    Table 5 shows how licensing affects the probability of switching out of employment into
unemployment. As before, the coefficient on the licensing indicator is negative and signifi-
cant, though it is smaller in magnitude. We find, after including our controls, that being in
a licensed occupation is associated with a 0.5 percentage point decrease in the probability
of subsequently switching into unemployment. Similarly, in Table 6, we see a decrease of 0.5
percentage points in the probability of having switched in the last period from unemployment
into the current occupation if the current occupation requires an license. These results, as
in the first two specifications, support the hypothesis that licensing creates barriers to entry,
incentives to stay in that occupation, and potential buffers against unemployment through




                                               23
potential monopoly rents and incumbent advantages. Similar to the probability of job-to-job
switching, we find that older workers are less likely to switch into or out of unemployment,
as are married individuals. Cognitive skills are negatively correlated with the probability
of moving to unemployment and moving in from unemployment. The intuition is straight-
forward: jobs that require a high level of cognitive skill embody difficult-to-replace human
capital, and so workers may be less likely to be laid off. Also, as shown in the previous
analysis, cognitive skills are more general, and so workers who are laid off from cognitive
jobs may be more able to find new jobs instead of falling into unemployment. It is also less
likely for a worker to switch directly from unemployment into a highly cognitively demanding
job. Interpersonal skill is strongly positively correlated with the probability of switching in
from unemployment, while manual skills do not have significant effects on the probabilities
of workers switching into or coming out of unemployment.

    It seems clear that licensing represents a relative barrier to entry for both unemployed
and employed workers. Both groups switch into occupations requiring licensing with a lower
probability than other occupations. However, this raises the question of whether licensing
represents a greater or lesser barrier for the unemployed versus the employed. Compared
with an employed individual, is it more or less difficult for an unemployed person to switch
into a licensed occupation than a non-licensed one? Table 7 shows the results from the
regression in equation 4. Recall that in equation 4, we restrict our sample to workers who
are working today, and either not working (Yit-1 = 0) or working at a different occupation
(Yit-1 = 1) in the previous period. We find that the coefficient on the licensing indicator is
negative and significant, implying that workers who have switched into a licensed occupation
are 4.4 percentage points less likely to have been in a different occupation than previously
unemployed. One possible interpretation is that a large part of the barrier to entry for
licensed jobs is the time costs of satisfying the training or experience requirements to obtain
the license. Since the opportunity cost of time for unemployed workers is likely lower than
it is for employed workers, the time component of the barrier is less important, and so the
cost of entry relative to non-licensed jobs is lower than it is for the employed. We also find
that of switchers, coming from a different occupation (rather than from unemployment) is
less likely for non-white workers and more likely for married workers. It is also more likely
that those entering jobs requiring high cognitive skills and low interpersonal skills switch
from other occupations rather than from unemployment. The coefficient on licensing status
further confirms our hypothesis that licensing is a barrier to entry both financially and in
terms of time costs.




                                              24
5.4     Licensing and Wage Growth

In this section, we investigate the effect of licensing on wage changes when a worker stays in,
switches into, or switches out of a licensed occupation. Many papers in the literature have
shown that licensed workers tend to have higher wage levels than non-licensed workers. Our
focus here is to examine the effects of licensing status on wage growth dynamics. Since wage
data are available only in the Outgoing Rotation Group (months 4 and 8) in the CPS, we are
measuring the change in wages associated with labor market transitions at an annual level.
All results in this section use the matched/corrected sample discussed earlier; that is, we
apply the CEM matching and weight all regressions by the PSM weights in order to estimate
the treatment effect of licensing in a balanced matched sample of treated and non-treated
groups. Table 8 shows the results for our wage growth analysis using estimating equations
5 and 6. The first column shows the results for workers staying in their occupation between
two consecutive years. After matching workers who are similar in observable characteristics
and job skill requirements, we find that on average, workers who are licensed have a 6.3
percentage point higher log wage growth than workers who are not licensed. This represents
about a $2,208 wage increase.19 This result is in line with the licensing literature, which
suggests that occupational licensing attainment has positive effects on wages. We also see
that older workers and workers who are employed at jobs with higher skill requirements
experience higher wage growth rates, whereas on average, females, non-whites, and workers
without college degrees have lower wage growth rates. Finally we find that, on average,
higher current wages are associated with lower wage growth rates.

    The second column in table 8 shows the results for workers who switch out of their
current occupation into a new occupation. With the full set of controls as well as applying
propensity score matching, we find that licensing is associated with an increase in wage gains
for those switching out of their current occupation. Specifically, relative to those switching
out of a non-licensed occupation, those who switch out of a licensed occupation gain 3.8
percentage log points in wages, or $1,251 annually on average. This may reflect some human
capital accumulation due to license-related training, or movement into a higher demand
industry such as high-tech programming from a licensed occupation. It may also come from
workers' licensing status being correlated with some unobserved personal characteristics:
workers who are licensed also tend to have higher unobserved ability and therefore higher
  19
    As mentioned earlier, all dollar amounts in the paper are in 2000 real dollars. The mean annual income
of this stayer sample is $35,046. Workers who are making the average income and staying in a licensed
occupation see a $2,208 extra annual wage gain compared with workers who stay in a non-licensed occupation
(6.3%*35,046 = 2,208).




                                                   25
wage growth. In section 7, we will address this issue by using several methods to evaluate the
impact of and correct for omitted variable and selection bias. Similar to previous results, we
also find that female workers, non-white workers, and non-college-educated workers tend to
have lower wage growth when switching occupations, whereas older workers, union workers,
and married workers gain more. Switching out of high cognitive and interpersonal skill
occupations increases the relative gains from switching out, while coming from a manual
skill-intensive job doesn't make a significant difference. However, all skills are positively
correlated with switching wage gain, with cognitive skills having the strongest correlation.

    We can also look at the effect of switching into a licensed occupation on wage gains.
Similar to column one and two, the third column of table 8 shows that switching into a li-
censed occupation is associated with higher wage gains relative to an observationally similar
worker switching into an occupation with no licensing requirements. Specifically, relative
to the gain from switching into an unlicensed job, switching into a licensed occupation is
associated with a 5.4 percentage point boost in log wage growth, or $1,834 more annually.
This is consistent with the licensing literature: licensing has a positive effect on wages. This
finding also supports papers that estimate the switching costs associated with occupation
mobility (Xu (2019) and Traiberman (2019)). If occupational licensing represents a hur-
dle for workers who switch, then workers have to expect a larger wage increase in order to
compensate for the licensing-incurred switching costs. Furthermore, we find that as before
female, non-college-educated, and non-white workers gain less when switching into an occu-
pation and that older, married, and union workers gain more. Having high skill levels always
has a positive impact on worker wage growth. This is true for both the source occupation
and the destination occupation, though the effect of the skill requirements for the destination
occupation is much stronger. As before, cognitive skill has the strongest impact on wage
growth.

   Finally, in the fourth column, we look at the effect of entering a licensed occupation
from unemployment. The sample here is all individuals who switch from unemployment to
employment between t - 1 and t. Since the switch is from unemployment, the wage gain is not
so much from the change in wages, as in the previous three exercises, but rather the entrance
wage received in the new job. The wage variable used in these estimates is the log weekly
wage. Column four shows that there is a strong and significant effect of licensing:in log
wages, workers who switch from unemployment to licensed jobs gain 0.114 points (starting
wages) more than those switching into non-licensed occupations, controlling for individual
and job characteristics. This is consistent with the findings in the literature (For example,




                                              26
Kleiner and Krueger (2013)). We see that older workers, union workers and married workers
tend to have higher entry wages from unemployment, whereas female, non-college workers,
and non-white workers tend on average to have lower entry wages. The higher the job's skill
requirements, the higher the average entry wage. Among the skill requirements, cognitive
skills are the most important in terms of the starting wage coming from unemployment.

    To sum up, we show that licensing has strong positive effects on wage growth. The
effect exists whether a worker stays in the same job, moves out of or into a licensed job,
or has newly joined a licensed job from unemployment. However, these coefficients should
be interpreted with caution. For example, for workers who stay in a job (column one),
the positive coefficient on licensing represents purely the positive effect of licensing on wage
growth. On the other hand, the positive coefficient on licensing for job switchers in column
three combines both the wage growth effect for licensed workers and the barrier effect of
entering a licensed occupation.



6    Occupational Heterogeneity in Licensing Effects

In this section, we examine how the effect of licensing differs across occupations. In the
previous section we see that on average, workers in licensed occupations have less occupa-
tional mobility. However, these differences in occupational mobility, and thus the effects of
licensing on mobility, may vary across occupations because of variation in task composition.
Figures 12 to 15 provide some evidence on heterogeneity in occupational mobility. Using
figure 13 as an example, the gray bars show the monthly switching-out rate for 25 different
universally licensed occupations, while the blue (leftmost) bar shows the average switching
rate for all other occupations. The dash-dotted line shows the average occupational switch-
ing rate across all occupations, including the universally licensed and non-licensed ones. It
is clear from the graph that almost all universally licensed occupations have switching rates
lower than those in the average non-licensed occupations, but we see great heterogeneity
across these universally licensed occupations. While some universally licensed occupations
have a monthly switching rate of less than 2%, some occupations such as pest control work-
ers see monthly switching-out rates of almost 8%. Similarly, we see great heterogeneity in
the rate of switching out to unemployment (15), switching in from other occupations (12),
and switching in from unemployment (14). Given this large heterogeneity in occupational
mobility across licensed occupations, the next question that we want to address is whether
the mobility and wage growth effects of licensing are also heterogeneous across these occu-



                                              27
pations. We answer this question using an strategy similar to our baseline analysis. Here,
we focus on one occupation at a time instead of pooling all occupations together, similar to
Han and Kleiner (2016) and Johnson and Kleiner (2017). However, our strategy deviates
from theirs in that we do not use the universally licensed occupations as an indicator for
licensing. Instead, we use the individual-level licensing attainment that is the same as in our
baseline analysis. We then restrict our sample to one (coarsely defined) occupation20 group
at a time. Table 11 shows the results for this analysis.

    As shown in Table 11, the results for "managerial and professional" occupations are
very similar to the economy average results we presented in the previous section. This is
because this occupation group represents the largest proportion of workers (34% of total
workers). On the other hand, the results for "farming, forestry, and fishing" occupations
(column four) are mostly statistically insignificant because of the very small sample size
(1% of total workers). While we see qualitative similarities across occupations that licensing
has a negative effect on worker mobility and a positive effect on worker wage growth, the
magnitudes of the effects significantly differ across groups. For example, in Technical, Sales
and Administration Support, licensed workers who stay in the same occupation between
two years see 3 percentage points in additional wage gains compared with workers who are
not licensed. However, for Operators, Fabricators and Laborers, being licensed leads to an
additional 8 percentage points in annual wage gains.



7      Robustness Checks

One potential concern about the results in our baseline analysis is that they may be subject
to selection bias. Workers who are licensed are possibly more/less skilled and therefore have
higher/lower wage growth and are more/less likely to switch occupations. We address this
potential problem with three different exercises. First, in section 7.1, we follow the strategy
introduced by Altonji, Elder and Taber (2005) and Oster (2017) and attempt to place on
our estimates bounds that account for selection on unobservables. Second, in section 7.2, we
use an instrumental variable strategy to correct for potential bias in our estimation. Third,
in section 7.3 we attempt to directly tackle the selection problem by following the two step
  20
     There is large variation in occupational licensing attainment rates across these coarsely defined occu-
pation groups. For example, in "managerial and professional" occupations, more than 30% of workers are
licensed. This is much higher than our pooled sample average licensing rate of 19.87%. On the other hand,
the licensing attainment rate in the "farming, forestry, and fishing" occupation group is only 6.21%.




                                                    28
selection correction strategy introduced in Heckman (1979). Furthermore, to make sure our
results are not specific to our particular sample or data, we repeat our primary analysis in
section 7.4 using different samples from the CPS as well as a totally different data set, the
SIPP.


7.1    Parameter Stability and Selection on Unobservables

A common method of evaluating the impact of omitted variable bias is to check whether the
parameter estimates of interest are robust (stable) to the inclusion of control variables. The
idea behind this approach is that the bias arising from omitting observable controls may
be informative about the bias arising from omitting the full set of observed and unobserved
variables. While this method is intuitive, several recent papers (Altonji, Elder and Taber
(2005), Oster (2017)) show that simply observing coefficient stability as controls are added
is not enough to conclude that omitted variable bias is negligible. In this section, we apply
the more robust methods developed in these two papers to our primary analyses (closely
following Oster (2017)), allowing us to place bounds on the bias that may be driving our
estimated treatment effects.

    The method makes several assumptions. Consider a basic version of our regression anal-
ysis above:
                             Y = 0 + 1 L + X  + W2 + ,

where X is the vector of all observed controls, L is the treatment indicator, and W2 is
unobserved. Define W1  X . The first assumption is about the relationship between the
selection relationships. Define the coefficient of proportionality  such that       2L
                                                                                2 =  2 , where
                                                                               1L
                                                                               1     2
                         2
iL  Cov (Wi , L) and i      V ar(Wi ). This relationship will always hold for some delta. The
method first assumes that  = 1; that is, the importance of selection on observables equals
that of selection on unobservables. We can then examine the relative degree of selection
on unobservables (the value of  ) that would result in the true treatment effect being zero.
Second, define Rmax as the R2 resulting from the theoretical regression where we did happen
to observe W2 along with X and L. Using different potential values of Rmax (the true value of
which is unknown), we can measure the influence of omitted variable bias by placing bounds
on our estimated treatment effects.

   Tables 12 to 14 show the results of this analysis. The first four columns of Table 12
show the estimated treatment effect of licensing on the switching-out rate with the gradual




                                             29
inclusion of various sets of observed controls. The estimated treatment effect with no controls
(-0.104) is slightly higher in absolute value than the estimate with all the controls (-0.097),
implying that the uncontrolled regression was (slightly) biased away from zero. The inclusion
of all the controls substantially increases the R2 from 0.02 to 0.09. Columns five through
eight show the same analysis for the switching-in rate, with similar results: the parameter
estimate becomes slightly smaller in absolute value, whereas the R2 increases significantly.

    The results from the robustness exercise are contained in the bottom panels of all three
tables. The first exercise assumes that  = 1, or that the correlation between the treatment
and unobservables is of the same direction and magnitude as that between the treatment
and observables. We can then calculate what the estimated treatment effect would be under
different assumptions about the relative variance of W2 , represented by Rmax . We follow
Oster (2017), who suggests an Rmax of 1.3 times the R2 from the fully controlled regression.
We also include estimates using several intermediate values of Rmax (0.5 and 0.7). The
resulting bounds on 1 are shown in brackets, with one bound being the value of 1 under the
value of Rmax shown to the left, and the other bound being the original estimate. Examining
Table 12, we see that controlling for selection on unobservables decreases the magnitude
of the treatment effect since our previous estimates were driven down (in absolute value)
by the inclusion of the observed controls. For example, under the assumption that  =
1 such that the unobservables are just as important as the observables, and under the
assumption of Rmax = R   ~ × 1.3, the lower bound for the effect of licensing on the probability
of workers' switching occupation in the next period is -0.094. If we keep the assumption on
the importance of unobservables but increase Rmax = 0.5, the lower bound of the licensing
effect becomes much smaller in absolute terms at -0.039. When Rmax increases to 0.7, the
effect of licensing becomes -0.001, which is not too different from zero. This is reassuring that
the licensing effect on workers' occupation switching fades away only when we assume the
most stringent conditions ­ the unobservables are at least as important as the observables,
and together they can explain 70% of data variation. Under reasonable assumptions where
unobservables are typically not more important than the observables (  1)21 , the negative
impact of licensing on workers' switching remains. Similarly, we see that licensing has strong
and significant barrier effects on worker entry even under the strictest assumptions about
unobservables, though the effect becomes relatively small at -0.006 under this extremely strict
assumption. We can also interpret these same results from a different angle. For example,
suppose we assume that we can explain 50% of the data variation in worker occupation
  21
    The reason is that researchers focus their data collection efforts (or their choice of regression controls)
typically on the controls they believe ex ante are the most important (Angrist and Pischke (2010)).




                                                      30
switching rates. Under this assumption, the licensing effect on workers who switch in or
out of their current occupation will disappear only when the unobservables are at least 0.5
times more important than the observables ( = 1.5 in both switching out and switching in
analysis).

    Tables 13 and 14 show the same robustness exercise on wage changes for workers who
stay and switch occupations, respectively. First, Table 13 focuses on the occupational stay-
ers. As opposed to the results presented in the switching analysis (Table 12), the parameter
estimates from the wage analysis are biased toward zero when we ignore all the observable
controls. Therefore, in this exercise, controlling for selection on unobservables in this man-
ner actually increases the magnitude of the estimated treatment effect, since our previous
estimates were driven up (in absolute value) by the inclusion of the observed controls. For
example, under the assumption of Rmax = 0.7, the upper bound for the effect of licensing
on wage changes from staying in an occupation is 0.077, which is significantly larger than
the original estimate of 0.063. This general result is true across all of the assumptions on
Rmax and  in Table 13. This implies that the wage growth results for stayers represent
a lower bound on the treatment effect of licensing. If we assume that by combining the
observables and unobservables we can explain 70% of the wage growth variation for stayers,
the unobservables would need to have an effect on wages opposite to that of the observables,
and they would need to be almost 7 times more important than the observables ( = -6.9)
to make the wage effect of licensing become zero. We can interpret the results in Table 14
in a similar fashion. On the left panel we focus on the wage growth effect of licensing for
workers who have switched out of their occupations. We see that omitting observables bi-
ased the estimates away from zero, since including more observables makes the estimates of
licensing effects smaller. Under the assumption that the unobservables are as important as
the observables in explaining switcher wage growth and the assumption that together they
explain 70% of the total wage growth variation, the lower bound of the licensing effect on
workers wage growth is 0.019. On the right panel of Table 14, we present the results for the
licensing effect on wage growth when workers switch into their occupation. Similar to the
results in Table 13, we see that including more observable controls in fact strengthened our
estimates of the licensing effect. This implies that omitting unobservables has biased our
estimates toward zero. When they are taken into consideration, and when (for example) un-
observables are of the same importance as the observables and Rmax = 0.7, the upper bound
of the licensing effect on worker wage growth is 0.068. Our baseline estimation (0.054) is a
lower bound of the licensing effect. These results reassure us that, in general, our results on
the licensing effect are robust even when omitted variables are taken into consideration and



                                              31
that many of our estimates actually represent lower bounds on the treatment effects.


7.2       Instrumental Variable Approach

In previous subsection, we evaluated the impact of omitted variables on estimated licensing
effects by putting bounds over the estimated coefficients under various assumptions. In this
section, we use an instrumental variable strategy to correct for the potential bias in our
estimated licensing effects.

       We begin by rewriting our baseline model as follows:

                                      yit = 0 + 1 Lit + Xit  + it ,                                        (7)

where L1 denotes the licensing indicator, and  is potentially correlated with the licensing
status and therefore may bias our estimates of 1 . yit denotes the key variable of interest,
such as log wage growth or the individual switching indicator. Xit includes the following
observables and fixed effects: age; gender; race; education; union status; marriage status;
log income level; occupational fixed effects using detailed census 2010 codes; as well as state,
year, and month fixed effects. We now introduce our instrumental variable, %LOS , which
denotes the share of workers who are licensed in the worker's particular occupation and state
group. The idea behind our instrument is that, using wage growth rates as an example, the
share of licensed workers within each occupation and state group may affect the probability
of workers' becoming licensed,22 but it should not have a direct impact on individual-level
wage growth except through that worker's licensing status. We estimate two new sets of
results: the above model using OLS, and the same model using 2SLS, showing the results in
table 15.23 We see the coefficients and standard errors of the estimated licensing effects for
five separate analyses. From column one to column five, we investigate the licensing effects
on log wage growth for workers who stay in the occupation; log wage growth for workers
  22
      The variation in the share of licensing attainment within an occupation across state groups may represent
cross-state heterogeneity in difficulty level when acquiring a license, or it may show heterogeneous average
levels of worker preferences over licensing across different occupations and states, all of which will likely
affect each individual's licensing decision.
   23
      We cannot use our baseline results from the previous section as a valid comparison to the 2SLS results,
since our baseline analysis uses a CEM and PSM matched restricted sample, while here we are using all
individuals in our sample. The disadvantage in using all individuals is that we do not achieve similarities
in the covariates over observables between the treated and non-treated groups. On the other hand, the
advantage in using all individual data is that we have a much larger sample size, which allows us to include
detailed occupation and state fixed effects as opposed to including only a coarse occupation groups fixed
effect, as in our baseline analysis.




                                                      32
who switch out in the next period; log wage growth for workers who have just switched in
this period (from a different occupation); an indicator for switching occupations next period;
and an indicator for having switched occupations from the previous period. We show our
OLS results in row one and 2SLS results in row two. The F-statistics in stage one is shown
in row three which suggest that we can reject that the coefficients on the instruments in the
first stage regression are equal to zero. Stock-Yogo weak IV tests critical values also shows
no evidence that our instrument is weak (Stock and Yogo (2002)).

    In column one, we see that using our instrumental variable increases the effect of licensing
on occupational stayers' wage growth. This suggests that the unobservables have biased our
estimates toward zero and correcting it will strengthen estimated licensing effects on wages.
This result is consistent with our previous results in Table 13, which show that after taking
into account the omitted unobservables in the analysis, the effect of licensing on wages
becomes stronger. Column two shows the wage growth effect of licensing on workers who
switch out of their current occupation the following year. The OLS result shows a positive
and significant licensing coefficient (0.023) that is slightly less than our baseline estimate.
The 2SLS result is larger, but not statistically significant. This result is consistent also
with our results in the previous subsection (Table 14, left panel)­ omitted variables bias our
results away from zero. Hence, if the unobservable variables contribute more to the variation
in switcher wage growth, the effect of licensing may go toward zero. Column three shows
the licensing effect on wage changes for workers who have just switched into their current
occupation. We see that the licensing effect on wage growth increases from 0.047 to 0.054
after including the instrumental variable and that the estimates are statistically significant
at a confidence level of 95%. This increase in the estimated licensing effect implies that any
omitted variable bias here was biasing our estimates toward zero, which is again consistent
with the results shown in Table 14, where our baseline estimates represent a lower bound on
licensing effects on wage growth.

    In columns four and five, we then turn to investigate how licensing affects worker-level
occupational switching decisions. In both columns we see negative and statistically signifi-
cant coefficients on licensing and the licensing effect's becoming smaller (in absolute value)
once the instrument is included. This result suggests that the omitted variables bias our
estimates of worker switching probabilities away from zero and including them would make
the licensing effect smaller ­ which is consistent with the results in Table 12. The magni-
tude in this analysis is much smaller compared with the ones in Table 12, which could be
due to sample selection differences, since our baseline results are restricted to PSM matched




                                              33
workers. However, the results in this section confirm our baseline results that licensing has
significant negative effects on workers' occupational switching decisions, both when switch-
ing in and switching out. Licensing also shows strong wage effect on workers' wage growth
when they stay in a licensed occupation or switch into a licensed occupation.

   Overall, the results from our IV strategy are consistent with the results from our parameter-
bound strategy in the previous section. Our 2SLS results support the conclusion from our
baseline estimates that licensing has statistically and economically significant negative effects
on worker mobility and positive effects on wage growth.


7.3       Heckman Selection Correction

In this section, we attempt to address the selection issue following the two step correction
procedure introduced in Heckman (1979). Consider our baseline model but simplify it to
Y = (1 - D)Y0 + DY1 , where

                                            Y0 =X0 + 0
                                            Y1 =X1 + 1 ,

and
                                         D = 1{Z - u > 0}.

Y is the variable of interest, such as log wage growth. D is an indicator of whether a worker
is licensed. Y1 denotes the variable of interest for licensed individuals, and Y0 denotes the
same variable for non-licensed individuals. We are interested in the average treatment effect:
AT E (X ) = X (1 - 0 ). The concern is that the error terms 0 , 1 , and u are probably not
independently distributed, so estimates of  will be biased. For example, if workers who are
non-licensed have higher (lower) values of 0 relative to licensed worker values of 1 , then
the OLS estimator for 1 - 0 will underestimate (overestimate) the true licensing effect.
The direction of the bias is not clear ex ante, since it is possible that workers with high
unobservable ability (for example) will join licensed occupations, but at the same time, it
is possible that workers with very high ability may choose not to join the licensing queue.24
We follow the two step procedure proposed by Heckman. In the first stage, we use a probit
model to predict the probability of D = 1{Z - u > 0}. Z includes the same variables as
X . We then calculate and include the inverse mills ratio    ^ = (Z   ^ )/(Z  ^ ) in the second
 24
      This is similar to Robinson (1989)'s argument on union member wage premium estimation.




                                                   34
stage regression.25

    Using this two step procedure, we first check the effect of licensing on log wage growth. For
workers who stay in the same occupation, the selection-corrected estimate for the treatment
effect of licensing is 0.087. For workers who switch out of their current occupation the
following period, the treatment effect of licensing is 0.078. These estimates are a little larger
than our baseline estimates, which suggests that endogenous selection in our baseline sample
and regression likely biased our result towards zero. However, since in our baseline analysis
we are restricted to only propensity score-matched observations, the results may not be
directly comparable. Lastly, we look at the licensing effect on occupational mobility. The
average treatment effect for licensing is -0.144, which is again much larger than our baseline
analysis in Table 3. The results using two step Heckman correction strategy are all in line
with our baseline results (at least qualitatively), which validates the strong and significant
licensing effects we find in the previous section.


7.4     Different Data and Sample Selection Criteria

In this section, we investigate the same questions as in the baseline analysis, but we use
different data samples and sources. Recall that our baseline results look at the effect of
licensing on annual labor market transitions, using low-frequency data from the CPS (tables
3 to 7). Our first exercise in this section is to use the same sample from the CPS but look
instead at the effect of licensing on monthly transitions.26 We then show how the results
differ when we impute data differently from our baseline analysis. The CPS has the most
reliable licensing indicators in months 1 and 5 and reliable wage data in months 4 and 8. In
the baseline results, we kept data from months 4 and 8 and modified the worker licensing
status using worker labor market data. In this section, we employ the second imputation
procedure by keeping workers in months 1 and 5 while imputing the wage data. The results
are shown in Table 9. The top panel of the table shows the results when estimating at the
monthly level, using our baseline imputation/cleaning method. The bottom panel shows
the results when using our alternate cleaning method. Notice that when using monthly
data, the marginal effects of licensing on the probability of switching between occupations
  25
     Since we do not have any exclusion restrictions in the first stage, identification is generally achieved
through functional form assumptions - in particular, the nonlinearity of the probit model relative to the
second stage regression.
  26
     We cannot run the same wage change analysis using monthly data, since wage information is provided
only in the CPS Outgoing Rotation Group and not available month to month.




                                                     35
are significant and negative as before, but with smaller coefficients. The effect on workers
moving in and out of unemployment is even smaller. Given that a worker is a new hire
in this period, if the worker is now licensed, he or she is more likely to have come from
unemployment than from another job. All results are in line with our baseline results. In
addition the results are robust to the two different imputation methods, with our second
imputation method giving us very similar results to our baseline method (bottom panel of
Table 9). This strengthens our conclusions about how occupational licensing affects labor
market transitions, especially because in month 1 and month 5, the licensing indicators are
the most credible. The results here further validate our imputation methods and baseline
results.

    We then use SIPP waves 12, 13, and 14 as well as module 13 in panel 2008 and apply
the same analysis. The advantage of using this sample is that the SIPP has wage data for
every wave in the sample, and module 13 has more reliable licensing indicators that are
comparable to the ones we use in the CPS. However, this analysis suffers from a relatively
smaller sample size. After data cleaning,27 we have 82,000 observations left in the sample.
Out of these observations, only 22,000 have a valid value for licensing status. This is because
the licensing-related questions are provided only in the topical module in wave 13. When
matching these workers from the topical module to the core data, we have only their licensing
status in this one interview month. Furthermore, many workers who are interviewed in the
core questions in wave 13 are not in the topical module and therefore do not have values for
licensing status. Some of the 22,000 workers who have valid licensing statuses do not have
values for labor market transitions. Dropping these workers brings the sample of workers
who have both a valid switching status as well as a licensing indicator down to about 19,500.
We see that roughly 4.6% of these workers switch occupations in four months, which is about
900 observations for switchers. Applying matching techniques results in a loss of additional
observations. So, for example, when we are looking at wage changes when switching into an
occupation that requires licensing, the sample size drops to just over 200 (row 8 in Table
10). This makes some of our results statistically insignificant. However, regardless of the
small sample size and using different data with different time horizons, our results from this
analysis are in line with our baseline results using the CPS. Licensing reduces worker mobility
going in and out of licensed occupations from both other occupations and non-employment.
  27
    We drop people who are older than 65 or younger than 20, who are family workers, unpaid workers, or
enrolled students. We also exclude workers who are disabled or in the armed forces. Finally, we exclude
workers who show up in the sample only once, since our analysis is about the effect of licensing on labor
market dynamics, which requires that we see the same worker at least twice.




                                                   36
Relative to getting hired from non-employment, workers are less likely to get hired from
other occupations if the destination occupation requires a license. The wage growth effect
is higher if one stays in a licensed occupation. Because of the small sample size, results for
wage changes upon switching are not statistically significant.

    Finally, we separately attempt to overcome the small sample issue by performing some
analysis using more than 20 years of data from the SIPP. Here, we use employment in a
universally licensed occupation as an indicator for licensing.28 Thus, for these results, we are
trading a precise indicator of licensing to gain a (much) larger sample size. The particular
analysis we perform is testing whether the rate of worker transitions through an occupation
that is universally licensed (regardless of actual attainment rate) is different from the rate for
other occupations. Because of the nature of this indicator (essentially, all it requires is the
individual's occupation code), we are able to use all panels of the SIPP starting from 1990
to 2013. We present all the results from this analysis in Appendix C, but the key conclusion
supports our baseline finding that occupational licensing has a significant negative effect on
these labor market transition rates.



8       Conclusion

The number of workers in the United States who are licensed has been rising since the
1950s and was greater than 20% in 2019. Both the number of licensed occupations and the
magnitude of the licensing requirements have been increasing across most U.S. states. Using
public data from the CPS and SIPP, we show that occupational licensing has a strong and
negative effect on worker labor market flows, but is associated with higher wage growth,
whether a worker is staying in a licensed occupation or switching into a licensed occupation.
Specifically, compared with other workers, licensed workers in our findings are 24% less
likely to switch occupations and 3% less likely to become unemployed in the following year.
Furthermore, licensed workers have wage growth rates that are 6.3 percentage points (pp)
higher on average than other workers who stay in the same occupation next year and wage
growth rates that are 3.8pp higher than other workers who switch occupations. Compared
with occupations without licensing requirements, occupational licensing represents a barrier
to entry for both unemployed workers (1.2% lower entrance rate) and workers who enter
from other occupations (24.1% lower entrance rate). Occupational licensing represents a
 28
      The set of universally licensed occupations is presented in Appendix A.




                                                     37
larger barrier to entry if a worker is switching in from other occupations relative to switchers
from non-employment. The barrier effect of licensing on labor flows may partly explain
the decline in occupational mobility over recent decades (Xu (2019)). These results raise
further questions about the effects of licensing: Does licensing affect the quality of goods and
services, and by what mechanism? How does licensing affect the welfare of workers outside
of those licensed occupations relative to incumbent workers? What are the aggregate and
distributional implications for heterogeneous changes in licensing coverage and entry costs?
We are currently pursuing answers to these questions by using a structural model that allows
us to study how changes in occupation-specific entry costs affect economic welfare and the
income distribution.




                                              38
References
Altonji, Joseph G, Todd E Elder, and Christopher R Taber. 2005. "Selection on observed
  and unobserved variables: Assessing the effectiveness of Catholic schools." Journal of Political
  Economy, 113(1): 151­184.
Angrist, Joshua D, and J¨
                        orn-Steffen Pischke. 2010. "The credibility revolution in empiri-
  cal economics: How better research design is taking the con out of econometrics." Journal of
  Economic Perspectives, 24(2): 3­30.
Blackwell, Matthew, Stefano Iacus, Gary King, and Giuseppe Porro. 2009. "CEM: Coars-
  ened exact matching in Stata." The Stata Journal, 9(4): 524­546.
Chetty, Raj. 2009. "Sufficient statistics for welfare analysis: A bridge between structural and
  reduced-form methods." Annu. Rev. Econ., 1(1): 451­488.
Davis, Steven J, and John Haltiwanger. 2014. "Labor market fluidity and economic perfor-
  mance." National Bureau of Economic Research.
Flood, Sarah, Miriam King, Steven Ruggles, and Robert Warren. 2015. "Integrated
  Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey: Version 4.0.[dataset]. Minneapolis:
  University of Minnesota." http: // doi. org/ 10. 18128/ D030. V4. 0 .
Gittleman, Maury, and Morris M Kleiner. 2016. "Wage effects of unionization and occupa-
  tional licensing coverage in the United States." ILR Review, 69(1): 142­172.
Gittleman, Maury, Mark A Klee, and Morris M Kleiner. 2018. "Analyzing the labor market
  outcomes of occupational licensing." Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society,
  57(1): 57­100.
Han, Suyoun, and Morris M Kleiner. 2016. "Analyzing the Influence of Occupational Licens-
  ing Duration and Grandfathering on Labor Market Outcomes." National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
Heckman, James J. 1979. "Sample selection bias as a specification error." Econometrica,
  47(1): 153­161.
Hyatt, Henry R. 2015. "The decline in job-to-job flows." IZA World of Labor.
Iacus, Stefano M, Gary King, and Giuseppe Porro. 2012. "Causal inference without balance
  checking: Coarsened exact matching." Political Analysis, 20(1): 1­24.
Johnson, Janna E, and Morris M Kleiner. 2017. "Is Occupational Licensing a Barrier to
  Interstate Migration?" National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kleiner, Morris M. 2000. "Occupational Licensing." Journal of Economic Perspectives,
  14(4): 189­202.
Kleiner, Morris M, and Alan B Krueger. 2013. "Analyzing the extent and influence of occu-
  pational licensing on the labor market." Journal of Labor Economics, 31(S1): S173­S202.




                                               39
Kleiner, Morris M, and Evan J Soltas. 2019. "A welfare analysis of occupational licensing in
  US states." No. w26383. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kleiner, Morris M, and Evgeny Vorotnikov. 2017. "Analyzing occupational licensing among
  the states." Journal of Regulatory Economics, 52(2): 132­158.
Lise, Jeremy, and Jean-Marc Robin. 2017. "The macrodynamics of sorting between workers
  and firms." American Economic Review, 107(4): 1104­35.
Moscarini, Giuseppe, and Francis G Vella. 2008. "Occupational mobility and the business
  cycle." National Bureau of Economic Research.
Oster, Emily. 2017. "Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: Theory and evidence."
  Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 1­18.
Robinson, Chris. 1989. "The joint determination of union status and union wage effects: some
  tests of alternative models." Journal of Political Economy, 97(3): 639­667.
Rust, John. 1987. "Optimal replacement of GMC bus engines: An empirical model of Harold
  Zurcher." Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 999­1033.
Stock, James H, and Motohiro Yogo. 2002. "Testing for weak instruments in linear IV regres-
  sion." National Bureau of Economic Research.
Traiberman, Sharon. 2019. "Occupations and import competition: Evidence from Denmark."
  American Economic Review, 109(12): 4260­4301.
Wiswall, Matthew. 2007. "Licensing and occupational sorting in the market for teachers." Un-
  published manuscript, Department of Economics, New York University.
Xu, Ming. 2019. "Understanding the Decline in Occupational Mobility." Working Paper.




                                               40
Table 1: Monthly Licensing Status Changing Rate ­ Before and After Imputation

Panels                                                                  Months
Panel A:                                                          M1-M2 M2-M3 M3-M4

Before correction     Licensing status changing rate (%)          52         32    28
Panel B:                                                          M5-M6      M6-M7 M7-M8

Before correction     Licensing status changing rate (%)          69         48    40
Panel C:                                                          M1-M2      M2-M3 M3-M4

After correction      Licensing status changing rate (%)          32         34    32
Panel D:                                                          M5-M6      M6-M7 M7-M8

After correction      Licensing status changing rate (%)          39         40          38
Note: Data source: CPS IPUMS.


             Table 2: Changes in Occupational Licensing Requirements

     Occupation          Education (yrs)         Initial Cost           Renewal Cost
                         '95    '13           '95  % ('13)          '95  % ('13)
         Engineer        3.7    4.0           $124 55%              $46 101%
    Land Surveyor        1.6    4.1           $82 42%               $86 24%
      Psychologist       5.8    6.0           $263 33%              $169 56%
            Nurse        2.0    2.0           $36 124%              $26 142%
          Teacher        2.3    3.7           $19 177%              $16 188%
      Veterinarian       6.0    6.0           $23 512%              $23 468%
    Total (Mean)         3.22   4.9           $101    116%          $83     106%
    Note: Years of Education: 2 is High School, 4 is Assoc., 6 is Bachelor's, 8 is Post-Grad.




                                               41
               Table 3: Occupational Switching (Job to Job, out)

                                               Switching Out (J2J)
                              A            B            C            D           E
        Licensed (1 ) -0.158*** -0.143*** -0.112***             -0.089***    -0.097***
                 Age            -0.002*** -0.002***             -0.002***    -0.001***
              Female            -0.013*** -0.009**              -0.008**     -0.002
          Non-White             0.007*    0.009**               0.012***     0.033***
           No college           0.011*** 0.030***               0.004        0.019***
     Union Coverage             -0.070*** -0.045***             -0.032***    -0.024***
             Married            -0.014*** -0.016***             -0.017***    -0.018***
   Weekly log income            -0.004*** -0.024***             -0.028***    -0.016***
            Cognitive                     0.452***              0.322***     0.195***
              Manual                      -0.199***             -0.011       -0.031
        Interpersonal                     -0.281***             -0.208***    -0.263***
Occupation EmpShare                       -4.404***             -5.667***    -5.592***
                 E[Y ]                                                       0.416
        % Effect of 1                                                        -23.63%
       Fixed Effects No                No           No          Yes          Yes
CEM & PSM Weighted No                  No           No          No           Yes
       Observations 130,290            130,106      129,790     129,773      66,502
 Note: Data Source: CPS IPUMS. Seventeen coarsely defined occupation groups are used
 in the occupation-state fixed effect: 1. Executive, Administrative, and Managerial Occu-
 pations; 2. Management Related Occupations; 3. Professional Specialty Occupations; 4.
 Technicians and Related Support Occupations; 5. Sales Occupations; 6. Administrative
 Support Occupations; 7. Housekeeping and Cleaning Occupations; 8. Protective Servce
 Occupations; 9. Other Service Occupations; 10. Farm Operators and Managers; 11.
 Other Agricultural and Related Occupations; 12. Mechanics and Repairers; 13. Con-
 struction Trades; 14. Extractive Occupations; 15. Precision Production Occupations;
 16. Machine Operators, Assemblers, and Inspectors; 17. Transportation and Material
 Moving Occupations. The coefficients represent the effects on annually occupational
 switching rate. The occupation classification used in transition rate is from IPUMS
 harmonized 2010 census code (440 categories). Fixed effects include occupation, year,
 month, and occupation state interaction.




                                         42
                 Table 4: Occupational Switching (Job to Job, in)

                                                 Switching In (J2J)
                               A           B            C             D            E
        Licensed (1 ) -0.173*** -0.160*** -0.128***              -0.105***     -0.096***
                 Age            -0.002*** -0.002***              -0.002***     -0.001***
              Female            -0.012*** -0.005                 -0.009***     -0.019***
          Non-White             0.004     0.006                  0.011**       0.010*
           No college           0.003     0.016***               0.002         0.006
     Union Coverage             -0.065*** -0.044***              -0.029***     -0.015***
             Married            -0.013*** -0.015***              -0.017***     -0.015***
   Weekly log income            -0.006*** -0.022**               -0.027***     -0.026***
            Cognitive                     0.441***               0.326***      0.255***
              Manual                      -0.184***              -0.063****    -0.049
        Interpersonal                     -0.304***              -0.264***     -0.350***
Occupation EmpShare                       -3.612***              -4.677***     -4.591***
                 E[Y ]                                                         0.399
        % Effect of 1                                                          -24.08%
       Fixed Effects No                No           No           Yes           Yes
CEM & PSM Weighted No                  No           No           No            Yes
       Observations 130,305            130,110      129,674      129,658       63,437
 Note: Data Source: CPS IPUMS. Seventeen coarsely defined occupation groups are used
 in the occupation-state fixed effects. See table 3 for details. The coefficients represent
 the effects on annually occupational switching rate. The occupation classification used
 in transition rate is from IPUMS harmonized 2010 census code (440 categories). Fixed
 effects include year, month, and occupation state interaction fixed effects.




                                          43
                    Table 5: Switching out to Unemployment

                                                Switching Out (J2N)
                               A            B           C             D           E
        Licensed (1 ) -0.027*** -0.008*** -0.005***              -0.004***    -0.005**
                 Age            -0.003*** -0.002***              -0.003***    -0.001***
              Female            -0.005*** -0.007**               -0.010***    -0.002
          Non-White             0.022*** 0.020***                0.021***     0.023***
           No college           0.003     0.002                  0.003        0.006*
             Married            -0.078*** -0.075***              -0.072***    -0.037***
   Weekly log income            -0.029*** -0.030***              -0.031***    -0.019***
            Cognitive                     -0.060***              -0.062***    -0.022**
              Manual                      -0.001                 -0.000       -0.011
        Interpersonal                     0.021**                0.023**      0.013
Occupation EmpShare                       0.141                  0.148        0.218
                 E[Y ]                                                        0.184
        % Effect of 1                                                         -2.98%
       Fixed Effects No                No            No          Yes          Yes
CEM & PSM Weighted No                  No            No          No           Yes
       Observations 252,228            251,813       251,532     251,217      74,928
 Note: Data Source: CPS IPUMS. Seventeen coarsely defined occupation groups are used
 in the occupation-state fixed effects. See table 3 for details.The coefficients represent
 the effects on annually occupational switching rate. The occupation classification used
 in transition rate is from IPUMS harmonized 2010 census code (440 categories). Fixed
 effects include year, month, and occupation state interaction fixed effects.




                                          44
                    Table 6: Switching In from Unemployment

                                                Switching In (N2J)
                               A            B            C            D            E
        Licensed (1 ) -0.024*** -0.003    -0.003                  -0.001       -0.005**
                 Age            -0.006*** -0.006***               -0.006***    -0.005***
              Female            0.005**   -0.001                  -0.002       -0.024***
          Non-White             0.025*** 0.023***                 0.025***     0.016***
           No college           0.023     0.011***                0.002        0.045***
             Married            -0.074*** -0.072***               -0.071***    -0.056***
            Cognitive                     -0.096***               -0.116***    -0.093***
              Manual                      -0.023**                -0.002       -0.002
        Interpersonal                     0.006                   0.012*       0.084***
Occupation EmpShare                       -0.102                  0.084        0.832***
                 E[Y ]                                                         0.455
        % Effect of 1                                                          -1.150%
       Fixed Effects No                 No           No           Yes          Yes
CEM & PSM Weighted No                   No           No           No           Yes
       Observations 246,845             246,845      246,307      246,307      115,852
 Note: Data Source: CPS IPUMS. Seventeen coarsely defined occupation groups are used
 in the occupation-state fixed effects. See Table 3 for details. The coefficients represent
 the effects on annually occupational switching rate. The occupation classification used
 in transition rate is from IPUMS harmonized 2010 census code (440 categories). Fixed
 effects include year, month, and occupation state interaction fixed effects.




                                          45
 Table 7: The Relative Effect of Licensing on the Unemployed vs. the Employed

                                           Switching In (J2J vs N2J)
                               A            B            C            D            E
        Licensed (1 ) -0.067*** -0.087***            -0.073***    -0.045***    -0.044**
                 Age            0.004***             0.004***     0.005***     0.005***
              Female            0.004*               0.008**      0.008***     0.014
          Non-White             -0.018***            -0.017***    -0.020***    -0.019***
           No college           0.004*               0.016***     0.009        0.008**
             Married            0.055***             0.053***     0.063***     0.061***
   Weekly log income            0.037***             0.026***     0.029***     0.018***
            Cognitive                                0.254***     0.134***     0.126***
              Manual                                 -0.082***    0.021*       -0.007
        Interpersonal                                -0.139***    -0.063***    -0.065***
Occupation EmpShare                                  -1.696***    -1.466***    -1.327
                 E[Y ]                                                         0.319
        % Effect of 1                                                          -13.96%
       Fixed Effects No                 No           No           Yes          Yes
CEM & PSM Weighted No                   No           No           No           Yes
       Observations 179,059             178,778      178,345      178,345      74,824
 Note: Data Source: CPS IPUMS. Seventeen coarsely defined occupation groups are used
 in the occupation-state fixed effects. See Table 3 for details. The coefficients represent
 the effects on annually occupational switching rate. The occupation classification used
 in transition rate is from IPUMS harmonized 2010 census code (440 categories). Fixed
 effects include year, month, and occupation state interaction fixed effects.




                                          46
                 Table 8: Wage Growth Effects of Licensing

        DepVar:  log w        J2J, stay        J2J, out    J2J, in      N2J, in
       Licensed (1 )         0.063***      0.038***       0.054***     0.114***
                Age          0.002***      0.002***       0.002***     0.005***
             Female          -0.148***     -0.151***      -0.151***    -0.249***
          Non-white          -0.032***     -0.040***      -0.051***    -0.055**
          No college         -0.127***     -0.121***      -0.153***    -0.259***
    Union Coverage           0.041***      0.056***       0.073***     0.144***
            Married          0.005**       0.032***       0.026**      0.030***
     Weekly Income           -0.588***     -0.613***      -0.633***1      -
       Cognitive-old         0.707***      0.149***       0.179***        -
         Manual-old          0.135***      0.074          0.067*          -
   Interpersonal-old         0.293***      0.083**        0.088**         -
      Cognitive-new             -          0.781***       0.614***     1.263***
        Manual-new              -          0.090***       0.068        0.133***
  Interpersonal-new             -          0.335***       0.174***     0.480***
Occ EmpShare - old           -0.609        -1.851***      -0.143***       -
Occ EmpShare - new              -          -1.055**       0.283        -0.955***
              Annual w ¯     $35,046       $32,910        $33,971        -
        Licensing Effect     $2,208        $1,251         $1,834         -
            Fixed Effects Yes              Yes            Yes          Yes
                Matched Yes                Yes            Yes          Yes
            Observations 42,369            27,449         21,989       52,641
1
    This represents the weekly income from the job before switching occupation.
     Note: Data Source: CPS IPUMS. Seventeen coarsely defined oc-
     cupation groups are used in the occupation-state fixed effects. See
     table 3 for details. The coefficients represent the effects on annually
     occupational switching rate. The occupation classification used in
     transition rate is from IPUMS harmonized 2010 census code (440
     categories). Fixed effects include year, month, and occupation state
     interaction fixed effects.




                                          47
                Table 9: Baseline Analysis Using Alternative Months in CPS

                                                                     CPS Monthly Results
                                                             1         E[Y ]       % Effect
                    Probability of Switching Out (J2J)     -0.017     0.041        -46.34%
                                                            (.005)
                      Probability of Switching In (J2J)    -0.018     0.039        -46.73%
                                                            (.003)
Probability of Switching Out to Unemployment (J2N)         -0.002     0.014        -32.25%
                                                            (.001)
Probability of Switching In from Unemployment (N2J)        -0.001     0.007        -20.73%
                                                            (.000)
       Prob of Switching In from J vs N (N2J vs J2J)       -0.017     0.106        -16.04%
                                                            (.007)

                                                           CPS Month 1 and 5 Annual Results
                    Probability of Switching Out (J2J)     -0.099     0.435        -22.87%
                                                            (.003)
                      Probability of Switching In (J2J)    -0.105     0.419        -24.89%
                                                            (.004)
Probability of Switching Out to Unemployment (J2N)         -0.007     0.459         -1.56%
                                                            (.002)
Probability of Switching In from Unemployment (N2J)        -0.042     0.512         -8.29%
                                                            (.002)
       Prob of Switching In from J vs N (N2J vs J2J)       -0.047     0.291        -16.01%
                                                            (.003)

  Note: Data Source: CPS IPUMS. All results above include occupational fixed effects, year
  fixed effects, union fixed effects, occupation and state interaction fixed effects, CEM matching,
  and PSM weights.




                                             48
            Table 10: Percentage Effect of Licensing Using SIPP 2008

                                                               SIPP Panel 2008
                                                           1        E[Y ]   % Effect
                   Probability of Switching Out (J2J)    -0.011    0.036    -32.06%
                                                          (.005)
                     Probability of Switching In (J2J)   -0.011    0.043    -26.57%
                                                          (.005)
Probability of Switching Out to Unemployment (J2N)       -0.004    0.022    -18.48%
                                                          (.004)
Probability of Switching In from Unemployment (N2J)      -0.012    0.028    -44.96%
                                                          (.004)
       Prob of Switching In from J vs N (N2J vs J2J)     -0.102    0.681    -14.93%
                                                          (.049)

                             Wage Growth for Stayer      0.019
                                                          (.008)
                     Wage Growth for Switcher (out)      -0.0306
                                                          (.165)
                       Wage Growth for Switcher (in)     0.146
                                                          (.115)
                    Wage Growth for New Hire (N2J)       -0.236
                                                          (.153)

  Note: The data is from waves 12, 13, and 14 of SIPP panel 2008. The indicator
  of licensing is from the topical module of SIPP wave 13. All results above include
  occupational fixed effects, year fixed effects, CEM matching, and PSM weights.
  Wage in this analysis represents workers' monthly wages, and the switching rate is
  in four-month frequency.




                                        49
                Table 11: Heterogeneous Licensing Effects across Occupations

                                                            CPS Annual Results
                                       occ1        occ2        occ3        occ4       occ5        occ6
      Prob of Switching Out (J2J)   -0.104***   -0.062***    -0.96***     0.186*    -0.078***   -0.097***

       Prob of Switching In (J2J)   -0.083***   -0.116***   -0.109***     0.082     -0.091***   -0.074***

Prob of Switching Out to N (J2N)     -0.006*      0.003      -0.013**     -0.031    -0.022**     -0.006

Prob of Switching In from N (N2J)    0.018***    0.015**    -0.045***     0.013*     0.013*      -0.018*

         Switching In from J vs N   -0.047***   -0.036***   -0.022***    0.109**    -0.047***   -0.077***

          Wage Growth for Stayer     0.060***    0.030**     0.070***     0.088*     0.035**    0.081***

  Wage Growth for Switcher (out)     0.033***     -0.014     0.087***   0.458***     0.65***      0.042

   Wage Growth for Switcher (in)     0.040***     0.024      0.093***     -0.175      0.032     0.133***

 Wage Growth for New Hire (N2J)      0.097***     0.027*     0.105***     -0.077    0.129***    0.181***
 Note: All results above include all controls and PSM matching weights. The six occupations are 1. Manage-
 rial and Professional; 2. Technical, Sales and Administration Support; 3. Service Occupations; 4. Farming,
 Forestry, and Fishing; 5. Precision Production, Craft and Repair; 6. Operators, Fabricators and Laborers.




                                                 50
                            Table 12: Control Sensitivity Treatment Effect Bounds ­ Switching Rate

                                             Switch Out Rate                                           Switch In Rate
                               1         2         3                  4                  5         6         7                  8
     Variable of Interest
                Licensed      -0.104    -0.102    -0.098            -0.097              -0.103    -0.098    -0.096            -0.096
                             (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.004)           (0.004)             (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.004)           (0.004)

                Controls
               Control 1                 *         *                  *                            *         *                  *
               Control 2                           *                  *                                      *                  *
               Control 3                                              *                                                         *




51
     Bounds and Deltas
       Rmax = R~ × 1.3                                     (-0.097, -0.094),  = 20.3                                 (-0.096, -0.094),  = 19.5

           Rmax = 0.5                                      (-0.097, -0.039),  = 1.5                                  (-0.096, -0.044),  = 1.5

           Rmax = 0.7                                      (-0.097, -0.001),  = 1.0                                  (-0.096, -0.006),  = 1.1



                    R2       0.02   0.02          0.06                 ~)
                                                                 0.09 (R                0.02      0.03      0.05           0.10 (R
                                                                                                                                 ~)
           Observations     66,542 66,542        66,542           66,542               63,482    63,482    63,482           63,482
       Note: All results above include CEM matching and PSM weights. Control 1 include: age, gender, education, race, marriage
       status, union status, income level. Control 2 include: occupational skill levels, occupational employment share. Control 3
       include: year effects, month effects, state and occupation effects. Column 4 of the left panel is the same as the first row of
       column E of Table 3. Column 4 of the right panel is the same as the first row of column E of Table 4.
Table 13: Control Sensitivity and Treatment Effect Bounds ­
Stayer Wage Growth

                                         Stayers W
                          1          2          3                 4
 Variable of Interest
            Licensed     0.054     0.071      0.062            0.063
                        (0.006)   (0.005)    (0.005)          (0.005)

            Controls
           Control 1                 *          *                 *
           Control 2                            *                 *
           Control 3                                              *

 Bounds and Deltas
   Rmax = R~ × 1.3                                     (0.063, 0.067),  = -28.9

       Rmax = 0.5                                      (0.063, 0.070),  = -14.1

       Rmax = 0.7                                       (0.063, 0.077),  = -6.9



                R2      0.002      0.25      0.28                 ~)
                                                            0.31 (R
       Observations     42,414    42,414    42,414           42,414
   Note: All results above include CEM matching and PSM weights.
   Control 1 include: age, gender, education, race, union status, mar-
   riage status, income level. Control 2 include: occupational skill levels,
   occupational employment share. Control 3 include: year effects, month
   effects, state and occupation effects. Column 4 of the table is the same
   as column of Table 8.




                                   52
                Table 14: Control Sensitivity and Treatment Effect Bounds ­ Switching Wage Change

                                         Switch Out W                                              Switch In W
                              1         2         3                 4                5         6         7                  8
     Variable of Interest
                Licensed     0.052     0.054     0.052           0.038              0.043     0.047     0.046            0.054
                            (0.008)   (0.007)   (0.007)         (0.007)            (0.009)   (0.008)   (0.008)          (0.008)

                Controls
               Control 1                *         *                 *                          *         *                  *
               Control 2                          *                 *                                    *                  *
               Control 3                                            *                                                       *




53
     Bounds and Deltas
       Rmax = R~ × 1.3                                    (0.034, 0.038),  = 7.6                                 (0.054, 0.057),  = -23.6

           Rmax = 0.5                                     (0.029, 0.038),  = 4.0                                 (0.054, 0.060),  = -615.0

           Rmax = 0.7                                     (0.019, 0.038),  = 1.9                                  (0.054, 0.068),  = -6.7



                    R2      0.002     0.236     0.246        0.317 (R~)             0.001     0.262     0.272         0.338 (R~)
           Observations     27,586    27,586    27,586         27,586              22,082    22,082    22,082           22,082
       Note: All results above include CEM matching and PSM weights. Control 1 include: age, gender, education, race, marriage
       status, union status, income level. Control 2 include: source occupational skill levels, source occupational employment
       share. Control 3 include: destination occupational skill levels and occupational employment share, year effects, month
       effects, state and occupation effects. Column 4 of the left panel is the same as column 2 (J2J, out) of Table 8. Column 4
       of the right panel is the same as column 3 (J2J, in) of Table 8.
                           Table 15: OLS vs 2SLS

                          w (stayer) w (switch out) w (switch in) Switch out   Switch in
1 (OLS)                   0.045      0.023          0.047         -0.034       -0.062
                          (0.006)    (0.008)        (0.008)       (0.004)      (0.004)
1 (2SLS)                  0.082      0.031          0.054         -0.023       -0.055
                          (0.018)    (0.020)        (0.022)       (0.011)      (0.011)
(Cragg-Donald Wald Fstat) 7811.7     8348.1         7720.7        1.7e+04      1.6e+04




                                    54
Figure 1: Licensing Rate vs. Occupational Switching Rate




                3.5




                                                                                                       35
                                                                                                       Fraction of Workforce Licensed (%)
 Monthly Switching Rate (%)




                                                                                                                                   30
            2.5          3




                                                                                                           20          25
  2             1.5




                                                                                                       15
                              1995m1    2000m1         2005m1             2010m1            2015m1

                                            Switching Rate                  License Rate




                         Figure 2: Licensing Share vs. Switching Out Rate
            .25
            .2
 Occupational Mobility
              .15




                                                      4800. Barbers
     .1




                                                                      4810. Insurance sales agents

                                                                      2310. Elementary and middle school teachers
            .05




                                                                                                3250. Veterinarians
            0




                              0        .2             .4             .6                    .8                                        1
                                                       Licensing Share




                                                             55
                          Figure 3: Licensing Share vs. Switching In Rate




            .2      .15
Occupational Mobility




                                                9130. Driver/sales workers and truck drivers
        .1




                                                                       3130. Registered nurses



                                                                                         3010. Dentists
            .05




                                                                                       3250. Veterinarians
            0




                          0         .2        .4             .6                   .8                 1
                                               Licensing Share




                               Figure 4: Average Switching In Rate

                                  Occupational Switching Rate (J2J In)
            .06
            .04
Switching Rate
            .02
            0




                                          Not-Licensed                  Licensed




                                                  56
                          Figure 5: Average Switching Out Rate

                            Occupational Switching Rate (J2J Out)

          .06
            .04
Switching Rate
          .02
          0




                                     Not-Licensed      Licensed




                      Figure 6: Average Switching In Rate (From U)

                              Occupational Switching Rate (N2J)
          .015  .01
    Switching Rate
.005      0




                                     Not-Licensed      Licensed




                                             57
                         Figure 7: Average Switching Out Rate (To U)

                                 Occupational Switching Rate (J2N)

           .01   .008
  Switching Rate
.004     .006
           .002
           0




                                        Not-Licensed      Licensed




                               Figure 8: Average Weekly Wages

                                      Average Weekly Wage
           800     600
Wage (in 2000 dollars)
       400 200
           0




                                        Not-Licensed      Licensed




                                                58
               Figure 9: Average Weekly Wage Differences by Age

                                           Weekly Wages by Age

            1000   800
 Wages in 2000 dollars
400      600200




                          20        30           40          50         60   70
                                                       age

                                             Not-Licensed         Licensed




                               Figure 10: Wage growth rate for stayers

                                         Wage Growth Rate -- Stayers
            .025    .02
change in$ log wage
  .01      .015
            .005
            0




                                             Not-Licensed         Licensed




                                                      59
                        Figure 11: Wage growth rate for switchers

                               Wage Growth Gate -- Switchers

           .04    .03
change in log wage
      .02  .01
           0




                                     Not-Licensed       Licensed




      Figure 12: Average Switching In Rate by Occupations

                             Occupational Switching Rate (J2J In)
           .08 .06
Switching Rate
    .04    .02
           0




                                     Not-Licensed       Licensed




                                             60
    Figure 13: Average Switching Out Rate by Occupations

                        Occupational Switching Rate (J2J Out)

            .08
                                                                             Pest control worker
                  .06
   Switching Rate
       .04  .02
            0




                                     Not-Licensed               Licensed




Figure 14: Average Switching In (From U) Rate by Occupations

                         Occupational Switching Rate (N2J)
            .08




                                                    Real estate agent
                                                       School counselor

                                                             Elementary/secondary teachers
                  .06




                         Cosmetologist
   Switching Rate
       .04  .02
            0




                                     Not-Licensed               Licensed




                                             61
Figure 15: Average Switching Out Rate (to U) by Occupations

                        Occupational Switching Rate (J2N)
            .08




                        Cosmetologist
                  .06
   Switching Rate
       .04  .02
            0




                                   Not-Licensed   Licensed




                                           62
Appendix

A      Universally Licensed Occupations

The following occupations are universally licensed (licensed in all 50 states and the District
of Columbia) in the U.S. There are many occupations that are partially licensed ­ licensed
in some states but not others. For example, security guards are licensed in 37 states, while
bartenders are licensed in 13 states. Note that our main analysis uses individual-specific
licensing data that do not rely on knowing these universally licensed occupations.

    · Accountant/auditor; Architect (except landscape or naval); Barber; Bus driver (mu-
      nicipal); Chiropractor; Dental hygienist Cosmetologist; Dentist; Emergency medical
      technician; Engineer; Funeral director; Hearing aid dispenser; Insurance agent; Land
      surveyor; Insurance adjusters; Lawyer; Practical/vocational nurse; Medical and health
      service manager; Mortgage loan originator; Registered nurse; Nursing assistant; Occu-
      pational therapist; Occupational therapy assistant; Optometrist;Osteopath; Pesticide
      applicator; Pharmacist; Physical therapist; Physical therapy assistant; Physician as-
      sistant; Physician/Surgeon; Podiatrist; Psychologist; Real estate agent; Real estate
      broker; Real estate appraiser/assesor; School bus driver; School Counselor; Securities;
      commodities and financial service agent; Social worker; Speech language pathologist;
      Truck driver; Veterinarian; Veterinarian technician/assistant; Teachers.



B      CPS Imputation

We impute the CPS data in two ways. First, we keep worker observations from months 4
and 8 so we have the most reliable data on wages. We then use workers employment status
information to modify the spurious licensing status. Specifically, we correct the imputed
licensing status in the following four cases. The first two cases are when a worker's record
shows change in licensing status between month 1 and 4, or between month 5 and 8. If a
worker is (is not) licensed in month 1/5 but is not (is) licensed in month 4/8, and he or she
does not experience an occupation change (finely defined 2010 census code, 440 categories
in IPUMS), industry change, employment status change, or class of work change, then we
say the worker is still (is still not) licensed. We then modify the licensing indicator from 0
(1) to 1 (0). The third and fourth cases are when a worker's record shows that he or she



                                             63
keeps the same licensing status from month 1 to 4 or from month 5 to 8. If a worker is
recorded as licensed in both month 1/5 and 4/8 but has switched occupations29 in between,
the new occupation is not a universally licensed occupation (see the appendix for the list of
universally licensed occupations), and furthermore his or her answer to the second question
in the licensing questionnaire has changed from 1 to 0 between the two months, we then
change the licensing status in 4/8 from 1 to 0. Similarly, if a worker is recorded as not
licensed in months 4 and 8 but has switched into a universally licensed occupation, and the
answer to the first question in the licensing questionnaire has changed from 0 to 1, we then
change the licensing indicator from 0 to 1. Lastly, for workers who are not licensed in either
months 1 or 4 and have switched occupations between months 1 and 4, we further check if
the worker's occupation in month 4 is the same as it is in month 5. If it is the same, and his
or her licensing status in month 5 is "licensed", we then change the worker's licensing status
in month 4 from 0 to 1. These modification steps are not perfect. For example, workers
in universally licensed occupations haven't necessarily attained a license. However, we see
these as first steps in utilizing this licensing data and the panel structure of the CPS and
have done what we can to make sure that the imputed licensing status data is as reliable as
possible. To verify the reliability of our exercise, we compare the switching rate in licensing
status for interview months and imputation months, which is the same exercise as in Table 1
and Table ??. After imputation, the licensing status change rate shows much more balance
between interview months and imputation months. Tables ?? and ?? show the results: after
the imputation process, the licensing status change rate is uniformly distributed across all
the interview months ­ this reassures us that our imputation improves the reliability of the
licensing indicators.

   In our second imputation method, we keep observations from months 1 and 5 and impute
wage values using data from months 4 and 8. We keep workers in months 1 and 5 to ensure
that we have the most reliable licensing indicator. However, we lose workers who are no
longer in the sample in months 4 or 8 and those who have changed their labor market status.
We also cannot account for potential high-frequency wage changes, so the wage values are
not as reliable as when we employ the first imputation method above. In particular, we
impute values only for workers who haven't experienced occupation, industry, employment,
and class changes. The assumption we impose here is that if a worker hasn't changed his
  29
    Here, occupations are defined in six coarse groups: (1) Managerial and Professional; (2) Technical, Sales
and Administration Support; (3) Service Occupations; (4) Farming, Forestry, and Fishing; (5) Precision Pro-
duction, Craft and Repair; (6) Operators, Fabricators and Laborers. We consider this type of occupational
switches to be significant career changes, which are more likely to be associated with licensing status change.




                                                      64
or her occupation and employment status within four months (month 1 to 4, or 5 to 8), his
or her wage will stay the same. This imputation imposes very strong assumptions on wage
observations, and these assumptions could bias our wage change analysis. However, we use
this imputation method (imputed wages with reliable licensing indicators) together with the
first method (reliable wages with imputed licensing indicators) to make sure our results are
reasonably robust. Since imputing wages is likely to induce more error, we use the data from
our first imputation in our baseline and are our preferred results.



C     Alternative Licensing Indicator

In this section, we present results using a licensing indicator different than the one in our
baseline analysis. Specifically, we use employment in a universally licensed occupation as
an indicator of being licensed. As mentioned in the data cleaning section, this indicator
has its drawbacks. It doesn't necessarily reflect the true licensing status of an individual
(since individuals may be licensed in a non-universally-licensed occupation, or unlicensed in
a universally licensed occupation). However, it also allows us to use a much longer panel of
data (over 20 years) for our analysis. The results are therefore not quantitatively comparable
to our baseline analysis, but can still be qualitatively compared with what we have already
shown in the main body of the paper.

    We first calculate the raw economy-wide switching rates for each occupation and compare
the switching in and out rates between universally licensed occupations and non-universally-
licensed occupations. We present the data in figures 15 and C.1. A brief glance across the
figures will make it immediately clear that licensed occupations experience far less churn
than other occupations. The rate at which people switch into licensed occupations is lower,
and so is the rate at which people switch out. This result is in line with our baseline results
using individual-level occupational licensing attainment as the licensing indicator.

    We then perform a similar empirical analysis as before, regressing worker switching status
and switching-associated wage changes on observable worker and job characteristics. The
results are shown in Tables C.1 to C.4. A striking result from this analysis is that even when
we are using a different licensing indicator, different data sets, and different time spans, the
effects of licensing on transition patterns and wage changes are remarkably similar. Switching
in and out of licensed occupations is much less frequent than non-licensed occupations,
whether it is transitions through other jobs or from unemployment. Occupational licensing




                                              65
imposes a cost that is time consuming for workers, so conditional on switching, it is more
likely that an individual switches to a licensed occupation from unemployment than from
other occupations.

                           Figure C.1: Occupation Switching Rate from J to J

                                    Occupational Switching Rate (J2J In)
                      .08   .06
             Switching Rate
                 .04  .02
                      0




                                            Not-Licensed       Licensed




                                                    66
              Figure C.2: Occupation Switching Rate from J to J

                       Occupational Switching Rate (J2J Out)

         .08   .06
Switching Rate
    .04  .02
         0




                                Not-Licensed      Licensed




            Figure C.3: Occupation Switching Rate from U to J

                        Occupational Switching Rate (N2J)
         .08   .06
Switching Rate
    .04  .02
         0




                                Not-Licensed      Licensed




                                        67
                       Figure C.4: Occupation Switching Rate from J to U

                                            Occupational Switching Rate (J2N)

                    .08   .06
           Switching Rate
               .04  .02
                    0




                                                     Not-Licensed      Licensed




                                 Table C.1: Occupational Switching (Job to Job)

                                        Switching Out (J2J)                    Switching In (J2J)
                                   1A           1B             1C         2A          2B            2C
  Licensed (1 )                 -0.016***    -0.015***     -0.010***   -0.015*** -0.015*** -0.013***
           Age                  -0.002***    -0.002***     -0.001***   -0.002*** -0.002*** -0.002***
        Female                  -0.012***    -0.014***     -0.007***   -0.012** -0.015** -0.009***
       Married                  -0.020***    -0.020***     -0.020***   -0.020*** -0.020*** -0.023***
        College                 0.009***     0.010***      0.002*      0.010*** 0.009*** 0.000
Monthly Income                  -0.010***    -0.010***     -0.008***   0.001*** 0.001*** 0.001***
      Cognitive                              -0.009**      0.023***              -0.090*** -0.028***
        Manual                               -0.022***     -0.038***             -0.001    -0.046***
  Interpersonal                              -0.020***     -0.020***             -0.065*** -0.039***
          E[Y ]                                            0.053                               0.058
 % Effect of 1                                             -18.7%                              -22.3%
      Matched No                             No            Yes         No          No          Yes
   Observations 1,131,107                    1,127,636     379,876     1,129,902   1,126,104   379,476




                                                             68
                   Table C.2: Switching In and Out of Unemployment

                        Switching Out (J2N)                           Switching In (N2J)
                      3A          3B            3C               4A            4B          4C
  Licensed (1 )    -0.004***   -0.006***    -0.004***        -0.003***      -0.005***   -0.004***
           Age     -0.002***   -0.002***    -0.001***        -0.003***      -0.003***   -0.002***
        Female     0.006***    0.003***     0.008***         0.006**        0.003**     0.007***
       Married     -0.025***   -0.024***    -0.018***        -0.026***      -0.025***   -0.023***
        College    -0.005***   -0.001***    -0.005*          0.007***       0.013***    0.009
Monthly Income     -0.005***   -0.005***    -0.004***        -0.007***      -0.006***   -0.008***
      Cognitive    -           -0.048**     -0.018***        -              -0.067***   -0.034***
        Manual     -           -0.013***    -0.030***        -              -0.018      -0.041***
  Interpersonal    -           -0.000***    -0.029***        -              -0.005***   -0.030***
          E[Y ]                             0.068                                       0.067
 % Effect of 1                              -5.96%                                      -5.94%
      Matched No               No           Yes              No             No          Yes
   Observations 1,297,738      1,293,988    444,770          1,291,856      1,288,114   444,286




                  Table C.3: The Relative Effect of Licensing on the
                  Unemployed vs. the Employed

                                           Switching In (N2J vs J2J)
                                           5A           5B             5C
                     Licensed (1 )     0.056***      0.053**     0.043***
                              Age      -0.002***     -0.002***   -0.002***
                           Female      0,051***      0.051***    0.048***
                          Married      -0.019***     -0.016***   0.004
                           College     0.021***      0.038***    0.039***
                   Monthly Income      -0.016***     -0.013***   -0.007***
                         Cognitive     -             -0.196***   -0.098***
                           Manual      -             0.026***    -0.062***
                     Interpersonal     -             0.014       -0.011
                         Matched No                  No          Yes
                      Observations 175,440           174,987     50,030




                                             69
Table C.4: Wage Effects of Switching from Unem-
ployment to Licensed vs. Non-Licensed Occupations

                  J2J, out       J2J, in    N2J, in
 Licensed (1 )    -0.007***     0.004***    0.207***
          Age     -0.001***     -0.001***   0.005***
       Female     0.006***      0.006***    -0.037***
      Married     -0.001        -0.006***   -0.012
       College    0.003*        0.001       0.027***
     Cognitive    -0.033***     0.004       1.699***
       Manual     -0.022***     0.008       0.873***
 Interpersonal    -0.019***     0.002       0.612***
          E[Y ]   0.009         0.009       7.382
 % Effect of 1    -77.7%        47.3%       22.2%
     Matched Yes                Yes         Yes
  Observations 367,016          367,528     26,306




                           70
