                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             INSURANCE DESIGN AND PHARMACEUTICAL INNOVATION

                                         Leila Agha
                                         Soomi Kim
                                         Danielle Li

                                     Working Paper 27563
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27563


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          July 2020, Revised November 2020




We are grateful to Jason Abaluck, Pierre Azoulay, Katherine Baicker, Ernst Berndt, Alex
Frankel, Erzo Luttmer, Jonathan Skinner, Christopher Snyder, Doug Staiger, Scott Stern, and
Heidi Williams, as well as participants at NBER Summer Institute and various seminar
participants for helpful feedback on this project. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Leila Agha, Soomi Kim, and Danielle Li. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Insurance Design and Pharmaceutical Innovation
Leila Agha, Soomi Kim, and Danielle Li
NBER Working Paper No. 27563
July 2020, Revised November 2020
JEL No. I11,O31,O32,O33,O38

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper studies how insurance coverage policies impact pharmaceutical innovation. In the
United States, most patients obtain prescription drugs through insurance plans administered by
Pharmacy Benefit Managers (PBMs). Beginning in 2012, PBMs began excluding coverage for
many newly approved drugs when cheaper alternatives were available. Relative to firms' existing
practices, we show that exclusions substantially reduced insurance claims for targeted drugs,
lowering their profitability. This new risk of coverage exclusion reshaped upstream
pharmaceutical R&D: for every 1 standard deviation increase in drug class exclusion risk, we
estimate an 11% decline in subsequent development activity. This change translated into a
relative decline in the development of drug candidates that appear more incremental: that is, those
in drug classes with more pre-existing therapies and with less scientifically novel research.


Leila Agha                                       Danielle Li
Department of Economics                          MIT Sloan School of Management
Dartmouth College                                100 Main St, E62-484
6106 Rockefeller Hall                            Cambridge, MA 02142
Hanover, NH 03755                                and NBER
and NBER                                         danielle.li@mit.edu
leila.agha@dartmouth.edu

Soomi Kim
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
skim20@mit.edu
       Technological innovation is a major driver of rising health spending, raising questions as
to whether current payment systems deliver the right balance between incentives to innovate
and incentives to contain costs. In particular, while insurance expansions have been shown to
spur R&D investments, critics argue that more generous coverage policies generate perverse
incentives for firms to develop expensive products with little incremental clinical value.1
       As prescription drug costs rise, politicians and policymakers have increasingly called for
the federal government to contain spending by limiting insurance coverage for high-cost,
low-value treatments. Despite the importance of this policy debate and the widespread
adoption of value-based pricing and coverage decisions outside the US, there is limited
empirical evidence on how insurance design shapes incentives for medical innovation.
       In this paper, we study the impact of a major change in coverage policies of private
sector prescription drug plans on upstream pharmaceutical R&D. Prior to 2012, private
prescription drug insurance in the US generally provided coverage for all FDA-approved
drugs.      To manage costs, plans used a combination of cost-sharing tiers and ordeal
mechanisms (e.g., prior authorization requirements) to direct patients to less expensive
drugs. These approaches, however, were insufficient to curb prescription drug spending,
which grew rapidly during the 1990s and 2000s (Kamal et al. 2018). Beginning in 2012,
Pharmacy Benefit Managers (PBMs), the intermediary firms that manage most private
prescription drug insurance, dramatically shifted their policies and began excluding
coverage for some drugs entirely. These exclusions applied to many newly approved drugs
without generic equivalents. This practice, known as maintaining a "closed formulary," has
since become standard, with 300 branded drugs excluded by at least one of the three
largest PBMs as of 2017.
       Exclusions typically target expensive treatments in therapeutic classes that already
contain cheaper options with a similar mechanism of action. Exclusions can substantially
reduce the profitability of these drugs. For example, when GlaxoSmithKline's blockbuster
asthma inhaler, Advair, was excluded by Express Scripts in January 2014, its US sales fell
by over 30% within a few months (Pollack 2014). As a consequence, the risk of exclusion
decreases the expected profitability of new drugs. The high blood pressure medication
   1
    For example, Stanford (2020) and Zycher (2006) have argued that the innovation benefits of generous
drug payment policies are large, while Bagley et al. (2015), Frank and Zeckhauser (2018), and Dranove et al.
(2020) highlight the risk that generous drug payments may yield excessive incremental innovation.


                                                     1
Edarbi, for instance, received FDA approval in 2011 but was almost immediately excluded
by CVS Caremark in 2012, suppressing demand before it could become established. By
September 2013, Edarbi's manufacturer, the Japanese firm Takeda, decided to sell off its
US distribution rights, despite keeping these rights in Japan and in other countries. Since
then, Takeda has not developed any further drugs for hypertension, choosing instead to
focus on oncology and rare diseases, areas which have seen far fewer exclusions.
       Studying how the downstream decisions of drug buyers shape upstream pharmaceutical
innovation can inform our understanding of how to design payment policies that balance
incentives for innovation with cost containment. These lessons, gleaned from the choices of
private sector firms, can provide insight into the possible effects of policy proposals governing
how public insurers interact with drugmakers.2 Indeed, the largest PBM, CVS Caremark,
manages benefits for 75 million Americans--more than the number of enrollees in either
Medicare or Medicaid.
       We begin our analysis by showing that exclusions were effective in reducing insurance
claims for targeted drugs, below the levels achieved with PBMs' prior approaches. For each
major PBM that excludes coverage, a drug's sales, as proxied by Medicare Part D claims,
falls by 24% on average, relative to comparable drugs that did not face exclusions.
       Next, we show that a drug's risk of facing exclusions varies systematically and
predictably according to the market characteristics of its therapeutic class. Specifically,
exclusions are more common in drug classes with a greater number of pre-existing drugs, as
well as in classes with a large number of patients, as measured by prescription volume.
These findings are consistent with the case of Edarbi, a later entrant in a crowded drug
class (angiotensin II receptor blockers--ARBs) intended to treat hypertension, a very
common condition. In excluding Edarbi, CVS was able to reduce costs over a large patient
population by pointing would-be users to cheaper substitutes in the same class.                       We
develop an index measure of a drug class's ex-ante risk of facing exclusions, as predicted by
its pre-2012 market characteristics.
       Our main results show that, following the introduction of closed formularies,
pharmaceutical investments fell markedly in drug classes at ex-ante high risk of exclusions,
   2
    Congressional Budget Office (2007) predicts that the government will not be able to negotiate lower
prices with drug manufacturers unless it adopts a PBM-pioneered model of providing preferential access for
specific drugs on publicly-run formularies.


                                                    2
relative to trends in low risk classes. For a one standard deviation increase in a drug class's
ex-ante exclusion risk, we document an 11% decline in the number of drugs entering
pre-clinical and clinical development. These declines affect drug candidates in all phases of
development, but are largest among earlier stage drugs. We find no evidence that drug
classes at higher risk of exclusion were on different development trends in the five years
prior to the introduction of exclusions.
   Finally, we explore the nature of this foregone innovation. After exclusions are introduced,
the composition of drugs under development shifts: R&D declined the most in drug markets
with a high number of existing therapies and high prescription volume. Moreover, exclusions
depress R&D investments in the least scientifically innovative drug classes: those where drug
patents are based on older and less "disruptive" underlying science (Funk and Owen-Smith
2017; Wu et al. 2019).
   Taken together, our results suggest that closed formulary policies altered the economic
considerations that drugmakers face when making R&D investment decisions. Prior to this
policy change, pharmaceutical firms could expect that their drugs would be covered by
insurers if approved by the FDA. In this world, firms had strong incentives to develop
incremental drugs aimed at large disease markets because such drugs were the most likely
to receive FDA approval and generate a large base of revenues if approved. With the
introduction of closed formularies, these incremental drugs became precisely the ones at
greatest risk of being excluded. Our results show that pharmaceutical firms responded to
this change in incentives by reducing R&D spending in drug classes serving common
diseases with many incumbent therapies. This response shifted investments away from
research areas with more incremental activity and lower scientific novelty.
   Our econometric approach is based on a difference-in-differences specification that
identifies a relative decline in R&D across drug classes at high vs. low exclusion risk. A
natural, welfare-relevant question is whether this constitutes a total decline in innovative
activity or a reallocation of R&D investment. Theoretically, whether firms reallocate or
simply reduce their R&D spending depends on their baseline ability to invest in promising
drugs. In a frictionless model, firms invest in all drugs with positive net present value
(NPV); the introduction of exclusions would lower NPV for drugs in high exclusion risk
areas and therefore lead to an aggregate decline in innovation. However, a growing finance


                                              3
literature has shown that even large public firms often behave as if they face financial
frictions and fail to invest in all NPV positive projects (Kerr and Nanda 2015; Krieger
et al. 2019). In this case, a decline in NPV for some drugs would free up funds to invest in
other areas, leading to a partial reallocation of R&D investment from high to low exclusion
risk drug classes. While we cannot answer this question empirically since it would rely
purely on time series identification, our results do show that insurance design choices are
powerful tools that can shape the direction of pharmaceutical R&D.
   We contribute to a broad literature examining how policy design shapes incentives for
innovators across a range of settings. For example, prior work has shown that the design of
tax credits and tax rates influences corporate innovation (Akcigit et al. 2018; Bloom et al.
2002; Dechezlepretre et al.      2016).   Market incentives can also shape the direction of
technology growth within an industry, as documented in environmental economics (Aghion
et al. 2016; Acemoglu et al. 2012). Within this literature, our work is most closely related
papers focusing on health innovation. A large body of evidence shows that public insurance
expansions create incentives for firms to develop new drugs (Acemoglu et al.                 2006;
Blume-Kohout and Sood 2013; Clemens 2013; Dranove et al.                 2020; Finkelstein 2004;
Krieger et al. 2017). Other papers such as Kyle and McGahan (2012) and Budish et al.
(2015) highlight the role of patent policy in encouraging innovation. In addition, Yin
(2008) studies the role of tax credits and Clemens and Rogers (2020) focuses on public
procurement incentives.
   Our paper contributes to this literature in two ways. First, while existing work focuses
on the role of public sector policies, ours is the first to focus on the policies of private firms.
By showing that formulary exclusion practices have a substantial impact on the rate and
direction of pharmaceutical innovation, we provide evidence that decisions made by private
sector actors can shape market-level incentives for innovation as much as public sector policy.
Second, our paper is also the first to study the impact of restricted prescription drug coverage
on pharmaceutical innovation. Theoretical work in this area (Garber et al. 2006; Lakdawalla
and Sood 2009) highlights the tradeoff between insurance design and innovation. Although
policies to restrict prescription drug coverage and aggressively negotiate prices are widely
used in Europe and Asia, there has been very limited empirical evidence regarding how these




                                                4
policies affect dynamic incentives for innovation. We make progress on this important public
policy issue by leveraging evidence from private sector policy makers.
        The rest of the paper proceeds as follows.          Section 1 introduces the institutional
context. Section 2 describes the negotiation between PBMs and drugmakers in more detail,
summarizing a theoretical model of how R&D investments may respond to the introduction
of formulary exclusions. Section 3 provides an overview of our key data sources covering
exclusions, drug development, and market characteristics. Section 4 describes which drug
classes contain formulary exclusions and reports evidence that exclusions suppress drug
demand. Section 5 presents our main findings on how formulary exclusions have reshaped
investments in drug development.             Section 6 discusses the welfare implications, and
Section 7 concludes.



1         Institutional Background

1.1        The Role of Pharmacy Benefit Managers (PBMs)
        In the US, three key parties are involved in shaping payments and access to prescription
drugs: manufacturers who develop and produce new drugs, institutional payers such as
insurance companies and large employers, and pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs), who
design and administer drug insurance plans.3
        Historically, PBMs were only responsible for processing patient claims at the pharmacy:
verifying the patient's coverage, obtaining payment from the insurer, and transmitting that
payment to the pharmacy. However, over time and in concert with a wave of mergers, PBMs
began playing a more active role in designing prescription drug plans on behalf of insurers
(Werble 2014). By 2016, the three largest PBMs--CVS Caremark, Express Scripts, and
OptumRx--collectively designed and administered 70% of private prescription drug plans
(Fein 2017).
        Modern PBMs argue that they create value by lowering prescription drug spending for
institutional payers.      One way that PBMs limit spending is through prescription drug
    3
    There are, of course, other parties involved, such as physicians, wholesalers, and pharmacies. We focus
on the parties above because they play the largest role in coverage and R&D decisions. See Appendix Figure
A.1 for a more complete picture of the supply chain.


                                                    5
coverage that steers patients toward the lowest cost treatment options. Prior to the use of
exclusions, PBMs employed three tools to reduce patient demand for expensive drugs.
First, insurance plans assign drugs to different coverage tiers, with varying generosity of
patient cost-sharing; expensive drugs would be placed in tiers with higher coinsurance or
copayment rates. Second, prior authorization requirements imposed on select drugs require
physicians to obtain advance approval from the PBM or insurer prior to coverage. Finally,
step therapy requirements allow coverage for certain expensive drugs only after the patient
has tried and failed cheaper alternatives.
       PBMs may also lower costs by pooling demand across multiple payers in order to
negotiate bulk discounts for drugs. Given the concentration in the industry and their role
in shaping patient demand via the tools described above, PBMs have substantial
negotiating power with manufacturers. Drugmakers routinely offer large rebates in order to
secure more favorable formulary positions for their drugs. PBMs may return a portion of
this savings to institutional payers and keep a portion for themselves. Because rebates are
highly secretive, we have little information on how they vary across drugs.


1.2       The Introduction of Formulary Exclusions
       Existing formulary strategies had limited success in reducing the use of expensive
medications.        Pharmaceutical firms employed a variety of techniques aimed at
circumventing coverage restrictions. For example, to help patients shoulder co-pays for
drugs placed in more expensive coverage tiers, drugmakers introduced "co-pay coupons"
that insulate consumers from cost-sharing.4 Similarly, drug sales representatives actively
targeted drugs with prior authorization requirements, training and supporting physician
practices to process prior authorization paperwork, in some cases by developing specialty
software for the purpose of auto-filling authorization forms (Pinsonault 2002).5
       Beginning with CVS in 2012, major PBMs responded by implementing closed formularies
(Pollack 2014). Rather than providing coverage (potentially with some tiering or restrictions)
   4
     Because the average implied co-insurance rate of even the highest tier drugs is roughly 30-40%,
subsidizing patient costs still netted pharmaceutical firms substantial revenues via the insurer contribution
(Claxton et al. 2011).
   5
     One audit study found that over 88% of prior authorizations were approved by health plans (Scott-Levin
2000).


                                                     6
for all FDA-approved drugs, PBMs began publishing lists of drugs that their standard plans
would not cover at all, directing potential users to lists of recommended alternatives, such
as similar branded or generic drugs.
       Exclusions constituted a much more effective tool for formulary management. In an
investor call, Helena Foulkes, the President of CVS Pharmacy at the time, highlighted the
efficacy of exclusions:

         "It is only through exclusion where we can prevent manufacturer subversion of a
         formulary strategy with co-pay coupons. As shown, an exclusion formulary will
         have more than a 95% preferred drug use versus 55% preferred share in tiered
         formularies." (Foulkes 2015)

Express Scripts reported a similar experience with its own exclusions:

         "We had a significant market share shift; nearly 70% in volume moved away from
         the non-covered drugs into covered drugs...and that percentage has continued to
         increase ever since then....And has it worked? It has worked really well." (Myers
         2014)

       The success of closed formularies in reducing utilization reduces the profitability of drugs,
as can be seen in the case of the asthma inhaler Advair. Yet, perhaps more importantly, the
threat of facing exclusion can also reduce prices even if a drug is never excluded in practice.
Stephen Miller, the Chief Medical Officer of Express Scripts, describes using the threat of
exclusion in price negotiations with pharmaceutical manufacturers:

         "We are going to be pitting you all against each other. Who is going to give us
         the best price? If you give us the best price, we will move the market share to
         you. We will move it effectively. We'll exclude the other products" (Miller and
         Wehrwein 2015).6

Consistent with the market dynamics described by Garthwaite and Morton (2017), a credible
threat of exclusions reduces the net price that drugmakers can charge, regardless of whether
exclusions actually take place.
   6
     In line with this description, observers note that within a therapeutic class, PBMs are increasingly
selecting a single brand for coverage (Cournoyer and Blandford 2016).

                                                   7
        Finally, a natural question is why PBM formulary exclusions were introduced in 2012.
While we do not have direct evidence regarding CVS's deliberations, industry analysts have
pointed to a variety of potential factors. The steady rise of copay coupons since 2007,
previously documented by Dafny et al. (2017), eroded PBMs' ability to manage drug demand
via their traditional tiering. In addition, growing PBM market concentration strengthened
PBMs' bargaining power, while consolidated pharmacy networks improved PBMs' ability
to communicate and implement formulary restrictions (Miller and Wehrwein 2015). A key
concern is whether these same trends that led to the introduction of exclusion policies may
have directly contributed to declining innovation in drug classes at high risk of exclusion. We
investigate this possibility in Section 5.2 by looking for the presence of differential pre-trends
and conducting placebo experiments.



2         Formulary Exclusions and Upstream Innovation
        Because exclusions substantially impact the expected profitability of new drugs, the
introduction of closed formularies changed the set of factors that pharmaceutical executives
considered during the drug development process. Rather than focusing primarily on FDA
approvals, industry consultants began routinely advising pharmaceutical companies that
now "[m]arket access strategy should underpin decision-making throughout the entire
product lifecycle, including portfolio decision-making" (Siegal and Shah 2019).
        These concerns about formulary coverage may lead firms to apply a higher "bar" for
drugs that risk facing exclusions: rather than simply demonstrating safety and efficacy (the
standard for FDA approval), firms were also advised to conduct additional clinical trials to
demonstrate superiority in head-to-head comparisons with competitor's drugs.7 Formulary
considerations may therefore reduce investment both by weeding out drugs that do not meet
this higher standard, and by raising the cost and complexity of clinical trial design.
    7
     To provide evidence of superiority, a firm may choose to pursue more costly and ambitious clinical trials
in order to provide stronger evidence of efficacy relative to existing treatments. For example, the firm may
decide to directly compare a drug candidate to incumbent drugs to establish superiority in class, rather
than simply focusing on efficacy relative to a placebo (Schafer 2018; Siegal and Shah 2019). In a related
analysis, Seabright (2013) analyzes how drug procurement may affect trial design, particularly the incentive
to investigate treatment effect heterogeneity predictable by biomarkers.




                                                      8
    In Appendix A, we formalize this intuition by developing a simple model of how drug
exclusion policies impact firms' R&D decisions. In this model, a potential pharmaceutical
entrant faces an investment decision to develop a drug for a "new" drug class (where no
incumbent treatments exist) or an "old" class (where an incumbent therapy is available).
In the absence of exclusions, PBMs provide coverage for all approved drugs: if successful, a
pharmaceutical entrant would become a monopolist in the new drug class and a duopolist
in the old drug class. We model closed formularies as permitting exclusions when a similar
substitute is available. In the old drug class, the two firms bid on rebate payments to
the PBM in order to win exclusive formulary coverage. Exclusions therefore reduce drug
revenues in the old drug class, where entrants face exclusion risk and will pay high rebates
to the PBM if they succeed in obtaining formulary coverage. These reduced revenues lower
the returns to investing R&D dollars into the old drug class, without changing the returns
to investment in the new class. Our model predicts that we should see a relative drop in
new drug candidates entering markets in which existing therapies are already available.
    We note that the welfare implications of this change in drug development incentives are
theoretically ambiguous.    First, losses to pharmaceutical firms can be cast as gains to
PBMs, in the form of higher rebates.        If PBMs pass some of these cost savings onto
consumers, then exclusion policies create a tradeoff between incentives for future
innovation and affordability of current prescription drug coverage.        Second, an overall
decrease in drug development can be welfare enhancing if business stealing effects dominate
the benefits of expanding treatment options (Mankiw and Whinston 1986).              This is a
possibility in our setting, especially if foregone drug candidates would have otherwise been
entrants into already crowded therapeutic areas. Bloom et al. (2013) documents sizeable
business stealing effects of new innovation in pharmaceutical markets.            We discuss
additional issues related to welfare in Section 6.



3     Data
    In this section, we lay out the four data sources that underlie our analysis. To understand
the impact of exclusion policies on innovation, the key economic object we are interested in
measuring is pharmaceutical firms' perceptions of exclusion risk associated with developing


                                               9
new drug candidates across different classes. The ideal measure would capture both the risk
that the new drug is itself excluded, as well as the risk that the new drug is less profitable
because it must offer large price concessions in order to avoid exclusion.
       To develop our measure of exclusion risk, we link data on drug market characteristics
across classes (from First Data Bank) with the incidence of formulary exclusions (from PBM
communications). We use Medicare Part D data to demonstrate that formulary exclusions
reduce drug demand. Finally, we investigate the relationship between exclusion risk and
drug development, by linking exclusion risk to Cortellis data on R&D activity. The data
underlying these analyses is summarized briefly below.

   1. Formulary Exclusions: We collected data on formulary exclusions, using the publicly
         disclosed standard formulary lists published by CVS Caremark, Express Scripts, and
         OptumRX through 2017. Together, these firms account for approximately 70% of the
         PBM market.8 Our data cover "standard" formulary exclusions: these exclusions apply
         to most health plans administered by a particular PBM. Insurers may elect to provide
         more expansive coverage by opting out of the standard formulary, but we do not have
         information on exclusions within these custom plans.9 We match the excluded drugs
         to their 4-digit Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC4) drug class using the First
         Data Bank data (described below). These exclusions form the basis of our analysis.

   2. First Data Bank: In order to better understand the characteristics of drugs and drug
         classes that experience exclusions, we collect data on drug markets and drug pricing
         from First Data Bank (FDB). FDB is a commercial dataset primarily marketed to
         healthcare organizations that manage formularies. It contains information on a drug's
         ATC4 classification, pricing, and the existence of generic substitutes. We use this
         information to construct additional data on drug markets at the ATC4 level: the
         number of approved branded and generic drugs in an ATC4 class and measures of
   8
     When it first closed its formulary in 2012, CVS had a 20% share of the PBM market (Lopez 2018).
Express Scripts followed suit in 2014, when its market share was 33.8% (Health Strategies Group 2015).
Finally, OptumRx began publishing formulary exclusions in 2016, when its market share was 22% (Fein
2017).
   9
     Custom plans are less common because they are likely to be substantially more expensive. For example,
on its payer-facing website, CVS encourages insurers to choose its standard (closed) formulary, for an
estimated 29% savings in per member per month drug costs (Brennan 2017).



                                                   10
       the price of already approved branded and generic drugs.10 We use these variables to
       predict which drug classes face exclusion risk and as control variables to account for
       time-varying market attributes in certain specifications.

   3. Medicare Part D Data: To establish that formulary placement affects drug
       demand, we document the impact of exclusions on a drug's insurance claim volume in
       Section 4.2. Because sales volume is not measured by FDB, we turn to publicly
       available data on annual Medicare Part D claims volume by drug.11 Most Medicare
       Part D plan sponsors contract with PBMs for rebate negotiation and benefit
       management (Government Accountability Office 2019), and many Part D plans
       feature closed formularies (Hoadley et al. 2011), making Medicare Part D a suitable
       context to study the impact of exclusions. This data is available from 2012-2017 and
       reports the annual number of claims for all drugs with at least 11 claims.

   4. Cortellis Investigational Drugs: Our main analysis studies the impact of formulary
       exclusions on drug development. We obtain data on pipeline drugs, including both
       small molecule and biologic drugs, from Clarivate Analytics' Cortellis Investigational
       Drugs database (Cortellis). Cortellis tracks drug candidates using data it compiles
       from public records: company documents, press releases, financial filings, clinical trial
       registries, and FDA submissions. Drug candidates typically enter the Cortellis database
       when they enter preclinical development; this is often when a drug candidate will
       appear in patents or in other documents describing a firm's research pipeline. Similarly,
       because all firms are required to apply for and receive FDA approval to begin human
       clinical trials, Cortellis has near complete coverage of drug candidates that advance
       into human testing.
  10
      We use unit price provided by the manufacturer to FDB. Specifically, wholesale acquisition unit
cost (manufacturer's published catalog or list price to wholesalers) was used, where available. If this
was unavailable, suggested wholesale unit price (manufacturer's suggested price from wholesalers to their
customers) was used. If this was unavailable, then direct unit price (manufacturer's published catalogue or
list price to non-wholesalers) was used. Unit refers to the NCPDP billing unit of the product, where a unit
is defined as a gram, each, or milliliter.
   11
      This data is published annually by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Studies. We accessed it online at
https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/
Information-on-Prescription-Drugs/Historical_Data, in November 2019.




                                                      11
         Using Cortellis, we track each drug's US-based development across five stages:
         pre-clinical development, Phase 1 trials, Phase 2 trials, Phase 3 trials, and launch.
         Our primary outcome is the total number of drug candidates within a class that
         entered any stage of development each year.12 Table 1 Panel A reports the summary
         statistics of development activity across different stages.

       Throughout most of the paper, our unit of analysis is a narrowly defined drug class,
following the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) classification system. ATC codes
are used to organize medicinal compounds; we use an ATC4 (four-digit) level classification,
which identifies chemical subgroups that share common therapeutic and pharmacological
properties.
       Appendix Table A.1 lists several examples of ATC4 designations. For example, diabetes
drugs fall into 3 distinct ATC4 categories depending on whether the drug is an insulin or
insulin analogue (ATC4 A10A), a non-insulin blood glucose lowering drug (A10B), or other
diabetes drug (A10X). Cardiovascular drugs span 28 distinct ATC4 categories. Narrowing in
on the subgroup of cardiovascular drugs that are beta blocking agents, Appendix Table A.1
reports 6 distinct ATC4 classes for beta blockers, distinguishing whether the beta blocker is
present in isolation or in combination with various other drug types.
       We interpret an ATC4 drug class as a "market," where drugs within the class will typically
be partial substitutes for one another. We drop ATC4 categories that are not categorized as
drugs in FDB, such as medical supplies. We also restrict to ATC4 categories that contain
at least one branded drug on the market as of 2011. Finally, we drop ATC4 categories with
missing 2011 data on prices or the availability of generic and branded drugs as measured in
FDB and ATC4s with missing data on prescription volume as measured in the 2011 Medicare
Expenditure Panel Survey, as we need to be able to predict exclusion risk as a function of
these market attributes for our main specification. After making these restrictions, our
primary sample has 127 ATC4 classes. Table 1 Panel B shows the summary statistics of
  12
    In cases where we observe a drug in development at a later stage without a recorded date for prior
development stages, we fill in the earlier stage date to equal the subsequent recorded stage. Because the
FDA requires each new drug to move through each phase before receiving approval, seeing a drug at a later
stage in development is strong evidence that it previously moved through the earlier stages. We never fill
drug development "forward" because many drug candidates fail to progress at each stage.




                                                   12
various market characteristics for our sample of ATC4s, separately based on whether or not
they experienced exclusions in 2012 or 2013.



4        Understanding Exclusion Risk

4.1       Exclusions over Time
       Figure 1 illustrates the rise of drug exclusions over time and across PBMs. As described
in trade press outlets and national media (Pollack 2014; Fein 2015; ?), CVS was the first
major PBM to implement a closed formulary, starting with the exclusion of 38 drugs in 2012.
Over the next five years, CVS oversaw a sustained expansion in the number of types of drugs
it added to its exclusion lists. Express Scripts introduced its exclusion list in 2014, followed
by OptumRx in 2016. By 2017, a total of 300 drugs were ever excluded by at least one of
the three major PBMs.
       We find that exclusions largely targeted newer branded drugs: 75% of those excluded in
our data had no molecularly equivalent generic substitute.                     Exclusions also targeted
therapeutic areas with large numbers of patients. For example, Figure 2 plots exclusions by
disease category at the drug level and shows that, from the outset, diabetes drugs have
consistently been the most frequently excluded.                Other diseases with high numbers of
exclusions include cardiovascular, endocrine, and respiratory diseases.
       In the remainder of this section, we analyze the effect of exclusions on drug sales and
describe how exclusion risk differs across markets, as defined by drug therapeutic classes.


4.2       The Impact of Exclusions on Drug Sales
       A PBM's formulary choices (coverage and prices) have been shown to have a clear
impact on patients' drug use. A large body of work has documented that patient demand
for drugs is elastic to out-of-pocket prices, suggesting that eliminating insurance coverage
for excluded drugs will suppress demand.13 In addition, several papers have shown that
  13
    For example, the following papers find evidence of negative price elasticities for drugs, as a function of
insurance cost-sharing: Abaluck et al. (2018), Einav et al. (2017), Choudhry et al. (2011), Thiebaud et al.
(2008), Tamblyn et al. (2001).



                                                     13
formulary exclusions specifically reduce the utilization of targeted drugs (Chambers et al.
2016; Huskamp et al. 2003; Wang and Pauly 2005).14
   To test whether these patterns hold in our setting, we investigate the link between PBM
formulary exclusions and drug sales, using data on Medicare Part D prescription drug claims
from 2012-2017. We estimate the following regression equation:


                       Log(Claims)dt = 1 Excludeddt + Xdt + d + t +             dt                    (1)


Here, Claimsdt refers to the number of Medicare Part D claims made on drug d in year t.
Because the distribution of Part D claims per drug is highly right-skewed (see Appendix
Table A.2), we report our results in terms of the natural log of the drug's claim count. The
key variable of interest is Excludeddt , how many of the three main PBMs were excluding the
drug in a given year. We include drug fixed effects in all specifications so that our effect is
identified from within-drug changes in formulary exclusion status. We also include drug age
× calendar year fixed effects to capture time trends and drug lifecycle patterns.
   Our sample consists of drugs that were on the market prior to the introduction of
exclusions, and which have at least 11 annual Part D claims. Because Medicare Part D
regulation over this period disallowed formulary exclusions from six protected drug classes,
this analysis studies the 161 excluded drugs that are not in a protected class.15
   In Table 2, we show that each excluding PBM decreases a drug's prescription volume by
24% (e-0.274 - 1), relative to comparable drugs that did not experience an exclusion. Column
2 shows that our results are robust to including additional controls for time-varying demand
for the drug class, captured with ATC4 X calendar year fixed effects. In Columns 3 and 4,
we obtain a similar result when focusing on market share rather than prescription volume:
each excluding PBM reduces a drug's market share by 20%. We note that this analysis does
not allow us to measure prescription drug sales that are not claimed in Medicare Part D; if
   14
      While CVS was the first to implement a standardized national closed formulary in 2012, the two older
papers cited above provide evidence from smaller scale exclusions by individual insurance plans. These
earlier formulary coverage decisions affect many fewer patients than the national PBM formularies we study
here, but are likely to have similar effects on the drug choices of enrolled patients.
   15
      The protected classes are antidepressants, antipsychotics, anticonvulsants, antineoplastic agents,
antiretroviral agents, and immunosupressants. Of the 181 excluded drugs prescribed in Part D, only 20
fall into these classes.




                                                   14
formulary exclusions lead patients to pay fully out-of-pocket for the drugs without requesting
insurance coverage, we will not have a record of it in our data.
   The effects we measure capture the combined effect of reduced prescriptions for the
focal drug, as well as possible reallocation toward non-excluded drugs in its category.
These findings show that exclusions had a major impact on shifting sales and market share
across competitor drugs, beyond what PBMs previously accomplished for these drugs with
traditional demand management tools, such as tiering, prior authorization, or step therapy.
Moreover, our magnitudes are consistent with anecdotal evidence by case reporting: for
example, after its exclusion by Express Scripts, sales of the asthma inhaler Advair fell 30%
while sales for its non-excluded competitor Symbicort increased 20% over the same period
(Pollack 2014).
   In Appendix Table A.3, we investigate whether the immediate exclusion of newly released
drugs depresses drug diffusion, relative to the diffusion of other drugs in the same ATC4 class.
These estimates suggest that formulary exclusion depresses prescription volume of new drugs
by 68% (e-1.147 - 1), although the estimates are noisier because they focus on a small set of
13 drugs that face immediate exclusion by at least one PBM within 1 year of FDA approval.


4.3    Predictors of Formulary Exclusion Risk
   Having provided evidence that exclusions harm revenues, we next examine the factors
that predict exclusion risk.
   To motivate this analysis, we note that exclusion policies may impact upstream innovation
by reducing the expected profitability of some drug classes. In this paper, we document
the reduced form impact of predicted exclusion risk on subsequent investments in drug
development. An alternative approach would directly quantify the relationship between
drug profitability and development, using the exclusion risk as an instrumental variable for
profitabilty. We do not pursue this latter approach for two reasons. First, it is extremely
difficult to observe true profitability for individual drugs due to the prevalence of hidden
rebates. Second, a large literature has already documented the fact that innovation is elastic
to expected profitablity. This paper takes that knowledge as a foundation and focuses instead
on understanding whether policy levers such as targeted exclusions can be effectively used
to limit incentives to develop costly, low-value drugs.

                                              15
   Because drug exclusions steadily expanded after their introduction in 2012, we focus on
using a drug class's pre-period market characteristics to predict early exclusions, those that
occurred in 2012 and 2013. In our data, 12% of ATC4 drug classes experienced these early
exclusions.


Predictors of Drug-Level Exclusion

   Using data from FDB described in Section 3, we begin by constructing several potential
predictors of exclusion risk for 127 ATC4 drug classes. The availability of therapeutic
alternatives is measured by the number of existing branded drugs approved within an
ATC4, the number of existing generics within the same class, or the number of
finer-grained ATC7 subclasses (which indicate specific chemical substances). To account
for the expected size of the patient population, we use the total prescription volume across
all drugs in a given ATC4 class; this information is calculated from the 2011 Medicare
Expenditure Panel Survey.      Finally, we collect data on the price of already approved
branded and generic drugs, keeping in mind that price data do not reflect the rebates that
manufactures often pay to PBMs. All of these market characteristics are from 2011, before
the introduction of first exclusions in 2012.
   Figure 3 plots the coefficients of bivariate linear regressions of exclusion on each drug
class characteristic. We find that drug classes with higher prescription volume and more
existing treatment options (measured as the number of distinct drugs on the market) are
more likely to experience exclusions. These patterns are consistent with contemporaneous
descriptions of PBMs' exclusion strategies, which indicate that formulary exclusions often
target "me-too drugs" with multiple therapeutic substitutes (Reinke 2015), as well as drugs
with a larger number of prescribed patients: "[T]here's no reason to go after trivial drugs
that aren't going to drive savings" (Miller and Wehrwein 2015). We find no statistically
significant relationship between drug prices in the class and exclusion risk, but because our
data does not measure prices net of rebates, these correlations are difficult to interpret.


Class-Level Exclusions Risk

   We use the market characteristics described in the previous section to construct each
drug class's risk of facing exclusions, measured at the ATC4 level. To do so, we fit a logistic

                                                16
regression predicting whether a drug class experience exclusions in 2012 or 2013 as a function
of all of the ATC4 market characteristics described in the previous section (measured as
of 2011). This regression is described below, where F (·) denotes the cumulative logistic
distribution function.
                                  P r(Excludedc ) = F (Xc  )                                (2)

For this regression, the unit of observation is a single ATC4 drug class c. We then use the
regression's fitted values to construct the predicted exclusion risk of each ATC4:
Pr(Excluded)c .   Appendix Table A.4 shows the results of this exercise, and Appendix
Figure A.2 plots the resulting distribution of predicted exclusions.
   As discussed in Section 3, our ideal measure of exclusion risk captures firms' perceptions
of whether newly developed drugs in a given class may be at risk of exclusions. In practice,
we construct our measure to predict early exclusions in 2012 and 2013. Interpreting this as
a valid measure for exclusion risk over the post period requires two assumptions. First, drug
classes that are predicted to be more likely to face exclusions in 2012 and 2013 should also
be more likely to continue facing exclusions in later years. Second, because exclusion threat
can depress profitability even in the absence of actual exclusions (by forcing drugmakers to
grant price concessions in order to avoid exclusion), our measure should capture the threat
of exclusion even in classes where no drugs are excluded.
   Table 3 presents tests of both aspects of predictive validity. In Column 1, we show that
classes at high risk of early exclusions are also more likely to see later exclusions: a one
standard deviation increase in early exclusion risk correlates with a 17 percentage point
increase in the likelihood that an ATC4 class experiences exclusions in later periods, from
a mean probability of 39%. This result suggests that exclusions followed a consistent and
predictable pattern over our study period, and that pre-policy market characteristics can be
used to form valid out-of-sample predictions of at-risk drug classes.
   Next, we show that our predictions of exclusion risk contain information on the threat
of exclusion even when no early exclusions occur. To see this, the analysis in Column 2
considers the subset of ATC4s that see no exclusions during the first wave of exclusions in
2012 and 2013. This set--which includes almost 90% of our sample ATC4s--includes some
drug classes that were truly at low risk of facing exclusions, as well as drug classes that were
in fact at high risk, but which were able to avoid early exclusions perhaps by offering higher

                                              17
rebates. For this set of drug classes, we show that our measure of predicted exclusion risk is
still significantly correlated with future exclusions: a one standard deviation increase in early
exclusion risk generates a 15 percentage point increase in the likelihood of late exclusions,
from a base rate of 31%.
    Because it has predictive validity over time and predicts exclusion risk in classes with
no realized early exclusions, we use predicted exclusion risk as our primarily measure of a
drug class's exposure to closed formulary policies. As shown later in Section 5.3, our results
are robust to alternative measures of exclusion risk across drug classes, including realized
exclusion status, as well as indices that measure the intensity of exclusion risk by predicting
the count and share of excluded drugs.



5     The Impact of Exclusion Risk on Subsequent Drug
      Development

5.1       Empirical Strategy
    Our main specification compares drug development behavior across ATC4 drug classes
that vary in their ex-ante risk of exclusion, before and after the rise of closed formulary
policies:


            Developmentct = 1 Pr(Excluded)c × I(Yeart  2012) + Xct  + c + t +         ct     (3)

In Equation (3), Developmentct refers to various measures of the number of new drug
candidates in drug class c at year t. We define a drug class's extent of treatment using
Pr(Excluded)c , described in our discussion of Equation (2). The regressions control for
drug class fixed effects (c ), year fixed effects (t ), and time-varying drug market controls
(Xct ).
    To interpret our primary coefficient of interest, 1 , as the causal impact of drug exclusions
on development activity, we must assume that development activity in ATC4s with different
predicted degrees of exclusion risk would have followed parallel trends in the absence of
formulary exclusions. We use event study graphs over a 5 year pre-period to assess the


                                               18
plausibility of this assumption. These graphs are based on a modified version of Equation
(3), which replaces the single indicator variable for being in the post period (I(Yeart  2012))
with a vector of indicator variables for each year before and after the introduction of PBM
exclusion lists in 2012.


5.2       Main Results
       Table 4 presents our main regression results. The outcome is the total number of drug
candidates within a class that entered any stage of development each year. In Column 1,
we estimate that a one standard deviation increase in the risk that the class has formulary
exclusions leads to 3.6 fewer advanced drug candidates each year, a 12% reduction from a
mean of 30.6 advancing candidates.16               This estimate represents a relative decline in
higher-risk classes, relative to trends in lower-risk classes. In Column 2, we include controls
for a variety of time-varying market conditions at the ATC4 class level: the number of
approved branded drugs in that class, the number of approved generic drugs, the mean
price of branded drugs minus the mean price of generic drugs, the number of ATC7
subclasses (which indicate specific chemical substances) with approved drugs, and
prescription volume. Adding these controls lowers our estimate slightly from 3.6 to 3.3
fewer promoted drug candidates each year for every one standard deviation increase in
class exclusion risk, or a reduction of 11% relative to the mean. In Columns 3 and 4, we
consider an alternative functional form log(1 + Developmentct ).                   The log-transformed
outcome suggests that development activity declines by 6% for every 1 standard deviation
increase in class exclusion risk.


Event Study

       One potential concern for interpreting these findings is that innovation in ATC4 classes
at high risk of exclusion may have been evolving on different trends, for reasons other than
the introduction of formulary exclusions. For example, drug classes with many existing
treatment options may be both more likely to be excluded and, independently, also see
natural attenuation in innovative activity.
  16
     As reported in Appendix Figure A.2, the standard deviation of the probability the class faces exclusions
is 0.15. Using the coefficient reported in Table 4, we calculate -24.03  0.15 = -3.6.


                                                     19
    To assess this possibility, we first show that there are no discernible pre-trends in
development that vary by exclusion likelihood, in the years leading up to the introduction
of formulary exclusions. Figure 4 plots our results in an event study framework, illustrating
that there appears to be little difference in drug development across drug classes at high
vs. low risk of exclusions prior to 2011. These trends suggest that high exclusion classes
were not experiencing declining investment over the pre-period; to the extent that either
demand or innovative potential was changing across drug classes in our pre-period, those
changes do not appear to have cut along our predicted exclusion categories.              Rather,
development activity begins to diverge in 2012, and these differences grow until 2017, the
last full year of our sample.


Placebo Analysis

    Next, we conduct a series of placebo tests. If our measure of exclusion risk captures
aspects of a drug class--crowdedness for instance--that are predictive of declining R&D
independent of formulary exclusions, then we would expect drug classes with high exclusion
risk (measured in earlier pre-period years) to see innovation fall in response to pre-period
placebo exclusion policies. To test this, we use our coefficient estimates ^ estimated from
Equation (2) to identify drug classes that appear at risk of exclusion based on their market
characteristics as of each year in 2001-2005. That is, we look for drug classes that, in earlier
years, shared the same mix of treatment options and prescription volumes that would have
put them at high risk of exclusions in 2011. As can be seen from Figure 3, these are drug
classes that, at a given point in time, have a relatively large number of treatment options, as
well as high prescription volume. If our results were driven by trends unrelated to exclusions,
we should see R&D in these classes fall in the years following our assessment of their exclusion
risk.
    Figure 5 plots out results for five different tests, corresponding to a placebo policy change
in each of the years 2002 through 2006. The blue horizontal lines plot the placebo policy
estimates and 95% confidence interval, while the vertical red line highlights the true estimated
policy effect. These estimates mirror the specification in Column 2 of Table 4, except that
we drop price when constructing the exclusion risk due to missing historical price data



                                               20
covering the placebo policy periods.17 For example, the 2002 placebo policy estimates a
positive ^ coefficient of 2.2 on predicted exclusion risk interacted with a post period indicator
from Equation 3. For this placebo policy, the post period begins in 2002; exclusion risk is
measured using 2001 market characteristics; and we use a corresponding 11-year sample
period from 1997-2007. Similarly, the coefficient on the 2003 placebo refers to risk measured
in 2002, and a sample period of 1998-2008. We end the placebo tests with the 2006 placebo
policy change, because its 5 year post period ends in 2011, the last year of our true policy
pre-period.18 Figure 5 suggests drug classes with similar features to those eventually targeted
with exclusions did not experience declining investment over the pre-period; compared to
the statistically significant true policy estimate of -22.9, the placebo estimates range from
2.2 to 9.1, and none are statistically significant.


Stages of Development

       Having established evidence of a decline in overall development, Table 5 decomposes this
total effect by drug development stage. In Table 5, we find the largest level declines for earlier
stage drugs. Across all stages from preclinical through Phase 3 trials, these changes range
from 8% to 14% reduction from the mean for a one standard deviation increase in exclusion
risk. We interpret these findings in the context of the drug development process, where Phase
1 trials generally assess safety, Phase 2 trials provide preliminary evidence of efficacy, and
Phase 3 trials are the large-scale expensive trials that firms rely upon to generate data for
FDA approval. Of these investment stages, Phase 3 trials are the most costly, with average
costs estimated over $250 million per drug in 2013 dollars (DiMasi et al. 2016). Given that
the marginal cost of continuing to develop a candidate drug remains high through the end of
Phase 3 trial stage, it is sensible that firms would be more likely to drop drug candidates even
at this relatively late stage. Further, a drug is more likely to be excluded from formularies if
it offers few benefits relative to existing treatments. Phase 2 trials provide the first evidence
  17
     The true estimated policy effect of -22.9 is statistically significant and very similar to the estimate of
-22.0 reported in Table 4.
  18
     It is worth noting that there were other changes in prescription drug markets over this early pre-period,
such as the introduction of Medicare Part D in 2006. While Medicare Part D did affect drug development
investments, there is no evidence to suggest that it differentially impacted drug classes based on their
exclusion risk. To make sure that our results are not driven by this change, we study a variety of placebo
test timing.



                                                      21
of clinical efficacy. If a drug shows only marginal promise, then a firm concerned about the
possibility of exclusions may choose to end its development efforts rather than committing
to very expensive Phase 3 trials.
   In contrast, we find no effect for new drug launches; at the point when a drug has
completed Phase 3 trials, the bulk of R&D expenses are already sunk. As a result, concerns
about coverage would be less likely to impact a firm's launch decisions. Over time, we would
expect that launches would also fall in affected drug classes as the pipeline narrows, but,
given the long time lags in bringing a drug through each development stage, this effect would
not be immediate.


5.3    Additional Robustness Checks
   In this section, we show that our results are robust to alternative choices for defining
exclusion risk, linking drug candidates to drug classes, and calculating standard errors.
   First, we show that our results are consistent when we apply alternative definitions of
a drug class's exclusion risk in Appendix Table A.5. In our primary analysis, we use 2011
ATC4 market level characteristics to predict exclusion risk, defined as whether an ATC4
class is predicted to have at least one drug with an exclusion by 2013. In this table, we
test three alternative approaches. Columns 1-2 use 2011 ATC4 market characteristics to
predict the count of excluded drugs by 2013, while Columns 3-4 use 2011 ATC4 market
characteristics to predict the share of excluded drugs by 2013. Like our main specification,
both of these alternatives provide continuous measures of predicted exclusion risk, and thus
have the benefit of capturing variation in the threat of exclusions, in drug classes that are
similar to the initially targeted set but that did not experience early exclusions. Alternatively,
realized exclusions can be another definition of treatment, rather than predicted exclusion
risk; Columns 5-6 present results using a binary definition of treatment (whether at least
one drug in an ATC4 class was actually on a PBM exclusion list by 2013) and show a
similar pattern of results as our main analysis. All of these approaches find that new drug
development is declining in exclusion risk. Scaling each of the coefficients in Appendix
Table A.5 by the standard deviation of the relevant exclusion risk measure, we predict a
similar magnitude reduction in drug development in each specification: 2.7 (Column 2), 1.7
(Column 4), and 1.5 (Column 6).

                                               22
       Second, we show that our results are robust to the method we use to match drug
candidates to drug classes. In our primary analysis, we match drug candidates to ATC4
drug classes using a direct linkage when Cortellis provides it (in 43% of cases); in cases
where direct linking is not possible, we rely on indirect linking based on using a drug
candidate's area of therapeutic application (ICD9) combined with an ICD9-ATC4
crosswalk. Appendix B provides further details on how we linked the drug candidates from
Cortellis to ATC4 classes. Appendix Table A.6 shows that our results are similar whether
using only direct linkages (Columns 1-2) or only indirect linkages (Columns 3-4).
       Finally, conventional inference can over-reject when the number of treated clusters is
small, so we also implement a correction using the wild cluster bootstrap (Cameron et al.
2008; Djogbenou et al. 2019). In Appendix Table A.7, we report 95% confidence intervals
calculated with the wild cluster bootstrap for our main regression results; our findings remain
statistically significant.


5.4       Classifying Foregone Innovation Across Drug Classes
       In this section, we describe the drug classes and types of projects that experienced the
greatest declines in R&D as a result of formulary exclusions. To assess the decline in drug
development for each ATC4 drug class, we compare the number of candidates we predict
would have been developed in the absence of exclusions to the number we predict in the
presence of exclusions. This analysis examines how exclusions impact the allocation of
R&D resources across drug classes that vary in their size, competitiveness, or level of
scientific novelty.     We focus on allocation across drug classes because our theoretical
framework, formalized in Appendix A, predicts that exclusions will affect the relative
investments in drug development across classes.19
       Our analysis is based on the specification reported in Table 4 Column 2; this is our
preferred specification because it controls for a battery of time-varying drug class
observables and generates the most conservative point estimate. To measure predicted new
drug candidates in the presence of exclusions, we calculate the fitted value prediction of
  19
     The impact of exclusion policies within a drug class are less obvious; while it is possible that exclusions
may change the characteristics of promoted molecules within a drug class, these effects may be smaller and
more difficult to measure. Because ATC4 drug classes already represent relatively narrow categories, there
is limited scope to change the scientific novelty of investment within the class, for example.


                                                      23
drug development activity for every year of the post-period. To recover the predicted new
drug candidates absent exclusions, we repeat this exercise after setting the treatment
variable Pr(Excluded)c × I(Yeart  2012) equal to zero for all observations. We use these
predictions as the basis for calculating the percent decline in development activity
attributable to exclusion risk. We then compare the predicted decline in development
activity across several ATC4 drug class characteristics, measured before the introduction of
the formulary exclusions.


Availability of Existing Therapies and Market Size

   For our first counterfactual comparison, we divide drug classes into terciles based on the
number of existing therapies, as measured by the number of distinct drugs available within
that class as of 2011. Figure 6 Panel A compares predicted drug development activity under
the observed exclusion policies to the counterfactual activity that would have occurred absent
exclusions. Consistent with our model, we see the largest declines in drug classes with more
existing therapies: among drug classes in the top tercile of available therapies, exclusions
depress development by 5%. By contrast, exclusions depress development by less than 2%
for drug classes in the bottom tercile of pre-existing therapies. This result indicates that
formulary exclusions lead firms to reduce their investments in drugs that are more likely to
be incremental entrants to more crowded therapeutic areas.
   In Figure 6 Panel B, we perform the same analysis splitting drug classes by market
size, as measured by the volume of prescriptions filled in 2011 (estimated from the MEPS
data). We find that formulary exclusions disproportionately impact drug development in
therapeutic classes with many patients. For drug classes in the top tercile of prescription
volume, drug development is predicted to decline by nearly 8% after the introduction of
formulary exclusions.


Scientific Novelty

   Next we examine the relative effect that formulary exclusions had on R&D investment
across areas with differing measures of scientific novelty. To assess scientific novelty, we
match drug candidates within an ATC4 class to the scientific articles cited by their underlying
patents, making use of the patent-to-science linkages created by Marx and Fuegi (2020). We

                                              24
then create two measures of the scientific novelty of research in a drug class (averaged over
the pre-period 2007-2011).
    First, we calculate how often patents in a drug class cited recent science, defined as articles
under 5 years old as of 2011. In Panel A of Figure 7, we find that exclusions generate a
much larger decline in R&D in drug classes that were rarely citing recent science in the policy
pre-period, compared to those that were (10% vs. 2% predicted declines, respectively).
    Second, we measure how "disruptive" research in a drug class is likely to be. To do this, for
each of the scientific article cited by the underlying patents of the drugs, we follow Funk and
Owen-Smith (2017) and Wu et al. (2019) and measure how many of a focal article's forward
citations also cite the focal article's backward citations. This "disruptiveness" index, ranging
from -1 (consolidating) to 1 (destabilizing), captures the idea that a research article that
represents a paradigm shift will generate forward citations that will not cite the breakthrough
article's backward citations. In contrast, a review article that consolidates a knowledge
domain will receive forward citations that will also cite the same citations as the review
article. In Figure 7 Panel B, we report predicted changes in drug development as a function
of how disruptive the patents underlying the drugs were in this class over the pre-period
(proxied by the average disruptiveness index of the cited science). Formulary exclusions
spurred larger reductions in development in drug classes citing the least disruptive research.
    Together, these results suggest that closed formularies shift R&D dollars away from areas
with older, less novel science.



6     Discussion
    So far, we have shown that closed formulary policies lead pharmaceutical firms to invest
less in R&D for areas more likely to face exclusions. This response results in a shift in
development away from large markets (in terms of available therapies and prescription
volume). Our evidence also indicates that R&D effort shifts away from drug classes with
older and less disruptive underlying science. Overall, these results suggest that exclusions
direct upstream research away from more incremental treatments.
    The welfare implications of this behavior are theoretically ambiguous. There are two key
considerations. First, exclusions reduced development of drugs for crowded markets; what is


                                                25
the value of this sort of forgone incremental innovation? Second, when investment declines
in high-exclusion risk classes relative to other classes, does this contribute to an aggregate
decline in pharmaceutical R&D, or is some of the investment redirected to innovation in
other drug classes within the sector?
   Regarding the first question, assessing the value of late entrants to a drug class is difficult
because even incremental drugs can reduce side effects, improve compliance by being easier to
take, or generate price competition and improve access (Regnier 2013; Hult 2014). Further,
even if the new drugs never make it to market, incremental drug candidates may generate
scientific spillovers, leading to further innovation over a longer time horizon.
   Second, our empirical approach cannot test for aggregate changes in development
activity, which would be identified solely by time-series trends. By estimating equation (3),
we isolate the relative change in development activity in drug categories at high exclusion
risk, compared to the changes in low-risk categories. These differences could come from a
combination of absolute declines in R&D for excluded classes or it could come from a shift
in development from classes with high to low exclusion risk.
   Absent financial frictions, we would expect that the introduction of closed formularies
would decrease the expected value of investments in drug classes at high risk of facing
exclusions, but should have little impact on the net present value for drugs in classes at
low risk of facing exclusions. In such a world, we would interpret our results as leading
to an absolute decline in drug R&D. However, a large finance literature has shown, both
theoretically and empirically, that even publicly traded firms often behave as though they
face financial frictions (Myers and Majluf 1984; Froot et al. 1993; Brown et al. 2009). This
is especially true in pharmaceuticals and other R&D intensive sectors where intellectual
property is more difficult to collateralize or value (Fernandez et al. 2012; Kerr and Nanda
2015; Krieger et al. 2019). For example, it is common for firms to set their R&D budgets
by allocating a percentage of revenues from the previous year.
   In the event that exclusion policies generate some degree of reallocation away from
older drug areas toward newer ones, a welfare analysis would need to take into account the
relative value of research in these areas. In our case, this would require weighing the value




                                               26
of additional incremental innovations aimed at larger markets against the value of
earlier-in-class innovations for less common conditions.20



7        Conclusion
       Amid rising public pressure, government and private payers are looking for ways to
contain drug prices while maintaining incentives for innovation. In this paper, we study how
the design of downstream insurance policies--namely, those related to drug coverage--impact
upstream investments in pharmaceutical R&D.
       We find that drug classes facing a one standard deviation greater risk of experiencing
exclusions see an 11% decline in drug development activity following the introduction of
closed formulary policies. These declines in development activity occur at each stage of
the development process, from pre-clinical through Phase 3 trials. In aggregate, our results
suggest that PBMs wielded the threat of formulary exclusion in a way that shifted the
relative allocation of R&D effort away from incremental treatments; that is, away from drug
classes with many existing therapies on the market and older, less novel underlying science.
       Our results provide evidence that insurance design influences pharmaceutical R&D.
Pharmaceutical firms anticipate downstream payment policies and shift their upstream
R&D efforts accordingly. Viewed from a public policy perspective, this finding opens the
door for insurance design to be part of the broader toolkit that policymakers use to
encourage and direct investments in innovation. Existing policy efforts to shape innovation
have relied almost exclusively on directly influencing the costs and returns to R&D,
through patents, tax credits, research funding, or other direct subsidies.                       Our results
suggest that managers and policymakers can also use targeted coverage limitations and
price negotiation--for example, those generated by value-based pricing--to shift R&D
efforts away from drugs with limited incremental clinical value.
       The limitations of our analysis suggest several important directions for future work.
First, our identification strategy allows us to document a relative decline in R&D in high
  20
     Moreover, if exclusion policies have positive spillovers on development in non-excluded categories (e.g.,
due to within-firm investment reallocation), our estimates will tend to overstate the magnitude of the total
decline in R&D investment in excluded categories. By contrast, if exclusion policies have negative spillovers
on non-excluded categories (e.g., due to a fall in revenue reducing available development dollar), our estimates
will tend to understate the magnitude of the investment decline in excluded categories.

                                                      27
exclusion risk categories; more research is needed to assess the extent to which policies that
limit the profitability of a specific class of drugs reduce aggregate R&D. Second, it remains
a challenge to place an accurate value on the innovation that is forgone as a result of the
exclusion practices we study. While we focus on the availability of existing treatments,
prescription volume, and measures of scientific novelty, these are not complete descriptions
of the clinical and scientific importance of potentially foregone drugs. Third, because we
cannot directly observe drug price rebates, we cannot directly quantify the reductions in
revenue precipitated by formulary exclusion policies.
   This analysis studies the first wave of PBM formulary exclusions, but the implications
may evolve with ongoing changes to exclusion strategies. For example, in recent years,
formulary exclusions have begun to target therapies for relatively rare and sensitive diseases
for the first time, including HIV, hemophilia and certain cancers (The Doctor-Patient Rights
Project 2017; Maas 2018). Drug classes that appeared low-risk in our analysis based on early
exclusion patterns may become higher-risk as exclusions expand, leading to more widespread
reductions in drug development. Additional research will be needed to quantify the tradeoffs
associated with decreased development in these therapeutic areas.




                                             28
References
 Abaluck, J., J. Gruber, and A. Swanson (2018). Prescription drug use under medicare
    part d: A linear model of nonlinear budget sets. Journal of Public Economics 164,
    106­138.

 Acemoglu, D., P. Aghion, L. Bursztyn, and D. Hemous (2012). The environment and
    directed technical change. American Economic Review 102 (1), 131­66.

 Acemoglu, D., D. Cutler, A. Finkelstein, and J. Linn (2006). Did medicare induce
    pharmaceutical innovation? American Economic Review 96 (2), 103­107.

 Aghion, P., A. Dechezlepr^
                          etre, D. Hemous, R. Martin, and J. Van Reenen (2016). Carbon
    taxes, path dependency, and directed technical change: Evidence from the auto
    industry. Journal of Political Economy 124 (1), 1­51.

 Akcigit, U., J. Grigsby, T. Nicholas, and S. Stantcheva (2018, September). Taxation and
    innovation in the 20th century. Working Paper 24982, National Bureau of Economic
    Research.

 Bagley, N., A. Chandra, and A. Frakt (2015). Correcting Signals for Innovation in Health
    Care. Brookings Institution.

 Bloom, N., R. Griffith, and J. Van Reenen (2002). Do r&d tax credits work? evidence
    from a panel of countries 1979­1997. Journal of Public Economics 85 (1), 1­31.

 Bloom, N., M. Schankerman, and J. Van Reenen (2013). Identifying technology spillovers
    and product market rivalry. Econometrica 81 (4), 1347­1393.

 Blume-Kohout, M. E. and N. Sood (2013). Market size and innovation: Effects of Medicare
    Part D on pharmaceutical research and development. Journal of Public Economics 97,
    327­336.

 Brennan, T. (2017, August). 2018 Formulary strategy. Technical report, CVS Health
    Payor Solutions. Online at: https://payorsolutions.cvshealth.com/insights/
    2018-formulary-strategy.




                                          29
Brown, J. R., S. M. Fazzari, and B. C. Petersen (2009). Financing innovation and growth:
   Cash flow, external equity, and the 1990s r&d boom. The Journal of Finance 64 (1),
   151­185.

Budish, E., B. N. Roin, and H. Williams (2015). Do firms underinvest in long-term
   research? Evidence from cancer clinical trials. American Economic Review 105 (7),
   2044­85.

Cameron, A. C., J. B. Gelbach, and D. L. Miller (2008). Bootstrap-based improvements
   for inference with clustered errors. The Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (3),
   414­427.

Chambers, J. D., P. B. Rane, and P. J. Neumann (2016). The impact of formulary drug
   exclusion policies on patients and healthcare costs. Am J Manag Care 22 (8), 524­531.

Choudhry, N. K., J. Avorn, R. J. Glynn, E. M. Antman, S. Schneeweiss, M. Toscano,
   L. Reisman, J. Fernandes, C. Spettell, J. L. Lee, et al. (2011). Full coverage
   for preventive medications after myocardial infarction. New England Journal of
   Medicine 365 (22), 2088­2097.

Claxton, G., M. Rae, M. Long, A. Damico, G. Foster, and H. Whitmore (2017). Employer
   health benefits survey. Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research & Educational
   Trust .

Claxton, G., M. Rae, N. Panchal, J. Lundy, A. Damico, A. Osei-Anto, and J. Pickreign
   (2011). Employer health benefits 2011 annual survey. the kaiser family foundation and
   health research and educational trust. 1-220.

Clemens, J. (2013, December). The effect of U.S. health insurance expansions on medical
   innovation. Working Paper 19761, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Clemens, J. and P. Rogers (2020, January). Demand shocks, procurement policies, and
   the nature of medical innovation: Evidence from wartime prosthetic device patents.
   Working Paper 26679, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Congressional Budget Office (2007, April). Medicare prescription drug price negotiation
   act of 2007. Technical report, Congressional Budget Office Cost Estimate. Online



                                          30
   at       https://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/110th-congress-2007-2008/
   costestimate/s30.pdf.

Cournoyer,      A.   and   L.     Blandford    (2016,   October).   Formulary   exclusion
   lists create challenges for pharma and payers alike. Journal of Clinical
   Pathways .                   https://www.journalofclinicalpathways.com/article/
   formulary-exclusion-lists-create-challenges-pharma-and-payers-alike.

Dafny, L., C. Ody, and M. Schmitt (2017). When discounts raise costs: the effect of copay
   coupons on generic utilization. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 9 (2),
   91­123.

Dechezlepretre, A., E. Einio, R. Martin, K.-T. Nguyen, and J. Van Reenen (2016, July).
   Do tax incentives for research increase firm innovation? an rd design for r&d. Working
   Paper 22405, National Bureau of Economic Research.

DiMasi, J. A., H. G. Grabowski, and R. W. Hansen (2016). Innovation in
   the pharmaceutical industry:       new estimates of R&D costs. Journal of Health
   Economics 47, 20­33.

Dixit, A. (1979). A model of duopoly suggesting a theory of entry barriers. The Bell
   Journal of Economics , 20­32.

Djogbenou, A. A., J. G. MacKinnon, and M. Ø. Nielsen (2019). Asymptotic theory
   and wild bootstrap inference with clustered errors. Journal of Econometrics 212 (2),
   393­412.

Dranove, D., C. Garthwaite, and M. I. Hermosilla (2020, May). Expected profits and the
   scientific novelty of innovation. Working Paper 27093, National Bureau of Economic
   Research.

Einav, L., A. Finkelstein, and P. Schrimpf (2017). Bunching at the kink: implications for
   spending responses to health insurance contracts. Journal of Public Economics 146,
   27­40.

Fein, A. J. (2015, August). Here come the 2016 PBM formulary exclusion lists!
   Technical report, Drug Channels. Online at: https://www.drugchannels.net/2015/
   08/here-come-2016-pbm-formulary-exclusion.html.


                                              31
Fein, A. J. (2017, December). The CVS-Aetna deal:              Five industry and drug
   channel implications. Technical report, Drug Channels. Online at: https://www.
   drugchannels.net/2017/12/the-cvs-aetna-deal-five-industry-and.html.

Fernandez, J.-M., R. M. Stein, and A. W. Lo (2012, 10). Commercializing biomedical
   research through securitization techniques. Nature Biotechnology 30 (10), 964­975.

Filzmoser, P., A. Eisl, and F. Endel (2009). Atc-icd: Determination of the reliability for
   predicting the icd code from the atc code.

Finkelstein, A. (2004). Static and dynamic effects of health policy: Evidence from the
   vaccine industry. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (2), 527­564.

Foulkes, H. (2015, June). CVS Health Corp at Jefferies Consumer Conference.

Frank, R. G. and R. J. Zeckhauser (2018, January). High-priced drugs in medicare part
   d: Diagnosis and potential prescription. Working Paper 24240, National Bureau of
   Economic Research.

Froot, K. A., D. S. Scharfstein, and J. C. Stein (1993, December). Risk Management:
   Coordinating Corporate Investment and Financing Policies. Journal of Finance 48 (5),
   1629­58.

Funk, R. J. and J. Owen-Smith (2017). A dynamic network measure of technological
   change. Management Science 63 (3), 791­817.

Garber, A. M., C. I. Jones, and P. Romer (2006). Insurance and incentives for medical
   innovation. In Forum for Health Economics & Policy, Volume 9. De Gruyter.

Garthwaite, C. and F. S. Morton (2017). Perverse market incentives encourage
   high prescription drug prices. ProMarket Blog Post . https://promarket.org/
   perversemarket-incentives-encourage-high-prescription-drug-prices.

Government Accountability Office (2019, July). Medicare Part D: Use of Pharmacy Benefit
   Managers and Efforts to Manage Drug Expenditures and Utilization. GAO-19-498
   https://www.gao.gov/assets/710/700259.pdf.

Health Strategies Group (2015). 2015 Pharmacy benefit managers research agenda.
   Technical   report.   https://www.healthstrategies.com/sites/default/files/
   agendas/2015_PBM_Research_Agenda_RA_110714.pdf.

                                          32
Hoadley, J., L. Summer, E. Hargrave, J. Cubanski, and T. Neuman (2011). Analysis of
   medicare prescription drug plans in 2011 and key trends since 2006. Kaiser Family
   Foundation Issue Brief. The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation .

Hult, K. J. (2014). Incremental innovation and pharmacuetical productivity. Technical
   report, Health Strategies Group.

Huskamp, H. A., A. M. Epstein, and D. Blumenthal (2003). The impact of a national
   prescription drug formulary on prices, market share, and spending: Lessons for
   Medicare? Health Affairs 22 (3), 149­158.

Kakani, P., M. Chernew, and A. Chandra (2020). Rebates in the pharmaceutical industry:
   Evidence from medicines sold in retail pharmacies in the us. Technical report, National
   Bureau of Economic Research.

Kamal,    R.,      C.    Cox,     and   D.   McDermott         (2018,   February).    What   are
   the    recent        and     forecasted   trends      in     prescription   drug    spending?
   peterson-kaiser       health     system    tracker.        https://www.kff.org/slideshow/
   what-are-the-recent-and-forecasted-trends-in-prescription-drug-spending/.

Kerr, W. R. and R. Nanda (2015). Financing innovation. Annual Review of Financial
   Economics 7 (1), 445­462.

Krieger, J., D. Li, and D. Papanikolaou (2017). Developing novel drugs. Available at SSRN
   3095246 .

Krieger, J., D. Li, and D. Papanikolaou (2019). Missing novelty in drug development.
   Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Kyle, M. K. and A. M. McGahan (2012). Investments in pharmaceuticals before and after
   TRIPS. Review of Economics and Statistics 94 (4), 1157­1172.

Lakdawalla, D. and N. Sood (2009). Innovation and the welfare effects of public drug
   insurance. Journal of public economics 93 (3-4), 541­548.

Lopez, L. (2018, march). What CVS is doing to mom-and-pop pharmacies in the US
   will make your blood boil. Business Insider . https://www.businessinsider.com/
   cvs-squeezing-us-mom-and-pop-pharmacies-out-of-business-2018-3.



                                              33
Maas, A. (2018, September). As new formulary exclusions are unveiled, drugmakers need
   to communicate value. MMIT . https://www.mmitnetwork.com/member-content/
   as-new-formulary-exclusions-are-unveiled-drugmakers-need-to-communicate-value.

Mankiw, N. G. and M. D. Whinston (1986). Free entry and social inefficiency. The RAND
   Journal of Economics , 48­58.

Marx, M. and A. Fuegi (2020, April). Reliance on science: Worldwide front-page patent
   citations to scientific articles. Strategic Management Journal .

Miller, S. and P. Wehrwein (2015). A conversation with Steve Miller, MD: Come in and
   talk with us, pharma. Managed care 24 (4), 27­8.

Myers, D. (2014, March). Express Scripts Holding Co at Barclays Healthcare Conference.

Myers, S. C. and N. S. Majluf (1984). Corporate financing and investment decisions
   when firms have information that investors do not have. Journal of Financial
   Economics 13 (2), 187­221.

Pinsonault, P. (2002, June). When your drug is not on formulary. PharmExec.com . http:
   //www.pharmexec.com/when-your-drug-not-formulary.

Pollack, A. (2014, June). Health insurers are pressing down on drug prices.
   The      New     York   Times .     https://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/21/business/
   health-plans-bring-pressure-to-bear-on-drug-prices.html.

Regnier, S. (2013). What is the value of "me-too" drugs? Health Care Management
   Science 16 (4), 300­313.

Reinke, T. (2015). PBMs just say no to some drugs­but not to others. Managed Care 24 (4),
   24­25.

Schafer,    J.    (2018,   November).      Designing     clinical   trials   with   the   payer
   in       mind.      Clinical      Leader .        https://www.clinicalleader.com/doc/
   designing-clinical-trials-with-the-payer-in-mind-0001.

Scott-Levin (2000, June). Spring 2001 managed care formulary drug audit.

Seabright, P. (2013). Research into biomarkers: how does drug procurement affect the
   design of clinical trials? Health Management, Policy and Innovation 1 (3), 1­15.


                                                34
Siegal,   Y.   and       S.   Shah   (2019,    March).       Optimizing    market     access:       How
   therapeutic       area     dynamics      could      influence    strategy.     Deloitte      Insights .
   https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/industry/life-sciences/
   pharmaceutical-pricing-market-access.html.

Stanford, J. (2020, July). Price controls would throttle biomedical innovation. Wall Street
   Journal 41.

Tamblyn, R., R. Laprise, J. A. Hanley, M. Abrahamowicz, S. Scott, N. Mayo, J. Hurley,
   R. Grad, E. Latimer, R. Perreault, et al. (2001). Adverse events associated with
   prescription drug cost-sharing among poor and elderly persons. JAMA 285 (4),
   421­429.

The Doctor-Patient Rights Project (2017, December). The de-list:                     How formulary
   exclusion     lists    deny   patients     access    to    essential   care.   Technical       report.
   https://www.healthstrategies.com/sites/default/files/agendas/2015_
   PBM_Research_Agenda_RA_110714.pdf.

Thiebaud, P., B. V. Patel, and M. B. Nichol (2008). The demand for statin: The effect of
   copay on utilization and compliance. Health Economics 17 (1), 83­97.

Wang, Y. R. and M. V. Pauly (2005). Spillover effects of restrictive drug formularies
   on physician prescribing behavior: Evidence from medicaid. Journal of Economics &
   Management Strategy 14 (3), 755­773.

Werble, C. (2014, September). Pharmacy benefit managers: Health policy brief. Technical
   report, Health Affairs.

WHO Collaborating Centre for Drug Statistics Methodology (2010). Guidelines for atc
   classification and ddd assignment. Technical report, World Health Organization.
   https://www.whocc.no/filearchive/publications/2011guidelines.pdf.

Wu, L., D. Wang, and J. A. Evans (2019). Large teams develop and small teams disrupt
   science and technology. Nature 556, 378­382.

Yin, W. (2008). Market incentives and pharmaceutical innovation. Journal of Health
   Economics 27 (4), 1060­1077.



                                                35
Zycher, B. (2006). The human cost of federal price negotiations: the Medicare prescription
   drug benefit and pharmaceutical innovation. Manhattan Institute, Center for Medical
   Progress.




                                          36
                                               Figure 1: Number of Excluded Drugs by PBMs



                                  150
       Number of Excluded Drugs




                                  100




                                   50



                                                                                                                     CVS
                                                                                                                     Express Scripts
                                                                                                                     Optum
                                   0
                                        2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015   2016   2017
                                                                           Year

Notes: This figure plots the number of drugs excluded by each of the three Pharmacy Benefit Managers.
CVS was the first to begin excluding drugs in 2012, followed by Express Scripts in 2014 and OptumRx in
2016.




                                                                                  37
          Figure 2: Number of Excluded Drugs by Disease Categories

              20

              19

              18

              17

              16

              15

              14

              13

              12

              11

              10

               9

               8

               7

               6

               5

               4

               3

               2

               1

               0
                2011       2012        2013        2014        2015        2016        2017        2018



Notes: Each bubble represents a disease category in a year, and the size of the bubble reflects the number
of drugs that were excluded by CVS, Express Scripts, or OptumRx in that disease category. There were a
total of 300 drugs that were ever excluded from 2012-2017 by at least one of the three PBMs. Of these 300
excluded drugs, we were able to match 260 of them to the First Data Bank data, from which we obtained
the ATC4 data. We manually matched each ATC4 to a disease category; this disease taxonomy was adapted
from the disease categories provided by the PBMs in their exclusion lists.




                                                   38
                           Figure 3: Predictors of Exclusion Risk



                       Log(1 + N of generic NDCs)




                        Log(1 + N of brand NDCs)




                              Log(1 + N of ATC7s)




             Mean brand price - mean generic price




                         Total prescription volume



                                                     -.25    -.15     -.05     .05        .15   .25
                                                                 Standardized Coefficient
Notes: We used the 2011 market characteristics of the ATC4 class to predict exclusion risk. The plotted
coefficients were generated by conducting bivariate linear regressions of whether an ATC4 class had at least
one drug excluded in 2012 or 2013 on each characteristic of the ATC4 class. Independent variables were
standardized (divided by their standard deviation). The coefficients on the number of brand NDCs, number
of ATC7s, and prescription volume are significant at the 1% level, while the coefficient on the number of
generic NDCs is significant at the 10% level. The coefficient on price is not significant. Data on prices, the
number of brand and generic NDCs, and the number of ATC7s are from FDB; data on total prescription
volume are from the 2011 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey.




                                                            39
Figure 4: Impact of Predicted Exclusion Risk on New Drug Development:
                              Event Study


                         20
                         0
          Estimated Impact
                         -20
                         -40
                         -60




                             2007   2008   2009   2010   2011    2012   2013   2014   2015   2016   2017
                                                                 Year




Notes: Figure displays coefficient estimates and 90% confidence intervals from a modified version of
Equation (3). The outcome variable is the annual count of new development activity (across all stages). To
generate the event study graph, we replace the single post-period indicator variable (I(Year  2012)) with
a vector of indicator variables for each year before and after the introduction of PBM exclusion lists in
2012. We plot the coefficients on the interaction of these year indicators and a continuous measure of
predicted exclusion risk. (Exclusion risk is predicted using 2011 market characteristics, prior to the
introduction of PBM formulary exclusions. Details on the prediction of exclusion risk can be found in
Appendix Table A.4.) The regression controls for ATC4 fixed effects and year fixed effects. The sample
includes 1,397 ATC4-year observations.




                                                                40
Figure 5: Placebo Test: Impact of Predicted Exclusion Risk on New Drug
                             Development




                                                                                                      True policy effect

                                                                                                      Placebo tests




Notes: This coefficient plot shows the "placebo tests" of the results reported in Column 2 of Table 4. The
red line indicates the baseline, true policy estimate; it reports 1 , the coefficient on predicted exclusion risk
interacted with a post period indicator from Equation 3. This true policy estimate of -22.9 is statistically
significant and parallels the specification in Column 2 of Table 4, but the only difference is that when
constructing the exclusion risk, we dropped the price variables. The blue coefficients report the "placebo
tests" of the results reported in Columns 2 of Table 4. First, as in the exclusion risk used in Table 4,
exclusion risk was constructed by using the same 2011 market characteristics (but dropping price variables)
to predict exclusions by 2013 using Equation (2), but here we applied the coefficients from this regression
to 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, or 2005 market characteristics to construct new versions of the exclusion risk.
Second, the pre-period and post-periods were adjusted depending on the placebo policy year, such that we
use the same number of pre- and post-period years as Table 4. For instance, for the 2002 placebo policy, the
pre-period was 1997-2001 and the post-period was 2002-2007, and we used 2001 market characteristics to
construct the exclusion risk. For the 2006 placebo policy, the pre-period was 2001-2005 and the post-period
was 2006-2011, and we used 2005 market characteristics to construct the exclusion risk. Due to lack of
market characteristics data in the earlier period of the data, 3 ATC4s were dropped from the sample for
2006 and 2005 placebo policies, 4 ATC4s for 2004 placebo policy, and 5 ATC4s for 2003 and 2002 placebo
policies. None of the placebo estimates were statistically significant.




                                                       41
                                       Figure 6: Counterfactual Development Activity by Pre-Period
                                              Availability of Existing Therapies & Market Size

                                       A. Reduction in development                                                                               B. Reduction in development
                                       by number of drugs in class                                                                            by number of prescriptions in class
                   8




                                                                                                                          8
% decrease in development after 2012




                                                                                                       % decrease in development after 2012
                            6




                                                                                                                                   6
                4




                                                                                                                       4
    2




                                                                                                           2
                   0




                                                                                                                          0
                                        Low                    Medium                      High                                                   Low                   Medium                     High
                                              Terciles of pre-period no. available drugs                                                                Terciles of pre-period no. prescriptions




Notes: This figure displays the percent decrease in annual development attributable to exclusions.
Predictions are based on our estimation of equation (3); we match the specification reported in Table 4
Column 2. The figure shows the percent difference between predictions at the ATC4 × year with and
without exclusions, averaged over the post-period (2012-2017). In Panel A, we group ATC4 drug classes by
terciles of the number of existing drugs in the class (in 2011); data on existing drugs is from First Data
Bank. In Panel B, we group ATC4 drug classes by the number of prescriptions written in the class (in
2011); data on prescriptions is from the 2011 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey. Drug classes are weighted
by the number of drugs with advancing development over the pre-period.




                                                                                                  42
         Figure 7: Counterfactual Development Activity by Pre-Period Measures
                                 of Scientific Novelty

                                        A. % Citing Recent Science                                                                             B. Average "Disruptiveness" Index
                                   10




                                                                                                                                          10
% decrease in development after 2012




                                                                                                       % decrease in development after 2012
                           8




                                                                                                                                  8
                  6




                                                                                                                         6
         4




                                                                                                                4
 2




                                                                                                        2
                    0




                                                                                                                           0
                                         Low                   Medium                    High                                                      Low                 Medium                    High
                                        Terciles of pre-period proportion citing recent science                                                          Terciles of pre-period patent D-Index

Notes: This figure displays the percent decrease in annual development attributable to exclusions.
Predictions are based on our estimation of equation (3); we match the specification reported in Table 4
Column 2. Drug classes are divided into terciles according to attributes of patents associated with drug
development activity over the pre-period, averaged from 2007-2011. Panel A groups drug classes by the
share of pre-period patents in a drug class citing recent science as of 2011 (recent is therefore defined as
publications between 2006 and 2011). Panel B groups drug classes by the average "disruptiveness" index of
patents in the drug class over the pre-period, which is a measure that captures how disruptive the scientific
articles associated with the patent are; the index ranges from -1 (least disruptive) to 1 (most disruptive)
and was originally developed by Funk and Owen-Smith (2017).




                                                                                                  43
                            Table 1: Summary Statistics


                            (A) New Drug Development

                                       Mean     Std. Dev.   Median
                         All           30.61      42.06      13.05
                         Preclinical   17.39      26.13      6.64
                         Phase 1        6.54       8.84      3.07
                         Phase 2        4.57       6.04      2.17
                         Phase 3        2.11       3.04      1.04
                         Launch        1.02        1.63      0.31


                             (B) ATC4 Characteristics
                                                  ATC4s with         ATC4s without
      ATC4 market characteristics in 2011       early exclusions     early exclusions
      Mean N of generic NDCs                         767.9                310.3
      Mean N of brand NDCs                            268                 106.8
      Mean N of ATC7s within ATC4                    14.60                8.518
      Mean brand price - mean generic price          5.822                55.98
      Mean total prescription volume (millions)      70.46                17.63
      Number of ATC4s                                  15                  112

Notes: Panel A summarizes the annual drug development activity from 2007-2011 in the
Cortellis data. The sample includes 1,397 ATC4-year observations. The panel reports the
annual number of drug candidates within an ATC4 class that entered different development
stages. Panel B summarizes ATC4 market characteristics in 2011. Column 1 reports results
for ATC4 classes with at least one excluded drug in 2012-2013; Column 2 reports results for
ATC4s with no exclusions in 2012-2013. Data on pricing and the number of available drugs
are from First Data Bank; data on on total prescription volume are from the 2011 Medical
Expenditure Panel Survey.




                                               44
              Table 2: Impact of Exclusions on Prescription Volume

                                   (1)            (2)             (3)                 (4)
                               Log(Claims)    Log(Claims)    Log(Mkt. Share)     Log(Mkt. Share)

Number of Excluding PBMs        -0.274***      -0.319***         -0.220***          -0.319***
                                 (0.0638)       (0.0733)          (0.0809)           (0.0733)

Observations                      4,626          4,391             4,626               4,391
Drug FE                           YES            YES               YES                 YES
Cohort X Year FE                  YES            YES               YES                 YES
Market Controls                    NO            YES                NO                 YES

  Notes: This table estimates the impact of PBM formulary exclusion on the volume of
  Medicare Part D insurance claims; each column reports a different regression specification.
  The unit of observation is a drug × year. The outcome variable in Columns (1) and (2) is the
  natural log of the total number of annual claims; the outcome in Columns (3) and (4) is the
  annual market share of the index drug relative to all other drugs in the ATC4 class. The key
  independent variable of interest is the number of formularies excluding the drug that year.
  All regressions include drug fixed effects and drug age X calendar year fixed effects. (Drug
  age is measured as number of years elapsed since market entry.) Specifications (2) and (4)
  include additional controls for ATC4 class × calendar year fixed effects to account for trends
  in demand for different drug classes. Data on prescription volume is from Medicare Part D
  2012-2017 public use files. We analyze exclusions on 161 excluded drugs that are prescribed
  to Medicare Part D enrollees and are not in a protected class. Standard errors are clustered
  at the drug level. Statistical significance is indicated as: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                               45
              Table 3: Early Exclusion Risk and Later Exclusions

                                           (1)                        (2)
                                      Late Exclusion             Late Exclusion

    Pr(Exclusion)                         0.167***                   0.150**
                                          (0.0413)                   (0.0624)

    Observations                             127                    112
    Sample                               All ATC4s      ATC4s without early exclusions
    Fraction with Late Exclusions           0.39                    0.31

Notes: Using a linear probability model, we regressed whether ATC4 classes that were
highly predicted to be excluded by 2013 were more likely to be actually excluded later
after 2013. Early exclusion risk is a continuous measure defined using the same specification
underlying Table 4; we used 2011 market characteristics of the ATC4 class to predict whether
the ATC4 class was at risk of exclusion by 2013. We then standardized this early exclusion
risk variable. The outcome variable, late exclusion, is a binary variable that indicates whether
the ATC4 was on any of the PBM's exclusion list at least once in 2014-2017. Column 1
includes all ATC4s, while Column 2 drops ATC4s that were actually excluded by 2013.
Statistical significance is indicated as: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                              46
       Table 4: Impact of Predicted Exclusion Risk on New Drug Development

                             (1)                  (2)                   (3)                  (4)
                       New Development      New Development       Log(1+New Dev.)      Log(1+New Dev.)

Post X Pr(Exclusion)        -24.03***            -21.98***            -0.382***            -0.333***
                             (5.894)              (6.571)              (0.108)              (0.115)

Observations                  1,397                1,397                1,397                 1,397
Year FE                       YES                  YES                  YES                   YES
ATC FE                        YES                  YES                  YES                   YES
Market Controls                NO                  YES                   NO                   YES

     Notes: This table reports results from estimation of equation (3); each column reports a
     different regression specification. The unit of observation is an ATC4 drug class × year.
     The outcome variable "New Development" is the annual count of new development activity
     (across all stages). The treatment variable is a continuous measure of predicted exclusion
     risk. (Exclusion risk is predicted using 2011 market characteristics, prior to the introduction
     of PBM formulary exclusions. Details on the prediction of exclusion risk can be found
     in Appendix Table A.4.) The "Post" period comprises years 2012 and later, after the
     introduction of PBM formulary exclusions. All specifications include year fixed effects and
     ATC4 fixed effects. Columns 2 and 4 include time-varying controls for each of the drug class
     characteristics listed in Table 1. Standard errors are clustered at the ATC4 level. Statistical
     significance is indicated as: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                   47
  Table 5: Impact of Predicted Exclusion Risk on New Drug Development By
  Stages

                                 (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)
                                 All      Preclinical   Phase 1     Phase 2     Phase 3    Launch

Post X Pr(Exclusion)          -21.98***   -11.05***     -6.010***   -3.830***   -1.098**    0.220
                               (6.571)     (3.403)       (2.077)     (1.349)     (0.422)   (0.496)

Observations                    1,397       1,397         1,397       1,397      1,397     1,397
Year FE                         YES         YES           YES         YES        YES       YES
ATC FE                          YES         YES           YES         YES        YES       YES
Market Controls                 YES         YES           YES         YES        YES       YES
N of Drug Candidates Mean       30.61       17.39         6.54         4.57       2.11     1.02

  Notes: See notes to Table 4. Each column reports a regression with a different outcome
  variable. Column 1 replicates the result reported in Table 4 Column 2 on total development
  activity. The additional columns decompose this affect to explore how drug development
  changes at each phase, moving from the earliest observed preclinical activity in Column 2
  through the each phase of clinical trials and eventual launch on the market. Standard errors
  are clustered at the ATC4 level. Statistical significance is indicated as: *** p<0.01, **
  p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                              48
       Figure A.1: Pharmaceutical Payment and Supply Chain Example




Notes: Illustration of the flow funds and prescription drugs for a prescription drug purchase covered by
a Medicare Part D Insurance plan. Other private insurance plans using PBMs have similar flow of funds.
Figure credit to Government Accountability Office (2019).




                                                  49
                    Figure A.2: Distribution of Predicted Exclusion Risk



                60
                40




                                                                          Mean: 0.12
          Percent




                                                                          SD:     0.15
                                                                          Q1:     0.03
                                                                          Median: 0.06
                                                                          Q3:     0.15
                20
                0




                       0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5     0.6   0.7    0.8    0.9     1.0
                                               Pr(Exclusion)




Notes: This histogram plots the distribution of predicted exclusion risk of the 127 ATC4s in our main
analyses. Summary statistics are also provided. See notes to Appendix Table A.4 for details on how the
exclusion risk was calculated.




                                                 50
        Table A.1: Examples of ATC4 Codes Defining Drug Markets

               A10 Diabetes drugs
                 A10A Insulins and analogues
                 A10B Blood glucose lowering drugs, excluding insulins
                 A10X Other drugs used in diabetes

               C07 Beta blocking drugs
                 C07A Beta blocking agents
                 C07B Beta blocking agents and thiazides
                 C07C Beta blocking agents and other diuretics
                 C07D Beta blocking agents, thiazides and other diuretics
                 C07E Beta blocking agents and vasodilators
                 C07F Beta blocking agents, other combinations

Notes: This table provides examples of ATC4 classes for illustrative purposes. Our
sample includes 127 distinct ATC4 classes. A complete listing of the ATC4 class definitions
that guided this analysis can be found in WHO Collaborating Centre for Drug Statistics
Methodology (2010).




                                            51
             Table A.2: Summary Statistics, Part D Claims per Drug


                                                 Mean         Std. Dev.   Median     No. of obs.
Claims for non-excluded drugs (all ages)        158,298        842,241     4,357       3,923
Claims for excluded drugs (all ages)            454,433       1,193,389   45,374        867
Market share, non-excluded drugs (all ages)      0.187          0.305      0.027       3,923
Market share, excluded drugs (all ages)          0.113          0.211      0.028        867
Claims for new drugs, not excluded on entry     125,826        395,623     7,123       1,811
Claims for new drugs, excluded on entry         193,731        452,800    27,799         59
Market share of new drug, not excluded on entry 0.147           0.264      0.027       1,811
Market share of new drug, excluded on entry      0.063          0.183      0.004         59

 Notes: This table reports summary statistics from the Medicare Part D public use file.
 Data tracks annual claims per drug in 2012-2017; the unit of observation is the drug-year
 pair. Market share is calculated as the fraction of prescription drug claims in the ATC4 class
 that are for the index drug. The first four rows report results for all drugs, comparing those
 that were ever excluded to those that were never excluded durign the sample period. The
 last four rows report results for the subset of "new drugs," defined as drugs that enter the
 market in 2007 or later, and so are ten years old or younger for the duration of the sample.
 These final rows compare new drugs that were excluded within a year of entry to those that
 were not excluded in the first year.




                                              52
       Table A.3: Impact of Immediate Exclusion on Prescriptions of New Drugs

                           (1)                   (2)                  (3)                  (4)
                    Log(No. of Claims)    Log(No. of Claims)    Log(Market Share)    Log(Market Share)

Excluded at Entry        -1.147**              -1.193**              -1.094**              -1.099*
                          (0.573)               (0.591)               (0.546)              (0.564)

Observations               1,846                 383                   1,846                383
ATC4 FE                    YES                   YES                   YES                  YES
Cohort X Year FE           YES                   YES                   YES                  YES
Limited sample              NO                   YES                    NO                  YES

      Notes: This table investigates the impact of immediate exclusion by one or more PBM on
      claims for a new prescription drug. Each column reports results from a separate regression.
      The regressions include ATC4 fixed effects, and drug age X calendar year fixed effects.
      Identifying variation comes from the debut of multiple drugs within an ATC4 drug class,
      some of which are immediately excluded and others are not. Immediate exclusion is defined as
      exclusion in the calendar year immediately following market entry. The sample is restricted
      to drugs that enter the market in 2007 or later, and so are ten years old or younger for
      the duration of the sample. In Columns 2 and 4, the sample is further restricted to only
      ATC4 categories that have at least one immediately excluded drug. See notes to Appendix
      Table A.2 for more details on the data. Standard errors are clustered at the drug level.
      Statistical significance is indicated as: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                  53
                       Table A.4: Predicting Exclusion Risk

                                                                (1)
                                                             Exclusion

                   Log(1 + N of generic NDCs)                 -0.674**
                                                               (0.317)
                   Log(1 + N of brand NDCs)                     0.656
                                                               (0.511)
                   Log(1 + N of ATC7s)                          1.069
                                                               (0.665)
                   Mean brand price - mean generic price      -0.00862
                                                             (0.00761)
                   Total prescription volume                 1.70e-08**
                                                             (8.16e-09)

                   Observations                                 128

Notes: We used the above 2011 market characteristics of the ATC4 class to predict exclusion
risk. Using a Logit model, we regressed whether an AT4 class had at least one drug excluded
in 2012 or 2013 on all of the characteristics of the ATC4 class reported above. We then used
the regression's fitted values to construct predicted exclusion risk of each ATC4. Data on
prices, the number of brand and generic NDCs, and the number of ATC7s are from FDB;
data on total prescription volume are from the 2011 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey.




                                            54
     Table A.5:   Impact of Exclusion Risk on New Drug Development:
     Alternative Definitions of Exclusion Risk

                        Predicted Count Exclusion        Predicted Share Exclusion    Realized Exclusion
                           (1)           (2)                (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)
                        New Dev.     New Dev.            New Dev.      New Dev.      New Dev. New Dev.

Post X Exclusion Risk   -7.973***       -7.230**          -59.50*      -57.08*        -5.824**     -4.534**
                         (2.600)         (2.772)          (33.81)      (31.25)         (2.568)      (2.290)

Observations               1,397          1,397            1,397        1,397          1,397        1,397
Year FE                    YES            YES              YES          YES            YES          YES
ATC FE                     YES            YES              YES          YES            YES          YES
Market Controls             NO            YES               NO          YES             NO          YES

     Notes: This table reports results from estimating a modified version of equation (3),
     applying alternative definitions of exclusion risk. Instead of defining exclusion risk as whether
     an ATC4 class is predicted to have at least one drug with an exclusion as in Table 4, the
     exclusion risk here is defined as how many drugs are predicted to be excluded in an ATC4
     class in Columns 1-2 and what share of drugs are predicted to be excluded in an ATC4
     class in Columns 3-4. In Columns 5-6, rather than using continuous measures of predicted
     exclusion risk as our measure of treatment, we use a binary definition of treatment by looking
     at realized exclusions: whether at least one drug in an ATC4 class was actually on a PBM
     exclusion list. For further details on the regression specifications, see notes to Table 4.
     Standard errors are clustered at the ATC4 level. Statistical significance is indicated as: ***
     p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                    55
        Table A.6: Impact of Predicted Exclusion Risk on New Drug Development:
        Alternative ATC4 Linking

                                  Direct Linking Approach                   Indirect Linking Approach
                                   (1)                (2)                    (3)                 (4)
                             New Development New Development           New Development New Development

Post X Pr(Exclusion)              -20.98***           -18.59***            -4.301***            -4.454***
                                   (6.048)             (6.745)              (1.329)              (1.473)

Observations                        1,397                 1,397              1,397                1,397
Year FE                             YES                   YES                YES                  YES
ATC FE                              YES                   YES                YES                  YES
Market Controls                      NO                   YES                 NO                  YES
N of Drug Candidates Mean           21.06                 21.06              10.29                10.29

        Notes: These results parallel the specification underlying Table 4, but with alternative
        methods for linking drug candidates to ATC4 classes. We have replaced our baseline outcome
        measure of development activity with two alternative outcomes that take different approaches
        to matching. In Columns 1-2, we only count track development activity among the subset
        of drug candidates for which Cortellis directly reports the drug class. In Columns 3-4, we
        impute ATC4s from ICD9 codes for all drug candidates, rather than relying on Cortellis'
        reporting of drug class. Appendix B provides more details on how the drug candidates are
        linked to ATC4s. Standard errors are clustered at the ATC4 level. Statistical significance is
        indicated as: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                     56
Table A.7: Impact of Predicted Exclusion Risk on New Drug Development:
Wild Cluster Bootstrap

                                             (1)                  (2)
                                       New Development      Log(1+New Dev.)

              Post X Pr(Exclusion)         -21.98***              -0.333**
                                        [-39.07, -7.604]     [-.5344, -.03927]

              Observations                   1,397                1,397
              Year FE                        YES                  YES
              ATC FE                         YES                  YES
              Market Controls                YES                  YES

Notes: Columns 1 and 2 of this table repeat the specifications reported in Table 4 Columns
2 and 4, but now using wild cluster bootstrap to calculate the 95% confidence interval (rather
than using conventional inference). Clustering is performed at the ATC4 level. Statistical
significance is indicated as: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                             57
A      Theoretical Model
    We focus on a potential pharmaceutical entrant that makes R&D decisions on the basis
of expected profitability. This firm can make investments in one of two drug classes: class
o is "old" in the sense that there is already an approved treatment in that class; class n is
"new" in the sense that there are no existing treatments. For tractability, we assume that
there is exactly one incumbent drug in the old class. The pharmaceutical firm pays a fixed
cost of drug development, K , that is the same for both classes. If the firm invests in class
o, it produces an FDA approved drug with probability o ; for class n this probability is
given by n . If successful, the entrant competes as a monopolist in the new drug class and
as a Bertrand duopolist in the old drug class. For simplicity, we follow Dixit (1979) and
adopt a linear demand system with horizontally differentiated products. We assume there is
a single PBM that facilitates access to FDA approved drugs by administering an insurance
plan formulary. Patients pay a coinsurance fraction   (0, 1) for drugs included in the
PBM's formulary but must bear the full cost of drugs that are not.
    We begin in Section A.1 by characterizing pharmaceutical profits in both the old and
new drug classes when formulary exclusions are prohibited.        Next, in Section A.2, we
introduce formulary exclusions as a policy change in which PBMs begin granting exclusive
contracts to pharmaceutical firms in exchange for a fixed fraction (1 - )  (0, 1) of sales
revenue from the included drug. When there are two drugs on the market, we show that ex
post profits are lower for drugmakers when their drug is excluded from the PBM's
formulary; because of this, they are willing to offer higher rebates ex-ante in order to win
the exclusive contract. Finally, after characterizing downstream profits associated with
approved drugs, both with and without exclusions, we analyze how the exclusion policy
impact firms' upstream investment decisions, and provide an informal discussion of welfare
implications.


A.1     Downstream profits without exclusions
    In our baseline case, we do not allow for exclusions; PBMs facilitate access to all FDA
approved drugs. If the entrant drug is approved, it competes as either a monopolist in class
n or as a differentiated Bertrand duopolist in class o. In both cases, its drug is included on

                                             58
the PBM's formulary. Because formulary inclusion is guaranteed, the PBM cannot extract
rebate payments in the absence of a credible exclusion threat, in the context of our simple
model.21
       We denote the entrant's downstream profits as e,n in the new class and as open
                                                                                 e,o in the

old class. The subscript e indicates the entrant; the subscript o or n indicates the old or new
class, respectively; the superscript open describes the open formulary policy state where no
drugs are excluded.
       In drug class n, the entrant faces a standard monopoly pricing problem:


                                   max (pe,n - m) (A - Bpe,n )
                                   pe,n

Here, A is a parameter describing the level of demand in this drug class and B is a parameter
describing consumer's elasticity with respect to price. Marginal costs of production are
denoted as m. Demand also depends on p because we assume consumers are partially
insured. The relevant price consumers face is p  p, even though the drugmaker receives
p. Solving this problem yields equilibrium prices pe,n , quantities qe,n , and profit e,n .
       Meanwhile, in class o, the entrant e would be two competing with the incumbent i. We
assume that the demand system is symmetric and the drugs are horizontally differentiated
but of equivalent quality, so that b > d.

                                    open                 open
                                   qe,o  = a - bpopen
                                                 e,o + dpi,o
                                    open
                                   qi,o  = a - bpopen    open
                                                 i,o + dpe,o



Here, the parameters a and b denote potentially different levels and elasticities of demand,
relative to class n. The entrant and incumbent symmetrically choose price to maximize
  21
    In reality, PBMs could negotiate rebates in exchange for placement on a preferred formulary tier, even
in the absence of exclusions. For simplicity, we do not include these other tools in our model. Crucially,
exclusions are the strongest tool available to PBMs for restricting drug access, and are thus a significant
departure from the earlier forms of control over formulary structure.




                                                    59
profits:

                                                            open
                             max
                              open
                                   (popen           open
                                     e,o - m) a - bpe,o + dpi,o
                               pe,o

                             max
                              open
                                   (popen           open    open
                                     i,o - m) a - bpi,o + dpe,o
                               pi,o


We take the first order conditions and solve for the optimal duopoly pricing.

Proposition A.1 The incumbent and entrant face symmetric demand and will choose
identical prices and then produce identical quantities. Production will occur as long as
2b - d > 0.

                                open              open           open
                        popen
                         e,o = pi,o ,
                                          open
                                         qe,o  = qi,o  ,   open
                                                           e,o = i,o




This proposition is proved by deriving equilibrium price, quantity, and profit.        These
expressions are given below:

                                    open           a         bm
                            popen
                             e,o = pi,o =               +
                                              (2b - d) (2b - d)
                             open    open         ab     b(b - d)m
                            qe,o  = qi,o    =          -
                                              (2b - d)    (2b - d)
                                 open         b (a - (b - d)m)2
                           open
                           e,o = i,o        =
                                                   (2b - d)2


A.2        Downstream profits with exclusions
   We now consider the case in which PBMs are able to exclude approved drugs when there
is a viable alternative. In our model, this means that there can be no exclusions in class n,
so that prices, quantities, and profits are unaffected.
   In class o, however, drugs can be excluded. Excluded drugs can still be marketed, but
would not be covered by insurance, meaning that consumers face the full price p rather
than the subsidized p. The firm again enters differentiated Bertrand competition, but with
another firm whose drug is covered. For the purposes of this exposition, we assume that the



                                               60
entrant is excluded and the incumbent is covered. The demand functions will then become:

                                excluded
                               qe,o      = a - bpexcluded
                                                 e,o      + dpincluded
                                                              i,o
                                included
                               qi,o      = a - bpincluded
                                                 i,o      + dpexcluded
                                                              e,o



       Each firm will choose prices to maximize profits. Here, we assume that the term (1 - )
is the pre-negotiated rebate that the incumbent pays in order to be included in a PBM's
formulary. We will endogenize  in the following section. If the entrant is excluded, then it
no longer pays the (1 - ) revenue share to the PBM.


                            max (pexcluded
                                  e,o      - m) a - bpexcluded
                                                      e,o      + dpincluded
                                                                   i,o
                          pexcluded
                           e,o

                            max (pincluded
                                  i,o      - m) a - bpincluded
                                                      i,o      + dpexcluded
                                                                   e,o
                          pincluded
                           i,o



       Taking first order conditions, we can solve for the optimal price, quantity and profits for
entrant and incumbent.

Proposition A.2 When   , we have the following expressions for prices and quantities.


                              pexcluded
                               e,o       pincluded
                                          i,o      ,       excluded
                                                          qe,o        included
                                                                     qi,o


       The condition    means that the share of revenue retained by the pharmaceutical
company after rebates is greater than the drug coinsurance rate paid by insured
consumers.22 Under this assumption, the included drug is able to charge a higher price to
insurers and still sell more quantities because formulary placement leads consumers to face
a lower out-of-pocket price. The more generous the insurance coverage, the larger the price
wedge between the included and excluded drug. If marginal costs of production are zero,
then the two drugs will sell equal quantities: the excluded drug's lower prices will be
exactly the amount needed to offset the insurance coverage. If marginal costs are positive,
then the excluded drug will sell at a lower quantity than the included drug. Finally, the
  22
    Empirical estimates suggest this sufficient condition holds in practice. The Kaiser Family Foundation
reports average insurance subsidy rates (1 - ) for prescription drugs ranging between 62% and 83%,
depending on the drug tier, for employer sponsored insurance plans in 2017 (Claxton et al. 2017). These
estimates imply coinsurance rates  in the range of [0.17, 0.38]. In comparison, Kakani et al. (2020) estimate
rebates of 48% in 2017, suggesting the share of retained revenue  as 0.52.

                                                     61
expressions above assumed the entrant is excluded, but flipping the identity of the
excluded drug will simply swap the comparative statics: the excluded drug will have a
lower revenue per unit and lower quantity sold in equilibrium.
   To prove these propositions, we solve for the equilibrium price and quantities, taking the
rebate level (1 - ) required for formulary inclusion as given. We then solve for the optimal
rebate bidding strategy in the second stage. Prices are as follows:

                                              a      b(2b + d)m
                           pexcluded
                            e,o      =             +
                                          (2b - d)    (4b2 - d2 )
                                               a      b(2b + d)m
                            pincluded
                             i,o        =           +
                                          (2b - d)     (4b2 - d2 )



   Recall that the included drug does not receive the full price pincluded
                                                                  i,o      in additional revenue
for each unit sold, because it owes a cut (1 - ) of its revenue to the PBM. As a result, the
effective revenue per unit sold is pincluded
                                    i,o      for the included drug. As a result, we compare
pincluded
 i,o      to pexcluded
              e,o      to calculate the difference in revenue per unit across the included and
excluded drug.

                                             ( - )a     ( + )( - )bdm
                  pincluded
                   i,o      - pexcluded
                               e,o      =             +
                                             (2b - d)     (4b2 - d2 )

   As long as    and 2b - d > 0, it will hold that:


                                        pincluded
                                         i,o       pexcluded
                                                    e,o



   We can calculate equilibrium quantities as follows:

                        excluded        ab      b (2b2 - bd - d2 ) m
                       qe,o      =            -
                                     (2b - d)        (4b2 - d2 )
                        included        ab      b (2b2 - bd - d2 ) m
                       qi,o        =          -
                                     (2b - d)        (4b2 - d2 )




                                                62
   From these quantity expressions, we calculate:

                           included    excluded     ( - )b(b + d)m
                          qi,o      - qe,o      =                  .
                                                       (2b + d)

   Maintaining the assumption that   , it follows that:

                                      included   excluded
                                     qi,o       qe,o      .


A.3     Profits and bidding on rebates
   From the PBM's perspective, exclusions allow it to extract positive rebates 1 -  by
leveraging the exclusion threat. From the drug company's perspective, exclusions reduce
the profitability of entry into the old class; we discuss these profitability comparisons in
this section. A corollary of Proposition A.2 is that profits will be higher when a drug is
included rather than excluded from an PBM's formulary, as long as the final rebate level is
not too high. Because of this, drugmakers would be willing to provide an ex ante payment in
order to avoid exclusion ex post. We model this process as a second price auction in which
pharmaceutical firms bid for the exclusive right to be included in a PBM's formulary by
offering rebates of the form pq . The drug offering the highest rebate offer will be included
on the formulary; in cases with tied bids, one drug will be selected at random for inclusion.
The following pins down rebates in equilibrium:

Proposition A.3 In the old drug class, firms will be bid a rebate level 1 -  = 1 - , so
that:
                         excluded
                         e,o      = included
                                    i,o      and excluded
                                                 e,o      > open
                                                            e,o                           (4)

At the time a drug is approved, each pharmaceutical firm would be willing to set the rebate
up to the level that would equalize profits when included on formulary to the profits when
excluded. As shown in Appendix A, excluded profits equal included profits when the rebate
share (1 - ) equals the insurance coverage share (1 - ). Assuming that the entrant and
incumbent have symmetric demand and marginal costs, the incumbent's bid is the same as
the entrant's and we assume that the PBM uses a coin toss to break the tie. Because the




                                              63
firm's bid leaves it indifferent between being included and being excluded, the firm receives
its outside option profits in either case, and the PBM retains the extra rebate payment.23
       To compare profit of the entrant to the old drug class, see the expressions below:


 excluded
 e,o      = (pexcluded
              i,o
                            excluded
                       - m)qe,o
                                ( - )a     (2 - 2 )bdm                           ( - )b(b + d)m
 included
 i,o      =       pexcluded
                   i,o      +            +             -m           excluded
                                                                   qe,o      +
                                (2b - d)   (4b2 - d2 )                              (2b + d)



       As shown above, as long as  > , the included drug makes higher profits. Further,
profits for the included drug are increasing in , and the difference in profitability between
the included and excluded drug is also increasing in . Profits for the included drug are
equal to profits for the excluded drug when  = , since at this point the marginal revenue
per unit sold is the same for included and excluded drugs, as is the quantity sold. The drug
company would be willing to bid a maximum rebate level of up to 1 -  = 1 -  for inclusion
on the formulary.
       Now, we can compare price, quantity, and profitability of the entrant under the open
formulary regime compared to the closed formulary regime. The entrant's price net of the
PBM rebate under the open formulary is higher than the price of the excluded drug in the
closed formulary.

                                                 (1 - )a   ( - )bdm
                            popen   excluded
                             e,o - pe,o      =           +
                                                 (2b - d) (4b2 - d2 )
Under the sufficient condition that   , it will hold that the the entrant's drug price is
strictly higher under the open formulary than if it were excluded from coverage.


                                         popen   excluded
                                          e,o > pe,o

  23
    For simplicity, we do not model demand for PBM services. In practice, some of the PBM's rebate may
be passed on to consumers or retained as PBM profit.




                                                  64
   Further, the entrant's quantity sold is also strictly larger under the open formulary than
when it is excluded.

                        open    excluded     (1 - )b(b - d)m ( - )b2 dm
                       qe,o  - qe,o      =                  +
                                                 (2b + d)     (4b2 - d2 )

As long as    and b > d, it will also hold that:

                                              open    excluded
                                             qe,o  > qe,o


   Because the entrant's price and quantity are both strictly larger under the open formulary
than when the entrant is excluded, it follows that entrant's strictly profits are higher under
the open formulary:
                                         open  excluded
                                         e,o > e,o      .


A.4     Upstream investment decisions
   A firm will choose whether to invest in the old or new drug class by comparing expected
profits and success rates of drugs in each class. When there are no exclusions, a potential
entrant's expected returns at the time of its R&D decision are given by:
                                   
                                   n open if develop for class o
                              e      e,o
                           E [ ] =
                                   o  - if develop for class n
                                             e,n


The firm therefore chooses to develop for the old class as long as

                                                      n
                                             open
                                             e,o >      e,n .                               (5)
                                                      o

   In general, the old drug class will be more attractive when the likelihood of successful
development is higher, when there is a large base of potential consumer demand (e.g., if it is a
common condition), or if the firm's drug is more differentiated from that of the incumbent's.
However, when there is a threat of exclusion, the entrant anticipates needing to bid for
access to the PBM's formulary in the event it creates an FDA approved drug for the old
class. The firm has a probably o of developing a successful drug in the old class, in which


                                                    65
case it will enter its maximum rebate bid to be included in the formulary and win half the
time. However, any ex post returns to being included in the formulary are bid away, so that
the entrant expects to receive only its outside option: revenues in the case when its drug is
excluded.
   Meanwhile, profits from developing an entrant for the new drug class do not depend on
whether the formulary is open or closed, because we assume that drugs can only be excluded
when there is a viable alternative. The potential entrant's new criterion for developing in
class o when exclusions are permitted is given by:

                                                  n
                                     excluded
                                     e,o      >     e,n .                                 (6)
                                                  o

The criterion differs from the no-exclusion condition given in Equation (5) only in the
lefthand side, which had a excluded
                           e,o      instead of open
                                               e,o . As shown above profits are higher

when there is an open formulary so that open
                                        e,o  > excluded
                                               e,o      . The model therefore predicts
that the introduction of an exclusion policy leads firms to develop relatively fewer drugs for
the older class.




                                             66
B         Linking Drug Candidates to ATC4 Classes
       We matched the pipeline drug candidates in Cortellis to ATC4 codes in two ways: directly
via EphMRA codes and indirectly via ICD9 codes if the EphMRA codes were missing.
       Direct method: matching via EphMRA codes. Cortellis links drug candidates to
chemical drug classes (specifically the EphMRA code, which is a close derivative of the
ATC classification). Using a manually created crosswalk of EphMRA codes to ATC4 codes,
we used the EphMRA codes of the drug candidates to link the drugs to ATC4 classes. A
drug can be linked to many ATC4 classes, and we assigned equal weights of 1 to all ATC4
classes that directly matched to a given drug through their EphMRA codes.
       Indirect method: matching via ICD9 codes. An alternative way to link the drug
candidates to ATC4 classes is through the drugs' areas of therapeutic use (ICD9) provided
by Cortellis. Using the drug to ICD9 crosswalk from Cortellis, we linked to a crosswalk of
ICD9 to ATC4 codes created by Filzmoser et al. (2009), in which the authors assigned a
probabilistic match score of ICD9-ATC4 pairs.24 Since this results in a drug being matched
(indirectly via ICD9) to many ATC4s, we assigned the likelihood of an ATC4 matching to
a drug based on the probabilistic match scores from Filzmoser et al. (2009), such that the
assigned weights sum to 1 for each drug.
       For our main analyses, we matched the drug candidates to ATC4 codes using the direct
method via EphMRA codes and used the indirect method via ICD9 codes for drugs with
missing EphMRA codes. As shown in Appendix Table A.6, our results are similar regardless
of the linking method used.




  24
    Filzmoser et al. (2009) merged a dataset of prescriptions (with ATC4 codes) and a dataset of hospital
admissions (with ICD9 codes) at the patient-level. Since the ATC4 code of a patient's drug matches to many
diagnosis codes of the patient, the authors use a frequency-based measure to calculate a probabilistic match
score of an ICD9-ATC4 pair. They conduct this match specific to gender/age group of the patients. For our
analysis, we take the average match probability across the gender/age groups for a given ICD9-ATC4 pair.


                                                    67
