                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE SPILLOVER IMPACT OF INDEX INSURANCE ON AGRICULTURAL INVESTMENT
                 BY COTTON FARMERS IN BURKINA FASO

                                       Quentin Stoeffler
                                         Michael Carter
                                      Catherine Guirkinger
                                        Wouter Gelade

                                       Working Paper 27564
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27564


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2020




We are very grateful to Karim Pare and his team for excellent data collection efforts. We thank
Thomas Barré for useful comments and suggestions, as well as seminar participants at Istanbul
Technical University, Bahçeehir University, Boaziçi University and various conferences. We
also thank Inclusive Guarantee and SOFITEX for their support and for providing access to data.
This project was made possible by generous funding from the United States Agency for
International Development through the BASIS Assets and Market Access Innovation Lab grant
No: EDH-A-00-06-0003-00. Quentin Stoeffler also acknowledges support from Istanbul
Technical University's Bilimsel Aratirma Projeleri (BAP) unit, grant number SAB-2018-41143.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Quentin Stoeffler, Michael Carter, Catherine Guirkinger, and Wouter Gelade. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Spillover Impact of Index Insurance on Agricultural Investment by Cotton Farmers in
Burkina Faso
Quentin Stoeffler, Michael Carter, Catherine Guirkinger, and Wouter Gelade
NBER Working Paper No. 27564
July 2020
JEL No. G22,I38,O12,O13,Q12

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper examines whether agricultural insurance can boost investment by small scale farmers
in West Africa. We conduct a randomized evaluation to analyze the impacts of index insurance
for cotton farmers in Burkina Faso. We find no impact of insurance on cotton, but, consistent
with microeconomic theory, we find significant spillover impacts on investment in other
agricultural activities. Furthermore, the effects of insurance payouts on farmers hit by a shock
confirm the potential of index insurance as a risk-management tool. However, we uncover
important flaws in the implementation of the project that limited its impacts. Overall, this study
suggests a promising role of index insurance for stimulating investment, but also draws attention
to key challenges for an efficient delivery of insurance to small farmers. Finally, the hybrid,
mixed methods RCT design that we employ offers lessons for the evaluation of complex
interventions where trust, understanding and timing are all important.

Quentin Stoeffler                               Catherine Guirkinger
ITU Maçka kampusu, Isletme fakultesi            CRED, University of Namur
Ekonomi Bolumu, Sisli/Istanbul                  Repart de la vierge 8
Istanbul 34365                                  5000 Namur
Turkey                                          Belgium
stoeffler@itu.edu.tr                            catherine.guirkinger@unamur.be

Michael Carter                                  Wouter Gelade
Department of Agricultural and                  Union Nationale des Mutualités Libres
Resource Economics                              Brussels
University of California, Davis                 wouter.gelade@gmail.com
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
mrcarter@ucdavis.edu
1     Introduction
An increasing amount of evidence suggests that the lack of instruments for risk management (saving,
credit and insurance) plays a major role in limiting poor households' ability to accumulate assets
and improve their future well-being. Uninsured risk prevents households from perfectly smoothing
consumption (Dercon, 2002; Kazianga & Udry, 2006), and causes adverse shocks to have harmful
lifetime consequences (Hoddinott & Kinsey, 2001; Alderman et al. , 2006). Besides the impact of
realized shocks, exposure to risk also discourages investment in profitable but risky activities, as
households smooth income (Morduch, 1995). Farmers in Sub-Saharan Africa for example have been
shown to adopt low-risk, low-return portfolio strategies, such as cultivating "safe" crops (Dercon, 1996;
Stoeffler, 2016). This situation is striking in the Sahel in general and in Burkina Faso in particular,
where levels of risk are high and overall levels of investments in input and productive assets are low.
    If risk thus deepens and perpetuates low living standards in Burkina and elsewhere in rural Africa,
then insurance or other instruments to transfer risk from farmers would seem to be promising poverty
alleviation tools. By directly offsetting the most deleterious consequences of realized shocks, insur-
ance should indirectly allow rural households to prudentially invest more in risky, but high returning
agricultural activities. However conventional agricultural insurance is infeasible in most rural areas
of sub-Saharan Africa.1 On the other hand, index insurance has emerged as a promising alternative
to traditional insurance contracts. By making indemnity transfers contingent on an index (such as
average yields or rainfall within a locality) rather than on an individual outcome, index insurance is
immune to moral hazard and eliminates the need for costly individual loss verification. The draw-
back is that insurance payments based on the index are not perfectly correlated with actual farmers'
losses, and that the protection it provides farmers may be relatively low (an issue described as "basis
risk").2 Despite this weaknesses of index insurance, and the controversy that sometimes surrounds
it (Economist, December 13), there is a small, but growing body of evidence that insurance protec-
tion indeed boosts small-scale farmer investment in protected activity (Mobarak & Rosenzweig, 2012;
Karlan et al. , 2014; Cai et al. , 2015; Cole et al. , 2017; Jensen et al. , 2017; Elabed & Carter, 2018).
    The goals of this study are threefold. In the first instance we aim to increase the evidence base on
the impacts of agricultural insurance. Within the framework of a randomized control trial, we examine
the impacts of insurance not only on the insured crop but more generally on the whole portfolio of
agricultural activities. We also investigate the ex-post effects of insurance on farmers hit by a negative
shock that triggered insurance payments. Second, our particular study allows a window into the
implementation challenges that stand between index insurance programs and their expected impacts.
Third and finally, we illustrate the advantages of using mixed, quantitative and qualitative methods
to evaluate a complex intervention like insurance that offers infrequent, stochastic benefits.
    Despite its compelling logic, index insurance to smallholder farmers is difficult to implement (Jensen
& Barrett, 2017). Two of these challenges are particularly relevant to this study. First, the agricultural
calendar is fixed and unforgiving of implementation delays. The "risk reduction dividend" of increased
   1 The fixed costs of loss verification make it uneconomic to investigate losses for small-scale producers whose total

insurance premium are small. In practice, this led to poor loss verification, morally hazardous behavior and high loss
ratios for insurance companies (see Hazell (1992) for more detail and empirical examples).
   2 Clarke et al. (2012) show that weather-based index insurance correlates poorly with farmer losses. More general

overviews on this problem are given in the review papers by Miranda & Farrin (2012); Jensen & Barrett (2017) and
Carter et al. (2017)
investment cannot take place if insurance is delivered late, after key planting decisions have been
made. Second, insurance requires substantial trust on the part of the insured farmer that the financial
institution company will payoff as required in the event of a bad crop year in the future. Note that
the trust requirement under insurance is precisely the opposite of the trust required for a loan, where
the institution must trust that the borrowing farmer will repay in the future. Failure to address this
trust deficit in the case of insurance can result in low uptake and a variant of implementation failure.3
    Index insurance projects also present evaluation as well as implementation challenges. In contrast
to an RCT of, say, the health impacts of a biologic treatment, in an evaluation of social or economic
interventions, human cognition and agency intervene between the the treatment that is offered and the
treatment that is received (Barrett & Carter, 2010). The offer of a reliable insurance contract may be
received as such by some individuals, even as others may perceive the contract as untrustworthy effort
to to defraud them. This heterogeneity in treatment received not only can result in lower compliance,
but it may also induce an additional layer of impact heterogeneity, with those fully trusting the
contract potentially responding more robustly than those who do not.4 In short, the fact that the
treatment received is itself heterogeneous complicates inference about program efficacy. In addition,
index insurance offers what might be termed stochastic benefits, making payments only in the case
of relatively infrequent events (e.g., the one in ten year drought). Absent a long-run study, or a
geographically diversified research design, it is difficult to actual observe the performance and ex post
impacts of insurance, i.e. impacts on households that actually received insurance payments.5
    These myriad implementation and evaluation challenges motivate our reliance on a mixed research
design that draws on both quantitative and qualitative methods. As discussed by White (2013),
qualitative methods can help parse out the meaning of reduced form findings that emerge from even
a well-designed randomized control trial (RCT). Implementation failures as well as trust deficits are
both things that can perhaps best be probed using qualitative methods (see for instance the study of
micro-credit in Morocco by Morvant-Roux et al. 2014). Moreover, as we shall see in the case of this
study, the flexibility of qualitative methods allows some opportunities to learn from rare events (like
severe crop failure) even when the sample size considerations would doom quantitative methods.
    Against this backdrop of methodological challenges, this paper studies the impacts and implemen-
tation challenges of an index insurance contract designed for cotton farmers in Burkina Faso. Cotton
farming in Burkina Faso, as in other West African countries, is a profitable but risky activity, given
the crop's vulnerability to the region's variable weather patterns. Small-scale farmers often forgo this
profitable opportunity (or limit the area cultivated and their credit demand for cotton) in order to
    3 Lending institutions manage any trust deficit by requiring collateral from the borrower, whereas there is no similar

recourse for the insured farmer to use to bond the behavior of the financial institution that offers insurance.
    4 As discussed below in the specific case of this study, the decision to purchase insurance was a group one, raising the

specter that some of those insured may have had no trust in the insurance, while others may not have even known that
their group chose to purchase insurance. In addition, index insurance works best for those whose individual losses best
track the index, raising the possibility that some members of an insured group may have a pattern of yield loss that is
objectively not well correlated with average losses in the group. Mobarak & Rosenzweig (2012) and Jensen et al. (2018)
discuss the impact of a similar "basis risk" problem on the demand for individually purchased index insurance contracts.
    5 Most studies actually look at ex ante investment effects, meaning the impact of the insurance on production decisions

(because of the protection it provides) before households know whether they will have a shock and actually receive
insurance payments. Exceptions index based livestock insurance study in Kenya that covered 7 years, during which
one major drought occurred, allowing Janzen & Carter (2018) to study the ex post impacts of the insurance. Taking
a different approach, Boucher et al. (2020) spatially diversified a 2 year RCT across multiple regions in two countries,
allowing them to observe shocks in some regions and observe their ex post impacts.



                                                             2
minimize their exposure to risk. This "risk rationing" strategy (Boucher et al. , 2008) has adverse
effects on the entire farming system, because cultivating cotton is often the only channel for Burk-
inabe households to obtain agricultural inputs. Specifically, cotton inputs are used for other crops
such as maize, and protecting cotton production may also have spillover effects on farmers' other risky
agricultural activities (other crops or livestock herding) which are vulnerable to similar shocks. In
this context, insuring cotton has the potential to impact not only cotton production but the whole
household portfolio and farmers' long-term well-being, creating a "risk reduction dividend" by allowing
farmers to prudentially invest more in higher returning opportunities.
   This paper tests for such a risk reduction dividend following the introduction of cotton insurance
in Burkina Faso using what White (2013) calls a mixed methods RCT. Working with commercial
partners, the research team implemented a randomized control trial that involved 1000 households in
80 farmer groups located in the cotton-growing Houndé region, in southwestern Burkina Faso. Half of
the groups were randomly selected and offered the insurance product for purchase. Further, premium
price subsidies were used as part of an encouragement design and were randomly distributed within
groups that were offered the insurance. The insurance product is an area-yield insurance which pays
farmer groups when their yields fall below a specified level. The product was sold to farmers on credit
and provided reliable protection (see the discussion in Elabed et al. 2013 who implemented a similar
design in neighboring Mali).
   We measure the impact of being insured on farmers' cotton production and other agricultural
investments. We consider area cultivated, input use and yields for cotton, the directly insured crop. In
addition, we measure the spillover effect of being insured on food crops, sesame and livestock, which
are likely to be affected by the risk reduction provided by the index insurance. We first estimate
the Intention-to-treat (ITT) effect in the treatment group (all farmers who were offered the product).
Second, we use premium subsidies as an instrument to estimate the Average treatment effect (ATE)
on farmers that did purchased the product. The premium subsidy was efficient at boosting demand,
and can thus be used as a relevant instrument.
   Overall uptake of the insurance was high (46% of treatment group farmers), in contrast to some
other studies of index insurance pilot projects. Despite the promising take-up of the cotton insurance,
we find that the insurance had no detectable impact on investment in cotton, the directly insured
activity. We estimate a relatively precise 0 effect on cotton area, input use, credit and yield. On the
other hand, we find large impacts on sesame production (17 percentage point) and livestock herding
(about 1 Tropical Livestock Unit).
   Our mixed methods approach allows us to unpack this seemingly puzzling configuration of results,
with null direct, but positive spillover impacts. We followed up the quantitative data collection with
qualitative research in 11 of the 80 farmer groups that comprise the quantitative study (2 control
farmer groups, 9 treatment farmer groups, including the three that suffered severe yield losses in the
last year of the RCT). We find:

   · High, but incomplete levels of trust that the insurance company would indeed return and com-
     pensate losses in the event of a bad year;

   · Severe implementation problems in the form of a late insurance sales, with some farmers ex-
     plicitly noting that these timing issues prevented them from investing more in their cotton, but


                                                   3
      empowered to invest in other agricultural activities that take place on a later calendar;

    · A mixed message on the reliability of the insurance in the three farmer groups that experienced
      shocks. Payouts did eventually occur as promised, but late, and only after many farmers had
      engaged in costly coping strategies to repay loan liabilities. Fortunately, the delayed payments
      allowed farmers to eventually undo most of the damage caused by costly coping strategies, and
      most reported continued willingness to purchase the insurance.6

While the time horizon of this study was a modest two years, these findings indicate the layers of
implementation challenges that must be overcome if a trust-intensive instrument like insurance is to
really work over the longer term.
    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the literature on
risk and agricultural insurance in developing countries, focusing on spillover effects of insurance on
the full portfolio of activities. Section 3 zooms in on agriculture and cotton in Burkina Faso and
introduces the cotton insurance pilot project developed for this study. Section 4 presents the research
design and methods, as well as tests for baseline balance between treatment and control households.
Section 5 presents results from our mixed-method approach regarding cotton production, other crops
and activities, and the impact of insurance payments. Section 6 concludes with reflections on the
pitfalls and opportunities for agricultural index insurance.


2     Risk, investment and insurance
One of the objectives of index insurance is to stimulate smallholder farmers' investments in income-
generating activities. However, insuring one crop or activity is likely to have complex, spillover effects
on farmers' other activities. After a brief review of what economic theory suggests will be the impact
of insurance on farmers' portfolio of activities, this section considers the empirical evidence to date on
this topic.


2.1     Insurance and farmers' portfolio of activities
Risk and uncertainty play key roles in farmers' management decisions. First, most farm activities
imply risk-return trade-offs so that risk preferences and the availability of insurance influence farmers'
willingness to invest in a given activity (Dercon, 1998). Second farmers typically invest in different
activities and when choosing the composition of their portfolio of activities, they balance risk exposure
and expected income (Barrett et al. , 2001). For example, small farmers plant different crops and
often combine crop production with livestock rearing activities in the hope to stabilize their income
in a context of severe liquidity constraints and market failures (Dercon, 1996, 1998). Furthermore,
livestock herds frequently include different species of animals for the same risk diversification purpose
(Fafchamps et al. , 1998).7
   6 All groups that received payouts in fact renewed their contracts the following year, whereas the renewal rate was

modest for farmer groups that had no received payouts.
   7 Other factors may play a role in the diversification of farm activities. The smoothing of labour demand over time is

an example: planting crops that require labour at different moment in time allows farmers to optimize the use of their
time.



                                                           4
   In this context, insuring one activity is likely to influence a farmer's entire portfolio of investments.
Under a range of models of decision making under risk (Eeckhoudt et al. 1996; Hennessy 1998;
Ramaswami 1993; Chambers & Quiggin 2002; Carter & Barrett 2006), insurance is unambiguously
expected to stimulate investment in the insured activity as this investment becomes safer (Yu &
Sumner, 2018 give a quick review). In contrast, the impact of insurance on investment in other risky
activities in farmers portfolios is less straightforward as many effects are at play. First insurance
may reduce the need for diversification, and thereby investment in other activities. At the same
time, insuring one crop may indirectly protect another crop's returns if returns across the insured
and uninsured crops are positively correlated, increasing a farmer's willingness to invest in the directly
uninsured crop as well. Finally, the reduction in the riskiness of the portfolio may increase the farmer's
willingness to take risks in general, including in activities not directly insured.
   Several strands of the literature on decision making under risk provide formalizations of this prob-
lem. Standard portfolio theory (following a mean-variance approach) suggests that insuring one ac-
tivity would affect investments in another risky activity, but only if returns across these activities are
positively correlated (Eeckhoudt et al. , 2005). In a more general expected utility framework, insuring
one activity would change the levels of investment in other activities, even if returns are not correlated
across activities. Gollier & Kimball (1996) explore the conditions for independent investments to be
substitute (implying that insurance would decrease investment in the non-insured activity). They show
that substitutability obtains if absolute prudence is decreasing and larger than twice the absolute risk
aversion. This assumption is not, however innocuous, and Gollier (2004) provides examples when the
opposite result will hold.
   The problem of insurance spillover on to other activities becomes slightly simpler if the farmer is
constrained in her ability to modify her investment in the directly insured activity (cotton in our case;
see Section 3.1). In the presence of such a constraint, insurance reduces the "additive background risk"
that the farmer faces when deciding how much to invest in other risky activities. Eeckhoudt et al.
(1996) show that a decrease in an independent background risk increases the demand for risky assets,
provided absolute risk aversion is decreasing and convex. If the background risk is positively correlated
with the other risky assets (a likely situation in rainfed agriculture), the result obtains a fortiori, as
the insurance also indirectly insures the other activity (Tsetlin & Winkler, 2005).
   Finally, the impact of insurance on investment in a risk-free component of the portfolio is more
straightforward. As insurance reduces the need for hedging, farmers are expected to decrease their
investment in risk-free hedging activities (Karlan et al. , 2014).
   In short, theory suggests that insuring one crop will decrease investments in risk-free activities and
affect investments in other risky activities in directions that are not clear a priori (and will depend on
risk preferences and correlation in returns between the activities). In the specific case where a farmer
is constrained in her ability to increase investment in the directly insured crop, she is likely to invest
more in other farming activities that correlate positively with the insured activity.


2.2    Index insurance and investment
Index insurance has emerged as a policy option to reduce risk faced by poor households (Barnett &
Mahul, 2007; Barnett et al. , 2008). Classic insurance products that require individual loss verification


                                                     5
are extremely expensive to manage due to pervasive problems of moral-hazard, adverse selection and
long implementation delays (Hazell, 1992). Index insurance on the other hand eliminates the need
for assessing individual losses as payouts depend on the value of an index correlated with the shocks
faced by farmers. The index can be based on weather events (Gine et al. , 2008), on average livestock
mortality rate in a region (Bertram-Huemmer & Kraehnert, 2017), average crop yields (Elabed et al. ,
2013), or on satellite-based prediction of forage scarcity (Chantarat et al. , 2013) or crop losses (Flatnes
et al. , 2018).8 Relative to conventional, individual loss-verified insurance, index insurance can result
in substantial savings and address issues of adverse selection and moral hazard, if it is based on an
index that is easily measurable and impossible to manipulate by the insured or the insurer (Miranda,
1991).
    The major drawback of index insurance is that it imperfectly correlates with a farmer's losses,
implying that the insured farmer faces uncovered or "basis risk" (Miranda & Farrin, 2012; Clement
et al. , 2018). The index may trigger payments when the farmer's did not experience a negative shock
(false positives), or, worse, the index does not trigger a payment when the farmer experiences losses
(false negatives). The extent of basis risk depends on the quality and granularity of the index, and the
value of the protection offered to farmers varies greatly across index insurance products (Carter et al. ,
2017; Clarke et al. , 2012; Barre & Stoeffler, 2017). While index insurance has raised enthusiasm among
government and development agencies, take-up has sometimes been disappointingly low (Binswanger-
Mkhize, 2012). Many factors contribute to explain this outcome, including low quality of the products
offered, high costs, lack of trust in the provider, low financial literacy.9
    When successfully implemented, index products have been shown to help farmers cope with ex-post
shocks and to manage ex-ante risk. Cai et al. (2015) and Jensen et al. (2017) show that livestock
insurance stimulated investment in the insured animals, while Janzen & Carter (2018) provide evidence
that it protects consumption and livestock holding when shocks occur. With respect to crop index
insurance, Karlan et al. (2014) find that insured maize farmers in Ghana increased investment in
maize by 13-17%, and that their ability to absorb shocks improved. Similarly, results from a study in
Mali indicate that, once offered area-yield insurance for cotton production, cotton farmers increased
their area cultivated for cotton and their purchase of input by approximatively 25-40% (Elabed &
Carter, 2018).
    The evidence regarding spillover effects on investment in non-insured activities is thinner but sug-
gests that, in line with theory, these effects may be negative or positive. Karlan et al. (2014) found that
insured farmers reduce their investments in low risk/low return "hedging" activities such as non-farm
labor and mango harvesting. In contrast, the Cai et al. (2015) study of sow insurance in China finds
that if spillover exists on other livestock (besides the insured sows), they are positive. In a different
context, Gehrke (2019) shows that providing employment guarantees (through the NREGS program
in India) induces farmers to shift their production towards riskier and more profitable crops. Finally
Alcaraz et al. (2017) find strong evidence for health insurance to trigger substantial increases in edu-
   8 Benami  et al. (2020) review the evolution of different indices that have been used for index insurance.
   9 Forcomprehensive reviews, see Carter et al. (2017), Jensen & Barrett (2017) and Platteau et al. (2017). See Clarke
(2016) for a theoretical discussion of the relationship between index insurance quality and demand from a conventional,
expected utility perspective. Building on insights from the behavioral economics literature, Elabed & Carter (2015)
show that ambiguity avers individuals will exhibit excess sensitivity to low quality, basis risk-laden contracts compared
to expected utility maximizers.



                                                           6
cation investments in Mexico.10 Our study contributes to this emerging literature on index insurance
impacts, and in particular on the changes in the allocation of investments among insured farmers.


3     Cotton, risk and the index insurance pilot in Burkina Faso
While index insurance has been promoted as an answer to risk in developing countries in general, the
actual success of each product depends on a series of factors related to its context and design. This
section describes how the organization of the cotton sector in Burkina Faso allows the design of a
promising index insurance product, while posing some specific implementation challenges. Moreover,
understanding cotton production and its relationship with other activities is important for framing the
potential impacts of index insurance in this setting.


3.1       Farming systems and the role of cotton
As stated by Barrett et al. (2001), "diversification is the norm" in rural Africa. Table 1 shows
descriptive statistics from our baseline survey (see section 4.1) regarding the portfolio of agricultural
activities and their profitability. At baseline, the median farmer in our study area cultivated 3 hectares
of cereal grains (split between maize and drought-resistant sorghum and millet), 3 hectares of cotton
and a mix of secondary crop on another 2 hectares.11 On these two hectares, farmers cultivated crops
such as peanut, beans and sesame (on which more below). Markets for selling grain are relatively
thin and localized, as food crop production goes primarily to home consumption. In addition to crop
cultivation, livestock herding is an important part of farmers' livelihoods and a major productive
assets, used as a plough animal, or for generating animal product and for reproduction. As described
by Savadogo et al. (1998), animal traction greatly improves land and labor productivity in Burkina
Faso. However, some farmers have been found to limit their investments in livestock due to lump-sum
costs and high levels of risk, focusing in lower-risk, lower-return activities (Dercon, 1998). In Burkina
Faso as well, all these activities are vulnerable to common, correlated covariate shocks such as low
rainfall (Fafchamps et al. , 1998; Kazianga & Udry, 2006).
    In Burkina Faso and other Sahelian countries, sesame has become an attractive cash alternative
to cotton as sesame requires lower input and time investments, and can be sold rapidly after harvest
(Mangnus et al. , 2015; Stoeffler, 2016; Dossa et al. , 2017). The emerging importance of sesame seed
as a secondary cash crop is visible in our data. Among the control group farmers in our study (those
not offered insurance), the fraction cultivating sesame grew from 20% in the 2014 baseline to 39% in
2015. Amongst those growing sesame in the control group, the average area of sesame cultivated grew
from 1 to 1.4 hectares over that same time period.12
    While our data do not permit a full cost accounting for all crops, Table 1 gives an idea of the
importance and returns to each of these primary agricultural activities. Sorghum and millet are
drought resistant, but net returns to cotton are 50% higher than returns to these crops.13 Net returns
 10 The   authors suggest that the increase may be driven by an income effect.
 11 Figures   reported in this section are for the median farmer.
   12 The increasing trend in sesame cultivation over the period is consistent with other sources such as the national

figures from the FAO (http://www.fao.org/faostat/).
   13 Net revenue approximates returns to family labor and land.




                                                          7
                       Table 1: Baseline Agricultural portfolio and profitability
                      Mean Standard Deviation Median Observations
                            Crop Area (hectares)
 Total field area      10.0             7.4             8           1010
 Cotton                 3.9             3.4             3           1003
 Millet & Sorghum       1.7             1.7             1           1007
 Maize                  2.8             2.7             2           1007
 Sesame                0.19             0.5             0           1010
                       Value of Production ('000 CFA)
 Cotton               819.6           916.4           517.0         1003
 Millet & Sorghum 106.9               134.8            68.4         1007
 Maize                458.5           525.1           294.0         1007
 Sesame (2015)*        34.7            70.8             0           1010
                   Net Revenue** ('000 CFA per-hectare)
 Cotton                99.0            83.4            93.9          993
 Millet & Sorghum      62.6            42.7            53.2          764
 Maize                 96.5           103.4            94.4          953
 Sesame                81.7            56.9            72.0          396
 Source : 2014 baseline survey.
 Market exchange rate over the time of the study averaged 550 CFA/USD
 * Data on 2014 baseline sesame production and inputs were not collected.
 ** Net Revenue is the gross value of production minus cash inputs


to maize compare favorably to those for cotton, but the market for maize and other grains is thin and
highly localized. Comparing cotton to sesame, the other cash crop alternative, we see that net revenues
per-hectare are about 25% higher for cotton. At the same time, cotton has substantially higher cash
exposure than sesame as its cash costs per-hectare are roughly 10-times higher than those for sesame.
Elabed et al. (2013) report that in neighboring Mali, cotton farmers find it difficult to repay loans and
manage family obligations once yields fall below 750 kilogram per-hectare. Long-term data from the
Burkina study area show that there is a 20% chance that average yields in a village farmer group will
fall below this critical level. Individual risk exposure is more pronounced as individual farmer yields
fluctuate more than their village average. In the 2014 baseline study year, fully 9% of farmers failed
to produce even the 440 kilograms per-hectare, the amount required to fully reimburse principal and
interest on the production loan.14
    This risk-return profile makes cotton a promising target for insurance coverage. The well-organized
cotton value chain facilitates the development of area-yield index products and its delivery to farmers.
SOFITEX, the cotton company in the study area is highly centralized and enjoys a local monopsony.15
Each cotton farmer belongs to a farmer group (GPC or Groupes de Producteurs de Cotton ), which are
comprised of ten to forty farmers from the same community. SOFITEX provides all inputs on credit
  14 There is also a certain price uncertainty, reinforced by the length of the production timeline described above. The

monosony cotton processing company, SOFITEX, guarantees a minimum price at the beginning of the cotton season,
but this "floor price" is low and the final price fluctuates. Food crops are "safe" in that they are mostly cultivated for
self-consumption and isolate farmers from market price risk as producers and as consumers.
  15 SOFITEX began as a parastatal national monopoly. Other West African countries had a similar model, although

most countries have not privatized their cotton company. SOFITEX is now a private company, with the government of
Burkina Faso owning 49% of its capital. SOFITEX currently controls about 70% of the cotton crop in Burkina, with
the residual now handled by two smaller companies that operate in well-specified (and separate) geographies.




                                                            8
(seeds, fertilizer, pesticide, etc.) using the group's standing cotton crop as collateral.16
    The SOFITEX input package consists of a fixed quantity of seeds, fertilizers and pesticides per
hectare. The cost of the input package for farmers is about 90,000 CFA per-hectare, and the annual
interest rate is between 6 and 10%.17 In fact, the cotton company is the only source of formal credit
for inputs, and is the main source of input purchased by farmers. In theory, farmers are not allowed
to use these inputs on other crops, and input diversion is monitored by the company's agents (Agents
Techniques de Coton, ATCs ). In practice, it is widely known and accepted by SOFITEX that part
of the inputs obtained on credit are applied to other crops, by decreasing fertilizer usage per hectare
below technical recommendations for cotton. This makes cotton production central for farmers' entire
crop portfolio. In particular, fertilizer is used to produce maize, the primary food crop in the region
(Traore 2020).
    The tight value chain for cotton in Burkina creates the opportunity for an index insurance product.
Because SOFITEX purchases the entire production from farmer groups, it has detailed information on
annual production and yields at the group level. As discussed in section 3.2 below, the availability of
these data permits the low cost implementation of a reliable area yield-based index insurance. However,
a disadvantage of this well-structured value chain is its rigidity. Farmer groups need to aggregate and
communicate their demand for cotton credit (the number of hectares to be planted) 7-8 months before
cotton is actually planted. The top half of Figure 1 shows the timeline of agricultural activities. Credit
demands are made as early as September, for sowing in May/June of the following year. Harvesting
takes place between November and January, with farmers only receiving payment for their crop in
April (i.e., 18 months after the farmers arranged for credit). The rigidity of the cotton value chain,
combined with its risks, pushes farmers to be conservative in their input requests from SOFITEX,
and limits their capacity to invest when conditions change in the short term (e.g. when insurance is
provided).18 In contrast, the agricultural calendar for sesame is more favorable: farmers do not need
to purchase inputs in advance, planting occurs later during the rainy season, and sales are made right
after the harvest (see Figure 1).
    Finally the financing scheme also entails risk for farmers who are jointly liable for the GPC cotton
loan. If the production of one farmer in the GPC is not sufficient to cover her debt, other producers'
revenues are reduced to reimburse the entire GPC loan. Farmers are thus not only exposed to weather
risk, but also to the morally hazardous behavior of their neighbors, a feature discussed in detail by
Gelade & Guirkinger (2018).19 Thus, the financial risks that insurance could reduce is both at the
individual and at the group level.
    First, at the individual level, having insufficient cotton yields to cover her loan implies that a farmer
needs to either (i) liquidate productive assets to reimburse SOFITEX; or (ii) suffer a social penalty
for having other farmers reimbursing her loan under the joint-liability, in addition to reimbursing the
  16 Specifically, SOFITEX provides inputs in kind to farmers at the beginning of the agricultural season. When it

purchases the harvest, SOFITEX pays farmers for the value of the production but deducts the value of the input
package. Because SOFITEX is the only buyer (selling elsewhere is illegal and not observed in practice) it uses de facto
cotton as a collateral and perfectly enforces the reimbursement of the loan, as long as the yields of the GPC are sufficient.
  17 The loan is formally held by EcoBank.
  18 These features of the cotton system and timing have been well described theoretically and empirically by Saitone

et al. (2018) and Theriault et al. (2013).
  19 Flatnes & Carter (2019) suggest adding individual collateral into joint liability contracts in order to control this

intra-group moral hazard problem.




                                                             9
                                      Figure 1: Cotton and insurance timeline


jointly-liable farmers in a future year.
   Second, at the group level, while defaulting is a rare event, it has severe economic costs. Indeed,
SOFITEX bans the farmers of a defaulting group from borrowing in the future. Such a ban means losing
access for several years both to cotton production and to input for other crops. In this context, when a
group experiences a bad year and a low production, it generates great tensions in its local community
(Gelade & Guirkinger, 2018). Our qualitative results provide further evidence of the economic and
social costs of defaulting on the entire GPC loan (see section 5.3). In fact, farmers tend to be eager
to pay back their loans for avoiding the costs associated with default, and liquidate productive assets
or reduce consumption to do so, with important potential adverse consequences for their long-term
well-being.
   In this highly risky context, farmers ration their demand for credit. Indeed, farmer's risk exposure
has a negative ex-ante impact on cotton production at the intensive and at the extensive margin:
it pushes some cotton farmers to take smaller loans to decrease their exposure to defaults, and it
discourages or excludes some farmers from entering the cotton sector at all. As a result, financial
instruments that would reduce the group exposure to covariate risk are potentially in high demand,
and might enable farmers to borrow more, produce more and increase their agricultural income.20
   In sum, the organization of the cotton sectors generates both opportunities for designing a high-
quality index insurance product, and implementation frictions that may affect the impact of index
insurance.
 20 Elabed   & Carter (2018) find exactly this effect in sister pilot in neighboring Mali.




                                                             10
3.2        Index insurance for cotton farmers
The pilot insurance project analyzed in this paper started in Burkina Faso in 2014 in the Houndé region.
It was implemented by Inclusive Guarantee, in collaboration with SOFITEX and other commercial
partners.21 The insurance contract is based on a area-yield index (modeled on the contract described
in Elabed et al. , 2013), and is sold as part of the cotton credit package by the cotton company,
SOFITEX, eliminating the need for farmers to finance the premium payment up-front. This feature not
only eliminates liquidity constraints to the purchase of insurance, but also makes it easier for farmers
with time inconsistent preferences to purchase the insurance (Casaburi & Willis, 2018). Farmer groups
had to collectively decide whether or not to purchase the insurance. Given the joint liability nature of
the cotton loan contract, individuals were not allowed to deviate from the collective decision and if the
farmer group decided to buy coverage, then the entire cotton area cultivated by every group member
was insured and each individual was liable for their share of the premium. In 2018, SOFITEX decided
to scale-up the contract nationwide and to offer it to all its affiliated farmer groups in seven cotton
production regions.22
    Area yield contracts are both easy to understand and generally provide high quality protection
to farmers. Area yield contracts have long been recognized to be a reliable form of index insurance
(Miranda, 1991). Indeed, alternative indexes to construct insurance products, such as those based
on rainfall levels or vegetation indices measured from satellites, are only proxies of what one would
like to measure directly, which is yields in a given area. Using area-yields directly outperforms, in
theory, these proxies.23 Carter & Chiu (2018) provide a recent empirical example using the Tanzanian
rice data analyzed by Flatnes et al. (2018), showing that while expensive to implement outside of
monopsony buyers like SOFITEX, the area-yield product easily passes well-defined insurance quality
standards.
    The Burkina Faso index insurance product is based on the yields obtained from the entire farmer
group, and measured accurately by SOFITEX (which pays farmers based on this measurement). The
cotton insurance contract provides three levels of payment. When group yields are below 20% of the
yield distribution (a one in five years event), farmers receive a "small payout" of 11,200 CFA per-
hectare insured.24 This insurance payment was designed to correspond to the value of the insurance
premium (so that the premium is reimbursed to farmers in case of small shock in practice). When
yields fall below 8% of the yield distribution, the insurance provides a "medium payout" of 34,000
CFA. Finally, in case of yields falling below 4% of the distribution (a 1 in 25 year event), the farmers
receive a "big payout" of 90,000 CFA per hectare, which corresponds to the value of the input loan
per-hectare. As such, the payments do not cover a farmer's full income (the value of the production
lost because of shocks), but prevents them from defaulting on their loan. The commercial price of the
insurance product was set to 11,200 CFA per hectare, or about 12% of the loan volume.25
  21 At the time of the study, Inclusive Guarantee was known as PlaNet Guarantee.
  22 The  newspaper Lefaso.net (Sidiber, 2018) reports on SOFITEX's plan to roll out the cotton insurance nationwide .
Stoeffler & Opuz (2020) analyze data from this expansion of the insurance program.
  23 For examples of low quality insurance products based on rainfall levels, see for instance Clarke et al. (2012).
  24 For reference, 656.07 CFA = 1 euro (fixed exchange rate).
  25 As the basis for designing insurance contracts, SOFITEX provided historical yield information for all farmer groups

in the study area. Farmer groups were clustered in five categories, depending on their historical average yield. The yield
distribution was estimated separately for each category, and each category was offered a different contract based on the
estimated distribution. The index insurance is built on a double trigger mechanism following the design by Elabed et al.



                                                           11
    The literature on index insurance emphasizes the problems associated with providing low quality
products to farmers, such as those plagued by high levels of basis risk and by a poor design in general
(see for example Clarke 2016; Jensen et al. 2016; Carter et al. 2017; Binswanger-Mkhize 2012). Clarke
et al. (2012) describe an index insurance product that provides almost random payouts to farmers,
rather than providing support when shocks occur. In contrast, the product sold to cotton farmers
in Burkina Faso protects their income relatively well. As Elabed et al. (2013) show for the same
insurance product in Mali, this area-yield contract performs well in terms of providing payments to
farmer groups with low yields: when yields are below the critical level of 750 kg/ha, farmers receive
payouts with a probability of 85%. The relatively high quality of the protection is due to the small
scale of the "area" (the farmer group) considered by the area-yield design. Were the contract designed
at a larger geographic scale, the false negative rate would be 45% instead. Analyzing the Burkina Faso
contract, Barre & Stoeffler (2017) show that the product is relatively efficient at stabilizing farmers'
cotton income, and passes some normative tests of index insurance quality.
    Despite these attractive design features, the implementation of the project suffered from a major
drawback: the timing of insurance sales. As described in section 3.2, cotton input demand have to be
made early in the season (October-November 2013). On the other hand, insurance sales for the same
season occurred late, when the agricultural activities were starting (May-June 2014). The bottom part
of Figure 1 shows the timing related to the index insurance product. Ideally, insurance sales would
have occurred much earlier, when cotton input demand occurred, so that farmers can adjust easily the
area cultivated and their input obtained from SOFITEX. Thus, the implementation issue (late sales)
combined with the rigidity of the cotton input provision chain constitute a constraint for obtaining an
impact on cotton production.
    Given these constraints, but under the assumption that insured farmers felt well protected by a high
quality product (as assumption queried later), what impacts could we expect on agricultural outcomes
and investment? We formulate three hypotheses in light of the framework and evidence discussed in
section 2.

    · Cotton area, inputs and yields:
      While theory suggests that insured farmers should increase their investment in the insured activ-
      ity the timing of insurance sales largely constrained farmers from adjusting in their loan demand
      and investment in cotton. Except to the extent that farmers may have reduced the diversion of
      cotton inputs to other crops, we expect little impact of the insurance on cotton area, inputs or
      yields.

    · Other risky crops and activities :
      Theory suggests that being constrained in their ability to adjust cotton production, insured
 (2013) in Mali. Farmers receive payments under two conditions. First, the farmer group yield needs to be below a
given threshold corresponding to its category of yields (e.g., yields below 800 kg/ha). Second, the other farmer groups
in the neighborhood need to be below a "neighborhood threshold" as well. This means that the other groups located
in the same area (same village or neighboring villages) need to have somewhat low yields as well. The neighborhood
condition was designed to avoid potential moral hazard issues, while still conditioning the payment on each group's
yield. Since farmers of a GPC live in the same village and are usually members of the same family, ethnic group or
religious community, there were concerns of potential coordination within one farmer group. The neighborhood condition
prevents such coordination by ensuring that yields are not particularly good in other groups in the area as well. The
"neighborhood threshold" is higher than the own farmer group threshold (e.g., yields in the neighborhood needs to be
below 1000 kg/ha).


                                                          12
      farmers would invest more in other risky and profitable activities. We thus expect insurance to
      positively impact sesame cultivation and livestock investment.

    · Staple food crops :
      If staple food crops play a self insurance role, we expect insurance to to decrease investment in
      these buffer activities.

The next section presents the research design employed to test these hypotheses.


4     Research methods and design
As discussed in the introduction, the implementation and evaluation of index insurance faces a number
of challenges that are rooted in the reality of agriculture and the nature of insurance itself. This
section reviews the hybrid, mixed methods RCT implemented to meet these challenges and carry out
this study.26


4.1     The RCT research design and surveys
The quantitative portion of this paper is based on baseline and endline surveys of just over 1000 cotton
farming households, divided among 80 cotton groups (GPC) in the Houndé region of Burkina Faso.
None of these farmers had prior experience with agricultural insurance. The insurance intervention
studied was randomized in two steps. First, half of the GPCs were randomly selected to be offered the
insurance. Thus, the treatment area comprises 40 farmer groups, whereas the 40 farmer groups in the
control area could not purchase the insurance (insurance contracts were not generated for these groups
to prevent from contamination entirely). Second, an encouragement design was generated among the
treatment group by randomly distributing insurance subsidy coupons to farmer groups. Ten GPCs
received no subsidy, ten a 25% subsidy, ten a 50% subsidy and ten a 75% subsidy. Given that the
market price of the insurance was some 60% above the actuarially fair price, the first two groups of
GPCs faced prices well above the actuarially fair price, while the latter two enjoyed discounts below
that level (Barre & Stoeffler, 2017). Each GPC decided whether or not to subscribe to the insurance
during a general assembly meeting.
    Around 13 farmers per GPC were randomly selected to participate to a baseline and a follow-up
survey. A total of 1015 households were thus surveyed first in January 2014, before the first insurance
sales that took place in May-June 2014 (see the timeline in Figure 1 above). The follow-up survey was
conducted in January 2015 following the cotton harvest. Attrition was very low between baseline and
endline (only 5 households, i.e. 0.5%). The main purpose of the survey was to measure the ex-ante
impact of the insurance, i.e. the actual changes in production induced by the insurance because of the
protection provided, but regardless of future insurance payments. Indeed, at endline farmers did not
know yet whether they would receive an insurance payment, but had been protected by the insurance
during a whole agricultural season (see 1). Questionnaire modules included detailed information on
  26 The history of this study is less linear than this section might suggest. It began life as a boiler plate RCT, with

qualitative methods introduced as the research team realized that such methods were needed to parse untangle what
was happening as well as to learn from the experience of the smallish subset of farmers who suffered yield losses and
experienced insurance payouts.


                                                          13
                           Table 2: Baseline Summary Statistics and Balance Tests
                                                Control Treatment          t -Test                 F -Test
                                                Group        Group       (p-value)                (p-value)
                                      Agricultural Variables
       Cotton area cultivated (ha)           4.03         3.77                        0.23            0.862
       Cotton yields (kg/ha)                829.4        829.3                          1            0.437
       Cultivates GMO cotton (1=yes)        63%           42%                        0.0***          0.166
       Cotton credit (CFA)                 424,281      407,484                       0.60           0.773
       NPK fertilizer (bags/ha)              2.29         2.38                        0.17            0.752
       Total area cultivated (ha)            10.1          9.8                        0.55           0.911
       Rented a field                       34%           27%                        0.015*           0.317
       Cereals cultivated (ha)               4.59         4.43                         0.44          0.905
       Sesame cultivated (1 = yes)          21%           17%                          0.25          0.168
       Number of cows                        2.88         2.13                        0.10           0.016*
       Drought Shock, 2013/14               13%           17%                         0.080          0.257
       Livestock Shock, 2013/14              4%            5%                          0.35          0.329
                                   Household Living Standards
       Progress out of Poverty Index         36.3         36.8                         0.55          0.671
       Roof of dwelling is solid            47%           51%                          0.12          0.467
       Household Diet Diversity Score        7.83         7.84                         0.91          0.942
       Number of food coping strategies      0.47          0.4                         0.19          0.542
                                     Household Demographics
       Age of household head                  44          43.6                         0.66          0.23
       Household size                        10.4         10.4                         0.98        0.004***
       Household head education (years)       1.2          1.2                         0.66          0.95
                                        Insurance Uptake
       Covered by Insurance                  0%           46%                            -              -
       Number of Farm Observations                      508            507            1015            1015

Note: Variable averages and p-value of the difference of means between treatment and control groups.
The F-test is the joint test of significance of the coefficients for a regression of each variable on the
two randomized variables: (1) the treatment status; (2) the % subsidy variable.
* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001


agricultural production and investments at the plot level, as well as detailed household information. In
addition to the household survey, local leaders answered a separate questionnaire on the functioning
of the GPC.
   Table 2 presents descriptive statistics for the treatment and control groups. To test for balance
between these groups, column 3 of the table presents the p-value for the t -test of equality of means
between the two groups. The fourth column reports the p-value for the F -test for joint significance of
the regression of the baseline characteristic on the treatment indicator plus a single variable measuring
the discount offered to the farmer.27 An insignificant F -statistics indicates that we cannot reject the
hypothesis that the baseline characteristic is unrelated to treatment and discount assignment.
   The first panel of the table contains key agricultural indicators. As can be seen, the average area
cultivated is about 10 ha, with approximately 4.5 ha devoted to staple food crops (maize, sorghum,
millet and rice), 4 ha of cotton and 1.5 ha to other food and cash crops (sesame, groundnut, bean, etc.).
 27 While   treated as a continuous variable, this measure takes on only the discrete values of 0, 25%, 50% and 75%.


                                                           14
Baseline average cotton yields are relatively low (829 kg/ha) and fertilizer usage on cotton is below the
level recommended by the cotton company (farmers use an average 115 kg/ha, or 2.1 bags instead of the
recommended level of 3 bags or 150 kg/ha). Most households raise animals, with an average livestock
size of 2.5 cows and 6.4 Tropical Livestock Units (TLU).28 As can be seen, most of the indicators are
well-balanced across treatment groups, except that the control group farmers had planted substantially
more GMO cotton at baseline and rented-in more land. Later econometric analysis will control for
GMO cultivation in an effort to mitigate this imbalance.29 Finally the data on drought and livestock
shocks were measured retrospectively in 2015 for the 2013-14 season. Statistically similar numbers
of households in treatment and control groups suffered shocks. As can be seen, drought events are
relatively rare, affecting only 13-17% of households in that year. As discussed earlier, the rarity of
these events challenge the ability of a short-term quantitative study to obtain reliable estimates of the
ex post impacts of insurance.30
    As the second two panels of Table 2 show, treatment and control households appear quite similar
in terms of basic living standard and demographic indicators. Based on the Progress Out of Poverty
index (PPI), household have a poverty likelihood of 17% using the national poverty line (Schreiner,
2011). As can be seen, both treatment and control households are large (10 members on average) and
most household heads have a low level of education (1.2 years on average).
  As shown in the final panel of the Table, take-up was high in the research area: 18 out of the 40
GPC (45%) purchased the insurance product. This corresponds to 233 out of the 506 households to
whom the insurance was offered in our sample (46%), a take-up rate substantially above levels usually
observed in index insurance pilots projects (Hazell, 2010; Binswanger-Mkhize, 2012). As mentioned
above, GPCs were randomly selected to receive discounts, ranging from 0 to 75%. For those GPCs
offered no subsidy, the uptake rate was 20%. The uptake rate increased to 50% for the GPC offered a
25% discount, 30% for the 50% discount, and 80% for the 75% discount.


4.2     Qualitative research methods
In addition to the quantitative data collection effort in 2014 and 2015, we conducted qualitative
fieldwork in the study area in June 2016 as shown in the Figure 1 timeline. While its use is still marginal
in the economics literature, qualitative methods are increasingly used by development economists
and practitioners for understanding the mechanisms generating impacts, testing the robustness of
quantitative findings, exploring the generalization of results, or addressing questions that quantitative
work left unanswered (Kanbur, 2003; Morvant-Roux et al. , 2014). In particular, qualitative studies can
be extremely valuable for assessing the external validity of results in the case of complex development
interventions (Woolcock, 2013), as well as for the analysis of poverty (Narayan, 2000; Adato et al. ,
2006; Kanbur & Shaffer, 2007).
    Another strength of qualitative work is to shed light on "implementation gaps", which is the
  28 The formula used is: TLU = 0.7 * cattle + 0.35 * calves + 0.1 * (goats + sheeps) + 0.01 * (chicken + other poultry)

+ 0.2 * pigs + 0.5 * horses + 0.3 * donkeys.
  29 Our results are not sensitive to the set of control variables that we use. We show results controlling for GMO cultiva-

tion in the instrumented specification because GMO cultivation is likely to have an impact on the input purchased.Thus,
including this variable is likely to makes our estimates more precise.
  30 With very few exceptions (e.g., Janzen & Carter 2018, which benefitted from a 6-year study), quantitative impact

studies of insurance have only been able to focus on the ex ante effects of insurance.



                                                            15
mismatch between the design of the program on paper and its actual implementation (de Sardan
& Hamani, 2018; Ridde et al. , 2013). Also particularly relevant for our objectives, mixed-methods
(combining a qualitative study to a randomized experiment) have proven to generate important insights
for understanding the demand for micro-financial products among poor rural households (Morvant-
Roux et al. , 2014). However, very few academic studies have tried to analyze the impact of an
intervention through qualitative research, especially on productive investments of rural households
(Daidone et al. , 2015). Our qualitative fieldwork proved to provide a much better understanding of
the demand and impacts of the insurance program that we studied.31
    In terms of impacts, the first objective of the qualitative fieldwork was to better understand our
quantitative results (as in Morvant-Roux et al. , 2014 and White 2013). We explored in particular
the details of the project implementation in the ground, the timing of farmers' investment decisions
and their initial trust in the product. The second objective was to explore the ex-post impacts of
the program on groups which were affected by shocks. The endline household survey was conducted
before the first insurance payments and therefore does not allow to measure the effect of shocks and
the potential mitigating effect of the insurance.32
   In total, we conducted fourteen focus groups: two focus groups with farmers who were never
insured, two focus groups with small producers, two focus groups with women, four focus groups with
producers who received an insurance payment and two focus groups with farmers who renewed their
insurance (without having received a payment).33 The rationale behind these group compositions was
to elicit information from farmers that had a range of experience with the insurance contract. While
there exist little guidance regarding the required number of focus groups to reach saturation (after
which additional focus groups bring little additional information), recent research indicates that 2 to
6 focus groups by sub-population tend to be sufficient (Guest et al. , 2017). We also supplemented
the focus group discussions with semi-structured individual interviews with farmers, farmer group
leaders, and SOFITEX employees. Each focus group or interview was conducted by one or two local
enumerators, in the presence of one author, and then transcribed. The report that summarizes these
transcriptions is available upon request.


5     Impact of insurance on the farm portfolio
Section 3.2 above derived a set of hypotheses about the potential impacts of cotton insurance on
agricultural investment, conditional on the assumption that farmers felt genuinely protected by the
insurance relative to their uninsured state. Before turning to the evidence on these investment impacts,
  31 A caveat is that information was collected in 2016, two years after the product was initially sold to farmers (see the

timeline in Figure 1). By that time, farmers had experienced the product, various implementation issues, and the delivery
or lack of delivery of insurance payments. This experience may have influenced positively or negatively their attitude
towards the cotton insurance, and generate a bias in their answers. That being said, farmers remembered very well their
experience with the insurance project and product (especially those who purchased the product), referring for instance
to their initial meetings with our surveyors and to the initiation games that they played back in January-February 2014.
Moreover, their answers openly discuss both positive and negative aspects of their experience with the index insurance
project.
  32 As discussed earlier, shocks are also relatively rare events. In our treatment group, only 3 farmer groups out of 40

received a "large" insurance payment (and one group a "small" payment).
  33 Most focus groups had ten participants (the maximum that we allowed), but women groups and groups which never

purchased the insurance had fewer participants.



                                                            16
we first consider information gathered from 2016 focus group interviews on the extent to which farmers
indeed trusted the novel insurance product when it was introduced for the 2014/15 cotton season.
   Focus group sessions began asking the assembled farmers if they felt protected and had confidence
in the insurance product when it was introduced. Nearly all groups comprised farmers who answered
affirmatively with comments such as:

      I felt protected and I trusted the insurance (1, FG7)
      We trusted the insurance, this is why we purchased it again (5, FG6)
      I believe in the insurance (5, FG14)

These expressions of trust are consistent with the relatively robust uptake rate of 46%, and give
confidence that our tests for investment impacts are grounded in a reality where many farmers at least
perceived that the insurance would assist them in time of need. In a recent analysis that compares
insurance uptake in this pilot year with uptake in 2018 when the insurance was offered to all the
SOFITEX farmers in Burkina Faso (see footnote 22), Stoeffler & Opuz (2020) show that many of the
farmers in the study area were well-trained (especially through insurance games that had been used to
explain the product), understood the features of the contract and felt relatively well protected by it.
   Despite these indications that the contract was largely well-received by cotton farmers, it is also
clear that not all farmers did trust the insurance.34 As stressed above, one of the complexities that
confront insurance and other interventions where human beliefs and perception stands between the
treatment that was delivered and the treatment that was received, is that we can expect substantial
heterogeneity of impact. Notable comments from skeptical focus group participants include:

      Since it was something new, we cannot say that we trusted it. (1, FG8)
      In addition, we did not have proof that it would really pay people in case of shock (1, FG9)

In addition to their skeptical attitude toward the insurance, these comments also raise the issue of
how trust evolves over time as farmers gather information on the actual performance of the contract.
In Section 5.3, we take advantage of payouts that occurred following the 2015-16 season to learn
about how trust in insurance evolves over time, especially in the face of the implementation challenges
surrounding insurance.
   In the remainder of this section, we first exploit the quantitative and qualitative data for evidence
on investment effects at the extensive and intensive margins of cotton production in section 5.1. Section
5.2 then examines impacts on other activities in the farmers' portfolios.


5.1     Results on cotton production
The top panel of Table 3 estimation results for the following standard difference-in-difference intention-
to-treat (ITT) model:
                                         yi = 0 + 1 Ti + 2 Gi + i                                                (1)
  34 The decision on whether or not to purchase insurance was made during a meeting of the GPC. While not all farmers

participated in the meeting, among those who participated, nearly all agreed with the insurance purchase. Formal vote
was rare, but the insurance purchase decision was typically described as consensual during qualitative interviews.




                                                         17
                                       Table 3: Impacts on cotton
                                      (1)                (2)                (3)             (4)
                                     Loans       Area Cultivated      Fertilizer Use      Yields
                                  ('000 CFA)         (Hectares)       (Bags/hectare)    (Kg/hectare)
                                      Intention to Treat Estimates
 Constant                              13.0           0.411**              0.0277          139.3***
 Treated (offered insurance)            3.8             -0.05                0.02            -34.0
   95% Confidence Interval         [-79  71]       [-0.4  0.3]          [-0.2  0.2]      [-113  45]
 Cultivated GMO                       -43.5            -0.154              0.158*            27.09
 R2                                   0.001             0.004               0.004            0.042
                                Treatment on the Treated IV Estimates
 Constant                                2.5           0.4**                 0.03           127***
 Insured (instrumented)                   25           -0.05                 0.03             -27
   95% Confidence Interval          [-108  158]    [-0.7  0.6]          [-0.3  0.4]      [-165  111]
 Cultivated GMO                          -38            -0.2                 0.16              30
 R2                                     0.004          0.001                0.004            0.004
 Number of Farms Observed                923            928                  928              928
 Baseline Control Group Mean            448.1            4.2                  2.3             849
 Errors clustered at the village level.
 p < 10%,   p < 5%,   p < 1%


where yi is the change from baseline to endline in the value of outcome variable yi , Ti is a binary
variable that equals one for households in the insurance treatment group, and Gi is an indicator variable
signaling baseline use of GMO cotton, which, as noted above, was unbalanced between treatment and
control groups at baseline.
   The outcome variables of interest include two measures of investment at the extensive margin
(amount borrowed to cultivate cotton and area cultivated of cotton), and two measures of investment
at the intensive margin (bags of fertilizer applied to cotton per hectare and cotton yields). As can be
seen, the ITT point estimates of the impact of being offered insurance are all economically tiny and
statistically insignificant. The 95% confidence interval estimates cover values that are roughly 10 to
20% of the control group baseline mean, signaling that the zero impact estimates are relatively precise.
   With a net rate of compliance with treatment assignment of 46%, a simple treatment on the
treated (TOT) estimate is not going to change the qualitative character of these results. However, in
addition to treatment, we also have the randomly generated discount coupons that may allow us to
obtain sharper treatment on the treated estimates. Table 4 shows results from the first stage linear
probability regression that predicts insurance uptake using treatment assignment (Ti ) and subsidy
amount (Si ):
                                    Ii = 0 + 1 Ti + 2 Si + 3 Gi + i                                    (2)

As can be seen in the table, treatment assignment and subsidy levels are strong predictors of insurance
uptake. The R2 is 0.37 and the regression passes Sargan and Basmann overidentification tests in all
the two-stage-least-square regressions with p-values above 0.05.
   Using equation 2 to predict insurance uptake, I   ^i , we can now re-estimate equation 1, replacing
the treatment variable with the predicted insured variable. Results are showed in the bottom half of
Table 3. As expected the magnitude of these LATE treatment on the treated estimates are larger


                                                   18
                              Table 4: Insurance Take-up First-stage Regression
                                                               Insured
                                   Constant                       0.0
                                   Treat, 1                     0.205*
                                   Subsidy Level, 2           0.00595**
                                   Baseline GMO, 3              -0.0868
                                   Observations                   928
                                   R2                             0.37
                                   t-statistics in parentheses.
                                   * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01


than the ITT estimates in the top half of Table 3, but they remain economically small and statistically
insignificant.35
    The lack of impact on investment in the insured activity stands in contrast to other findings in
the literature summarized in Section 1. However, as detailed in Section 3, given the rigidity of the
input loan calendar and the delays in the sale of insurance, we did not expect a strong impact of the
insurance on loan and area planted in cotton. In 10 of the 11 focus groups where farmers had had
the opportunity to purchase insurance, it was noted that insurance sales occurred too late (end of
May, beginning of June) for farmers to adjust their cotton input demand (see Figure 1). By the times
insurance sales occurred, farmers were already sowing their fields. In the words of one focus group
participant:

      For me, it is April to May; after that, it becomes complicated [to change production plans
      for cotton] (4, FG1)

Farmers may nevertheless have adjusted the quantity of input effectively applied to cotton after the
delivery of insurance. For example, if they routinely divert large quantities of fertilizer towards other
crops, once insured, they may apply more fertilizer and labor input to cotton, thereby increasing yield.
At most, we might have expected either a moderately positive impact of insurance on input application
and yield, depending on whether farmers have some margin of adjustments once seeds, fertilizer and
pesticides have been distributed by the cotton company. However, as shown above, the impacts, if
any, are too modest to be reliably detected given the sample size and economically very small.


5.2     Spillover impacts of cotton insurance on other farm activities
While the qualitative evidence reveals that implementation delays made it difficult for farmers to
expand their borrowing and investment in cotton following the purchase of insurance, the calendar
in Figure 1 shows that initiation of a second cash crop activity, sesame, took place after insurance
had been purchased. We now turn to testing our other hypotheses concerning the impact of cotton
insurance on farmers' general portfolio of agricultural activities. In particular, given the qualitative
evidence that farmers largely trusted the insurance at baseline, we expect farmers to increase sesame
  35 In an effort to improve the efficiency of these estimates, both ITT and IV equations were re-estimated using an

ANCOVA approach (McKenzie, 2012). While the coefficient estimates on the baseline levels of the dependent variable
are well below one, the overall character of the results are the same as the difference in difference estimates reported in
Table 3. ANCOVA results are available from the authors.



                                                            19
cultivation as well as investment in livestock and other forms of on-farm investment. In addition, if
farmers do invest in riskier, profitable activities, we expect to see a reduction in cereal cultivation,
which a low-risk, low-return investment and a form of self-insurance (see section 3).
    Using the same econometric approach employed to analyze the cotton variables, we estimate the
intent-to-treat and treatment-on-the-treated impacts of cotton insurance on three non-cotton activ-
ities: cereal production (mostly for subsistence purposes), cultivation of sesame seeds (a cash crop)
and livestock rearing. We also investigate the impact of insurance on two indicators of overall farm
investment: land rentals and infrastructure investment.36 The parameter estimates reported in Table
5 reveal a consistent pattern for cereal production, sesame seed cultivation and livestock rearing. In-
surance has a zero to negative impact on cereals production (column 1) and positive impacts on both
sesame cultivation (column 2) and herd size (column 3). Focussing on the TOT estimates, estimated
insurance impacts are a 17 percentage point increase in sesame cultivation (an 80% increase relative
to the baseline level); and, a one unit, or 35%, increase in livestock holdings.
    In addition insured farmers increased their propensity to rent land in and their level of farm
infrastructure investment (only the TOT is statistically significant for rented land). They suggest a
21 percentage point increase in land rentals (a 66% increase off the baseline level) and a 7,824 CFA
($US 14) increase in infrastructure investment (a doubling of the baseline level).37


                                     Table 5: Impacts on other investments
                                       (1)             (2)            (3)                        (4)                  (5)
                                     Cereal            Sesame               Cows              Rent-in          Infrastructure
                                   Production         Cultivation           Owned              Land             Investment
                                       (kg)         (1, if cultivate)    (#)               (1, if rent-in)       ('000 CFA)
                                                Intention to Treat Estimates
 Constant                              391.1*           0.145***             -0.0628            0.0316                -2.7
 Treated (offered insurance)          -377.7*             0.08*               0.49**             0.07                 3.7*
   95% Confidence Interval          [-82974]          [-0.010.18]         [0.050.93]        [-0.020.15]           [-0.78.1]
 Cultivated GMO                         15.25             0.0182             0.0193            -0.0282               4.4**
 R2                                     0.002             0.006                0.01              0.002               0.005
 Observations                            923               928                  928               928                 928
                                         Treatment on the Treated IV Estimates
 Constant                             302                0.14***               -0.7              0.00                 -2.9
 Insured (instrumented)              -464                 0.17*               0.99*            0.21***                7.8*
   95% Confidence Interval       [-1165238]           [-0.010.36]         [-0.052.02]        [0.060.36]          [-1.316.9]
 Cultivated GMO                        23                  0.03                0.08               0.00               4.9**
 R2                                  0.004                0.004               0.001              0.008               0.003
 Observations                         923                  928                 928                928                 928
 Baseline Control Mean               5739                  0.21                2.89              0.34                  3.9
 Errors clustered at the village level.
 p < 10%,   p < 5%,   p < 1%


    In short, the quantitative evidence indicates that cotton insurance, even when imperfectly imple-
mented, triggers significant behavioral changes towards greater investment in risky farm activities not
  36 In a context where land sales' markets are virtually absent, investment in agricultural activities are often realized
by renting land.
  37 As with the cotton results, ANCOVA estimates are again available from the authors and tell the same story as the

difference in difference estimates.


                                                           20
directly covered by the product, and perhaps a decrease in cereals cultivation that plays a self-insurance
role in the farming system. Focus group participants mentioned these spillover effects into their general
portfolio of agricultural activities:

      I also invested in livestock and sesame thanks to the insurance, even though the insurance
      only regards cotton, because I felt that my cotton was protected (II2)
      We really thought that we were protected. This is why we increased the area that we culti-
      vated. (7, FG12)

These quotes confirm that farmers trusted the insurance and were willing to take on additional risks
based on the insurance protection and generate a positive average treatment effect. However, farmers,
such as those quoted earlier, who expressed this distrust in the insurance are unlikely to have responded
by increasing their farm investments. To the extent that farmers build trust in the insurance product
over time, we might expect impacts to become even larger after several years of coverage. However the
building of trust crucially depends on a farmer's actual experience with the insurance and its reliability.
Our qualitative data enable to investigate these issues, as the next section now discusses.


5.3    Ex-post impacts of insurance payments
Unlike the January 2015 endline household survey, the June 2016 focus groups discussions occurred
after insurance payments had been made based on yield shortfalls in the 2014-15 cotton cropping
season (see figure 1). Focus group discussions were held with the three insured farmer groups in our
research area received the "large" payouts after the 2014-15 seasons, as well as with groups who did
not receive any payments. These data enables us to draw a more complete picture of the impacts of
insurance after a one-year experience.
   The groups that had near normal yields and did not receive any payments reveal a pattern that
suggests that they may decrease their demand in the future and perhaps did not fully understand or
accept the concept of insurance in the firsts place. Typical comments include:

      It is good to be insured, but it is difficult for farmers to throw away money. We bought the
      insurance in 2014-15 but it did not bring us anything in return (6, FG2)
      We thought that individual cases would be considered. But it was not like that, so we stopped
      our collaboration [with the insurance] (6, FG11)
      Their [Sale agents'] attitude shows that they just want to make profit on us. It is not to
      help us (8, FG12)

These quotes show the critical role of the first experience with the product and point to several
common problems encountered in the distribution of microinsurance products. The first quote reveals
an incomplete understanding of how insurance in general operates as it seems to reflect frustration at
having paid a premium while getting nothing tangible in return in a season without crop losses. The
second of these comments points to some confusion between index and individual insurance. The third
quote indicates that the aggressive marketing put in place by the insurance company was misleading,
and that the product was deceptive. All point towards issue of distrust and misunderstanding that


                                                    21
would be expected to undercut future insurance purchases. While these points have been repeatedly
made in the literature (e.g., see Carter et al. 2017; Jensen & Barrett 2017; Platteau et al. 2017),
actors in the field still face a lot of difficulty in conveying the concept of insurance in general and index
insurance in particular.38
    Focus group respondents from the groups that received insurance payouts reported that they en-
countered important losses because their fields had been attacked by parasites in the middle of the
season, after a "dry pocket" (relatively long period without rains in the middle of the rainy season).
They spent additional time and money to try to save their crops from the worms but the products
they used were ineffective:

      In the entire village, only 10 people were able to reimburse their loan. The shock was huge.
      The lack of rain and the insects ruined all the cotton (1, FG6)
      We even sold our livestock to pay the insecticide to kill the worms (6, FG6)

However, while their yields were very low, they did not receive payments immediately (nor were they
promised payments). Instead, farmers were asked to reimburse their loans in June 2015, since the
production of their groups were insufficient to cover their credit. Insurance payouts were eventually
made in August, although farmers had all but given up on ever receiving indemnification for their
losses.
    From a research perspective, this payment delay allows us to observe insured farmers in something
akin to their counterfactual, uninsured state. That is, the same individuals reported about their situ-
ation without insurance (in June) and their situation with (delayed) insurance payments (in August).
Farmers' accounts reveal both the traumas caused by the negative agricultural shock and the positive
ex-post impact of the (eventual) insurance payments.
    As the focus group discussions revealed, debt repayment to SOFITEX/EcoBank, due to the agri-
cultural shock, caused serious economic and social stress in the communities. Farmers had to deplete
their productive assets to pay back their loan:

      We did not know that we would receive insurance payments. Since we had already sold our
      livestock, our cereals and other things to pay our debt, we were living in misery until the
      insurance payments arrived (3, FG7)
      I was working [as a day laborer] for other people in order to get food for my family. I had
      only a few goats so I did not want to sell them (5, FG7)
      [Without the insurance] we would not have been able to continue farming. We sold almost
      everything even the food [stocks] (1, FG8)

In addition, the situation generated tensions and social conflicts in the affected villages, especially
directed towards the GPC leadership that had decided to purchase the insurance in the first place:

      It was very tense, we sold our livestock to pay back the credit to EcoBank and SOFITEX.
      Some refused and left the farmer group (4, FG6)
  38 Arguably, this kind of misunderstanding of novel insurance technologies make the case for some kind of learning

subsidy, akin to the case for temporary subsidies for improved agricultural inputs discussed by (Carter et al. , forthcom-
ing).


                                                           22
The insurance payments, on the other hand, reverted the situation (both socially and economically):

      The insurance prevented us from the worst, otherwise I would have left the village (6, FG7)
      When considering what happened in 2014-15, if the insurance had not been there, we would
                                                              39
      not be here to talk with you today (5, FG6)

They allowed them to buy back the livestock that they had sold (although at higher prices), to feed
their families for the year to come, and to continue farming. Farmers declared that they spent the
insurance money to purchase livestock, food, agricultural input, durables, to pay school fees, cultivate
new crops (e.g., rice), increase cotton area, pay back credit and even marry:

      With the insurance money, I bought an ox, a cart, and the tiles for the roof of my new
      house (8, FG8)
      We bought a plow and a few ox that we had to sell to pay back SOFITEX and the bank (3,
      FG8)

While the delay in insurance payments was extremely damaging to farmers, the focus group material
gives powerful testimony of the great potential of a well implemented insurance scheme to avoid the
costly coping strategies and social disruption that farmers reported prior to receipt of the payout. Less
clear is the future attitude of these farmers toward the purchase of insurance.


6     Conclusion: opportunities for index insurance?
This paper analyzes the impacts of a cotton index insurance pilot program on cotton growers in Burkina
Faso, combining a rigorous randomized control trial evaluation with careful qualitative work. We argue
that this kind of hybrid, mixed methods RCT approach is likely to be especially useful for complex
and to some extent unforgiving interventions like insurance that confront both implementation and
evaluation challenges. This approach allows us to address issues that Miranda & Farrin (2012) identify
as important knowledge gaps in their review article, regarding the spillover effects and the ex-post
impacts of index insurance.
    The quantitative evidence reveals that the insurance had no impact on farmers' investment in
cotton, a lucrative but risky cash crop. The qualitative work reveals that this finding reflects im-
plementation problems rather than farmers' lack of trust or interest in the insurance product itself.
Corroborating this finding, the quantitative work shows that insurance led to substantial increases in
investment in other income earning activities, including a an 75% increase in land devoted to sesame
production and a 35% increase in livestock holding. There is also statistically weak evidence (ITT
estimates significant at the 10% level) that insurance caused a reduction in the production of food
grains, which arguably function as a self-insurance activity in the cotton farming system. The qualita-
tive evidence again corroborates this quantitative evidence that insurance created spillover investment
impacts in activities other than cotton.
    Finally, the qualitative data allow us to gain some insights on the impact of insurance on coping
strategies in the wake of a yield shock that influenced only a small fraction of the overall sample,
 39 Farmers   also gave examples of serious individual conflicts, as well as risks of suicide.


                                                              23
rendering quantitative analysis infeasible. Implementation challenges again weakened the effectiveness
of the insurance (payouts were delivered several months late), but this problem effectively allowed each
farmer to provide their own counterfactual as the delay allowed us to observe their coping strategies
prior to the late receipt of the insurance payment. We could then observe their at least partial recovery
after receiving the insurance payments.
   While index insurance has sometimes been over-hyped (as Binswanger-Mkhize, 2012 and others
have argued), these results suggest that they are several good reasons to remain optimistic about the
prospects for index insurance to alter investment by small-scale farmers in the risk-prone environments
of West Africa and elsewhere. At the same time, the tight knit value chain for cotton in Burkina Faso
solves many of the barriers that have confronted index insurance elsewhere, including constraints posed
by liquidity and perhaps by time inconsistent preferences. The value chain also made it possible to
implement at low cost an area yield index that provides relatively reliable insurance protection com-
pared to other families of insurance indices. And yet, even given these advantageous circumstances, the
complexities of implementing agricultural insurance in a difficult rural environment had a fundamental
effect on the investment effects that did and did not occur.
   More specifically, flaws in the insurance delivery systems may have detrimental consequences for
farming households and the future of insurance projects. Chief among the challenges are assuring timely
marketing, education and sales of insurance contract, but also timely indemnity payments. While
farmers in our study area who suffered sever shocks ultimately benefited substantially from insurance
payouts, payment delays resulted in harmful stress and at least temporary farm decapitalization.
The qualitative interviews uncovered may elements of dissatisfaction related to implementation of the
insurance project and also complaints about a number of features of the insurance product, not all of
which are simple or inexpensive to resolve. Finally, in the year following the study, renewal rates were
high for those few farmer groups that received had received payouts, but dipped for those groups that
did not receive payouts (this pattern resonates with the finding of Stein, 2018, on repurchasing rate
for index insurance in India). Learning about a technology that offers only stochastic benefits (e.g.,
see Lybbert & Bell 2010) remains a challenge and would seem to require development of innovative
educational tools.
   A last lesson we draw from our study is methodological and advocates for a more systematic use of
mixed methods to evaluate and interpret the impacts of development interventions. While there is a
long tradition of studying implementation challenges (and failures) in development interventions in the
qualitative social sciences (see for instance the seminal book from Ferguson, 1994, and more recently
Morvant-Roux et al. , 2014 or de Sardan & Hamani, 2018), our study is original in that it presents
jointly econometric findings on impacts and qualitative findings on both impacts and implementation.
We find that the two approaches complement each others in very relevant manners in the case of a
complex intervention likely to yield stochastic and heterogeneous benefits. Our study highlights the
power of mixed-method approaches, often promoted by researchers and policy makers (White, 2013),
but still rarely conducted in economics research.




                                                    24
References
Adato, Michelle, Carter, Michael R, & May, Julian. 2006. Exploring poverty traps and social exclusion
  in South Africa using qualitative and quantitative data. The Journal of Development Studies, 42(2),
  226­247.

Alcaraz, Carlo, Chiquiar, Daniel, Orraca, María José, & Salcedo, Alejandrina. 2017. The effect of
  publicly provided health insurance on education outcomes in Mexico. The World Bank Economic
  Review, 30(1), S145­S156.

Alderman, Harold, Hoddinott, John, & Kinsey, Bill. 2006. Long term consequences of early childhood
  malnutrition. Oxford Economic Papers, 58(3), 450­474.

Barnett, Barry J, & Mahul, Olivier. 2007. Weather index insurance for agriculture and rural areas in
  lower-income countries. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 89(5), 1241­1247.

Barnett, Barry J, Barrett, Christopher B, & Skees, Jerry R. 2008. Poverty traps and index-based risk
  transfer products. World Development, 36(10), 1766­1785.

Barre, Thomas, & Stoeffler, Quentin. 2017. Assessing index insurance: Conceptual approach and
  empirical illustration from Burkina Faso.

Barrett, Christopher B, & Carter, Michael R. 2010. The Power and Pitfalls of Experiments in De-
  velopment Economics: Some Non-random Reflections. Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy,
  32(4), 515­548.

Barrett, Christopher B, Reardon, Thomas, & Webb, Patrick. 2001. Nonfarm income diversification
  and household livelihood strategies in rural Africa: concepts, dynamics, and policy implications.
  Food Policy, 26(4), 315­331.

Benami, Elinor, Jin, Zhenong, Carter, Michael R., Ghosh, Anirduddah, Hijmans, Robert J., Hobbs,
  Andrew, Kenduiywo, Benson, & Lobell, David B. 2020. Uniting Advances in Remote Sensing, Crop
  Modeling, & Economics for Understanding and Managing Weather Risk in Agriculture.

Bertram-Huemmer, Veronika, & Kraehnert, Kati. 2017. Does Index Insurance Help Households Re-
  cover from Disaster? Evidence from IBLI Mongolia. American Journal of Agricultural Economics,
  100(1), 145­171.

Binswanger-Mkhize, Hans P. 2012. Is there too much hype about index-based agricultural insurance?
  Journal of Development studies, 48(2), 187­200.

Boucher, Stephen R, Carter, Michael R, & Guirkinger, Catherine. 2008. Risk rationing and wealth
  effects in credit markets: Theory and implications for agricultural development. American Journal
  of Agricultural Economics, 90(2), 409­423.

Boucher, Stephen R, Carter, Michael R., Lybbert, Travis J., Malacarne, Jonathan, Marenya, Paswel,
  & Paul, Laura. 2020. Bundling Innovative Risk Management Technologies to Create Resilience and
  Accelerate Agricultural Growth.


                                                 25
Cai, Hongbin, Chen, Yuyu, Fang, Hanming, & Zhou, Li-An. 2015. The effect of microinsurance
  on economic activities: evidence from a randomized field experiment. Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 97(2), 287­300.

Carter, Michael R, & Barrett, Christopher B. 2006. The economics of poverty traps and persistent
  poverty: An asset-based approach. The Journal of Development Studies, 42(2), 178­199.

Carter, Michael R, & Chiu, Tara. 2018. Quality Standards for Agricultural Index Insurance: An
  Agenda for Action. State of Microinsurance, 4.

Carter, Michael R, de Janvry, Alain, Sadoulet, Elisbeth, & Sarris, Alexandros. 2017. Index Insurance
  for Developing Country Agriculture: A Reassessment. Annual Review of Resource Economics 9:421-
  438, 9, 421­438.

Carter, Michael R., Laajaj, Rachid, & Yang, Dean. forthcoming. Subsidies and the African Green Rev-
  olution: Direct Effects and Social Network Spillovers of Randomized Input Subsidies in Mozambique.
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.

Casaburi, Lorenzo, & Willis, Jack. 2018. Time versus State in Insurance: Experimental Evidence from
  Contract Farming in Kenya. American Economic Review, 108(12), 3778­3813.

Chambers, Robert G, & Quiggin, John. 2002. Optimal producer behavior in the presence of area-yield
  crop insurance. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 84(2), 320­334.

Chantarat, Sommarat, Mude, Andrew G, Barrett, Christopher B, & Carter, Michael R. 2013. Designing
  index-based livestock insurance for managing asset risk in Northern Kenya. Journal of Risk and
  Insurance, 80(1), 205­237.

Clarke, Daniel, Mahul, Olivier, Rao, Kolli N, & Verma, Niraj. 2012. Weather based crop insurance in
  India. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper.

Clarke, Daniel J. 2016. A Theory of Rational Demand for Index Insurance. American Economic
  Journal: Microeconomics, 8(1), 283­306.

Clement, Kristina Yuzva, Botzen, WJ Wouter, Brouwer, Roy, & Aerts, Jeroen CJH. 2018. A global
  review of the impact of basis risk on the functioning of and demand for index insurance. International
  Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 28, 845­853.

Cole, Shawn, Gine, Xavier, & Vickery, James. 2017. How does risk management influence production
  decisions? Evidence from a field experiment. The Review of Financial Studies, 30(6), 1935­1970.

Daidone, Silvio, Pellerano, Luca, Handa, Sudhanshu, & Davis, Benjamin. 2015. Is Graduation from
  Social Safety Nets Possible? Evidence from Sub-Saharan Africa. IDS Bulletin, 46(2), 93­102.

de Sardan, Jean-Pierre Olivier, & Hamani, Oumarou. 2018. Cash Transfers in Rural Niger. Cash
  Transfers in Context: An Anthropological Perspective, 300.

Dercon, Stefan. 1996. Risk, crop choice, and savings: Evidence from Tanzania. Economic Development
  and Cultural Change, 44(3), 485­513.


                                                   26
Dercon, Stefan. 1998. Wealth, risk and activity choice: cattle in Western Tanzania. Journal of
  Development Economics, 55(1), 1­42.

Dercon, Stefan. 2002. Income risk, coping strategies, and safety nets. The World Bank Research
  Observer, 17(2), 141­166.

Dossa, Komivi, Konteye, Mariama, Niang, Mareme, Doumbia, Youssouf, & Cissé, Ndiaga. 2017. En-
  hancing sesame production in West Africa's Sahel: A comprehensive insight into the cultivation of
  this untapped crop in Senegal and Mali. Agriculture & food security, 6(1), 68.

Economist. December 13, 2018. In Africa, agricultural insurance often falls on stony ground.

Eeckhoudt, Louis, Gollier, Christian, & Schlesinger, Harris. 1996. Changes in background risk and risk
  taking behavior. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 683­689.

Eeckhoudt, Louis, Gollier, Christian, & Schlesinger, Harris. 2005. Economic and financial decisions
  under risk. Princeton University Press.

Elabed, Ghada, & Carter, Michael. 2018. Ex-ante impacts of agricultural insurance: Evidence from a
  field experiment in Mali.

Elabed, Ghada, & Carter, Michael R. 2015. Compound-risk aversion, ambiguity and the willingness
  to pay for microinsurance. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 118, 150­166.

Elabed, Ghada, Bellemare, Marc F, Carter, Michael R, & Guirkinger, Catherine. 2013. Managing
  basis risk with multiscale index insurance. Agricultural Economics, 44(4-5), 419­431.

Fafchamps, Marcel, Udry, Christopher, & Czukas, Katherine. 1998. Drought and saving in West
  Africa: Are livestock a buffer stock? Journal of Development Economics, 55(2), 273­305.

Ferguson, James. 1994. The anti-politics machine:" development," depoliticization, and bureaucratic
  power in Lesotho. U of Minnesota Press.

Flatnes, Jon Einar, & Carter, Michael R. 2019. A little skin in the game: Reducing moral hazard in
  joint liability lending through a mandatory collateral requirement. Journal of Economic Behavior
  & Organization, 164, 199­214.

Flatnes, Jon Einar, Carter, Michael R, & Mercovich, Ryan. 2018. Improving the quality of index
  insurance with a satellite-based conditional audit contract.

Gehrke, Esther. 2019. An employment guarantee as risk insurance? Assessing the effects of the NREGS
  on agricultural production decisions. The World Bank Economic Review, 33(2), 413­435.

Gelade, Wouter, & Guirkinger, Catherine. 2018. The enforcement advantage of external monitor-
  ing: Lessons from an experiment with joint-liability groups in Burkina Faso. Journal of Economic
  Behavior & Organization, 151, 307­325.

Gine, Xavier, Townsend, Robert, & Vickery, James. 2008. Patterns of Rainfall Insurance Participation
  in Rural India. World Bank Economic Review, 22(3), 539­566.


                                                  27
Gollier, Christian. 2004. The economics of risk and time. MIT press.

Gollier, Christian, & Kimball, Miles S. 1996. Toward a systematic approach to the economic effects of
  uncertainty: characterizing utility functions. Tech. rept. Discussion paper, University of Michigan.

Guest, Greg, Namey, Emily, & McKenna, Kevin. 2017. How many focus groups are enough? Building
  an evidence base for nonprobability sample sizes. Field Methods, 29(1), 3­22.

Hazell, PBR. 2010. The potential for scale and sustainability in weather index insurance for agriculture
  and rural livelihoods. International Fund for Agricultural Development.

Hazell, Peter B. 1992. The appropriate role of agricultural insurance in developing countries. Journal
  of International Development, 4(6), 567­598.

Hennessy, David A. 1998. The production effects of agricultural income support policies under uncer-
  tainty. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 80(1), 46­57.

Hoddinott, John, & Kinsey, Bill. 2001. Child growth in the time of drought. Oxford Bulletin of
  Economics and statistics, 63(4), 409­436.

Janzen, Sarah A, & Carter, Michael R. 2018. After the Drought: The Impact of Microinsurance on
  Consumption Smoothing and Asset Protection. American Journal of Agricultural Economics.

Jensen, Nathaniel, & Barrett, Christopher. 2017. Agricultural index insurance for development. Applied
  Economic Perspectives and Policy, 39(2), 199­219.

Jensen, Nathaniel D, Barrett, Christopher B, & Mude, Andrew G. 2016. Index insurance quality and
  basis risk: Evidence from Northern Kenya. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 98(5),
  1450­1469.

Jensen, Nathaniel D, Barrett, Christopher B, & Mude, Andrew G. 2017. Cash transfers and index in-
  surance: A comparative impact analysis from Northern Kenya. Journal of Development Economics,
  129, 14­28.

Jensen, Nathaniel D, Mude, Andrew G, & Barrett, Christopher B. 2018. How basis risk and spa-
  tiotemporal adverse selection influence demand for index insurance: Evidence from northern Kenya.
  Food Policy, 74, 172­198.

Kanbur, Ravi, & Shaffer, Paul. 2007. Epistemology, normative theory and poverty analysis: implica-
  tions for Q-squared in practice. World Development, 35(2), 183­196.

Kanbur, SM Ravi. 2003. Q-squared, combining qualitative and quantitative methods in poverty ap-
  praisal. Orient Blackswan.

Karlan, Dean, Osei, Robert, Osei-Akoto, Isaac, Udry, Christopher, et al. . 2014. Agricultural Decisions
  after Relaxing Credit and Risk Constraints. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(2), 597­652.

Kazianga, Harounan, & Udry, Christopher. 2006. Consumption smoothing? Livestock, insurance and
  drought in rural Burkina Faso. Journal of Development Economics, 79(2), 413­446.


                                                  28
Lybbert, Travis J., & Bell, Adrian. 2010. Stochastic Benefit Streams, Learning, and Technology
  Diffusion: Why Drought Tolerance is Not the New Bt. AgBioForum, 13(1).

Mangnus, Ellen, van de Pol, Floris, Tiombiano, Darius, & Sanogo, Karim. 2015. Sesame Sector
  Development: Lessons learned in Burkina Faso and Mali.

McKenzie, David. 2012. Beyond baseline and follow-up: the case for more T in experiments. Journal
  of Development Economics, 99, 210­221.

Miranda, Mario J. 1991. Area-yield crop insurance reconsidered. American Journal of Agricultural
  Economics, 73(2), 233­242.

Miranda, Mario J, & Farrin, Katie. 2012. Index insurance for developing countries. Applied Economic
  Perspectives and Policy, 34(3), 391­427.

Mobarak, Ahmed Mushfiq, & Rosenzweig, Mark R. 2012. Selling formal insurance to the informally
  insured.

Morduch, Jonathan. 1995. Income smoothing and consumption smoothing. The Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 9(3), 103­114.

Morvant-Roux, Solène, Guérin, Isabelle, Roesch, Marc, & Moisseron, Jean-Yves. 2014. Adding value
  to randomization with qualitative analysis: The case of microcredit in rural Morocco. World Devel-
  opment, 56, 302­312.

Narayan, Deepa. 2000. Voices of the poor: can anyone hear us? Vol. 1. World Bank Publications.

Platteau, Jean-Philippe, De Bock, Ombeline, & Gelade, Wouter. 2017. The demand for microinsurance:
  A literature review. World Development, 94, 139­156.

Ramaswami, Bharat. 1993. Supply response to agricultural insurance: Risk reduction and moral
  hazard effects. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 75(4), 914­925.

Ridde, Valéry, Kouanda, Seni, Yameogo, Maurice, Kadio, Kadidiatou, & Bado, Aristide. 2013. Why
  do women pay more than they should? A mixed methods study of the implementation gap in a
  policy to subsidize the costs of deliveries in Burkina Faso. Evaluation and Program Planning, 36(1),
  145­152.

Saitone, Tina L, Sexton, Richard J, & Malan, Benoît. 2018. Price premiums, payment delays, and
  default risk: understanding developing country farmers' decisions to market through a cooperative
  or a private trader. Agricultural Economics, 49(3), 363­380.

Savadogo, Kimseyinga, Reardon, Thomas, & Pietola, Kyosti. 1998. Adoption of improved land use
  technologies to increase food security in Burkina Faso: Relating animal traction, productivity, and
  non-farm income. Agricultural systems, 58(3), 441­464.

Schreiner, Mark. 2011. A Simple Poverty Scorecard for Burkina Faso.




                                                 29
Sidiber, Aissata Luare G. 2018 (May). L'assurance-récolte coton pour garantir les revenus des produc-
  teurs dans la zone SOFITEX.

Stein, Daniel. 2018. Dynamics of demand for rainfall index insurance: Evidence from a commercial
  product in India. The World Bank Economic Review, 32(3), 692­708.

Stoeffler, Quentin. 2016. Crop portfolio choices in Burkina Faso. Journal of Developing Areas.

Stoeffler, Quentin, & Opuz, Gulce. 2020. The index insurance take-up puzzle: New experimental and
  quasi-experimental evidence from Burkina Faso.

Theriault, Veronique, Serra, Renata, & Sterns, James A. 2013. Prices, institutions, and determinants
  of supply in the Malian cotton sector. Agricultural Economics, 44(2), 161­174.

Traore, Salimata. 2020. Farmer organizations and maize productivity in rural Burkina Faso: The
  effects of the diversion strategy on cotton input loans. Review of Development Economics.

Tsetlin, Ilia, & Winkler, Robert L. 2005. Risky choices and correlated background risk. Management
  Science, 51(9), 1336­1345.

White, Howard. 2013. The use of mixed methods in randomized control trials. New Directions for
  Evaluation, 138, 61­73.

Woolcock, Michael. 2013. Using case studies to explore the external validity of 'complex' development
  interventions. Evaluation, 19(3), 229­248.

Yu, Jisang, & Sumner, Daniel A. 2018. Effects of subsidized crop insurance on crop choices. Agricultural
  Economics, 49(4), 533­545.




                                                  30
