                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           EXPANDING ACCESS TO CLEAN WATER FOR THE RURAL POOR:
                   EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM MALAWI

                                         Pascaline Dupas
                                        Basimenye Nhlema
                                         Zachary Wagner
                                           Aaron Wolf
                                           Emily Wroe

                                       Working Paper 27570
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27570


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2020




This research was made possible thanks to grants from Stichting Dioraphte and the Stanford
Center for Innovation in Global Health. We gratefully acknowledge their support. These funders
had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the
manuscript. We thank Partners In Health Malawi for their partnership. The research protocol was
approved by the Malawi National Health Sciences Research Committee and by the Stanford IRB.
It is registered in the AEA RCT registry (AEARCTR-0002893). We thank Vivian Hoffmann and
Michael Kremer for their inputs at the conceptual and design stage, and we are grateful to Ian
Ross, Amit Dekel, Ismael Djima, Charlotte Pelras and Nina Rapoport for their insightful
comments on our first draft. We also thank seminar participants at Stellenbosch University,
DFID, and the Virtural Development Seminar for their helpful questions and suggestions. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Pascaline Dupas, Basimenye Nhlema, Zachary Wagner, Aaron Wolf, and Emily
Wroe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Expanding Access to Clean Water for the Rural Poor: Experimental Evidence from Malawi
Pascaline Dupas, Basimenye Nhlema, Zachary Wagner, Aaron Wolf, and Emily Wroe
NBER Working Paper No. 27570
July 2020
JEL No. D10,D12,I11,I12

                                           ABSTRACT

Using data from an 18-month randomized trial, we estimate large and sustained impacts on water
purification and child health of a program providing monthly coupons for free water treatment
solution (diluted chlorine) to households with young children. The program is more effective and
much more cost-effective than asking Community Health Workers (CHWs) to distribute free
chlorine to households during routine monthly visits. That is because only 40% of households
make use of free chlorine, targeting through CHWs is worse than self-targeting through coupon
redemption, and water treatment promotion by CHWs does not increase chlorine use among free
chlorine beneficiaries. Non- use of free chlorine is driven by households who have a protected
water source and those who report that chlorine makes water taste bad.


Pascaline Dupas                                   Aaron Wolf
Department of Economics                           Yale University
Stanford University                               New Haven, CT 06520
579 Serra Mall                                    United States
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                           aaron.wolf@yale.edu
and CEPR
and also NBER                                     Emily Wroe
pdupas@stanford.edu                               Partners in Health
                                                  Neno
Basimenye Nhlema                                  Malawi
Partners in Health                                ewroe@pih.org
Neno
Malawi
bnhlema@pih.org

Zachary Wagner
RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street
Santa Monica, CA 90401
zwagner@rand.org




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at:
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/2893
1    Introduction
Free access to essential health products such as vaccines, antimalarial bednets, or clean water is
widely accepted as a cost-effective way to reduce the disease burden in lower income countries
(Jamison et al., 2018). A large body of research supports this: take-up of preventatives is
typically very low absent very large subsidies (see Dupas and Miguel, 2017, for a review). In
some cases, full subsidies are not enough, however. Take-up rates of free flu shots in the United
States are notoriously low (Milkman et al., 2011). Full immunization rates in Udaipur, India,
plateaued at 18% even when reliable, free immunization camps were set-up in villages (Banerjee
et al., 2010). Duflo et al. (2019) found no effect on sexually transmitted infection rates after
Kenyan youths received a large supply of free condoms. Also in Kenya, Dupas et al. (2016) find
that only 40% of households who get access to a free water treatment product use it.

Common strategies to boost take-up of free health services and products involve either infor-
mation (e.g. mass media information campaigns), financial incentives, or nudges (e.g. SMS
reminders). Such strategies are common in higher-income countries. In lower-income coun-
tries, where target populations are often rural, dispersed, and may not all have access to a
radio or a phone, such strategies can be prohibitively expensive. Even when they are feasible,
their impacts on take-up appear limited. A meta-analysis of 10 recent studies of text mes-
sage reminders in the United States, Kenya, Nigeria, Guatemala, and Zimbabwe find that they
increase childhood vaccination by 13% on average (Mekonnen et al., 2019). Full immuniza-
tions rates increased from 18% to 36% when in-kind-incentives were provided to parents in the
Udaipur experiment of Banerjee et al. (2010)­an impressive doubling, but even with incentives
more than half of children did not receive full immunization. What else can be done, then, to
increase take-up of free preventative health services among the rural poor?

An increasingly prevalent model for health outreach in rural areas of lower-income countries is
the Community Health Worker (CHW) model. In this model, lay members of the community
work (either for pay or as volunteers, depending on the model) in association with the local
health care system, typically visiting households at home, providing basic diagnostic services,
and referring sick patients to facilities as well. Recent studies have found that properly compen-
sated CHWs can effectively be used to expand access to curative products (Wagner et al., 2019)


                                                1
and reduce child mortality (Bj¨
                              orkman-Nyqvist et al., 2019). Whether CHWs are effective at
encouraging households to adopt specific health practices remains an open question, however.
As members of the community, they might have useful information about which households
are likely to reap higher returns from investing in prevention. They also have the ability to
make recurrent visits, monitoring and nudging households to be consistent in their preventative
behavior.

We study the potential complementarity between CHWs and full subsidies in the context of safe
water access in Malawi. In a region with a well-established NGO-supported CHW program,
in which CHWs work under the government's Health Surveillance Assistants (HSAs) and are
assigned 20 to 30 households each to monitor, we randomly assign households to receive either
18 months of coupons for free chlorine solution redeemable at local shops, free monthly chlorine
deliveries by CHWs, or to be in a control group. We cross randomize CHWs to incorporate
active Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH) education into their monthly household visits
to test if this increases chlorine take-up and/or helps sustain chlorine use over 18 months. In
a neighboring region with only the HSA program (no NGO-supported CHWs), we randomize
households between the coupon program and a control group.

We find that the coupon program increases verified chlorine usage rates during spotcheck visits
from 5% to 30%. This effect is constant across the 18-month period of follow-up. The share of
households with verified chlorine usage during at least one of the two followup visits increases
from 6% to 46%. This level of usage seems to be the ceiling, however: none of the CHW-based
interventions have additional impact. To start, the impact of the coupon program is larger in
the region without a CHW program. In the region with a CHW program, the impact of the
coupon program is identical whether or not the CHW was randomized into being trained to
promote WASH. Finally, and most surprisingly, relying on CHWs to deliver free chlorine to
all households during monthly visits does no better than the coupon program at improving
chlorine usage. If anything, it does slightly worse due to imperfect compliance among CHWs,
combined with imperfect targeting.

The large increase in chlorine usage under the coupon program translates into substantial child
health impacts. Caretaker-reported incidence of diarrhea, fever, and vomiting ­ all symptoms
of water-borne infections ­ go down by 20 to 25% in the coupon group within 6 months and

                                               2
remains lower over the entire 18 month follow-up period. The health effects are smaller under
the home delivery by CHW program. This is due to poorer targeting by CHWs than through the
coupon program. Households who do not receive the subsidy from CHWs are disproportionately
vulnerable to water-borne diseases. In contrast, those vulnerable households are significantly
more likely to avail themselves of free chlorine through coupon redemption.

These results suggest that (non-incentivized but well compensated) CHWs are neither comple-
ment nor substitute with subsidies: they do not increase take-up absent subsidies nor do they
increase take-up of subsidies. Using CHWs as behavior change communication and/or nudge
agents appears to be an inefficient use of their time in contexts where households are already
informed of the importance of clean water during prenatal and postnatal care.1

Overall, less than half of households in our sample ever use chlorine they receive for free, even in
the presence of a WASH promotion program. That means that blanket free dispensing leads to
substantial wastage. We test whether CHWs can be used to effectively target the subsidies to
households who have an interest in the product. After CHWs in the home delivery group had
been doing deliveries for 8 months (during which they received enough chlorine to distribute to
their entire community), we randomized a "rationing" treatment: while some CHWs continued
as before (no rationing), others received only 60% as many chlorine bottles as households in
their community (medium rationing) and some only 40% (strong rationing). Rationed CHWs
were explicitly asked to try to deliver the chlorine bottles to households most likely to use
the chlorine to treat their water.2 We find that fewer households received deliveries after the
rationing starts, but the share of households with verified chlorine usage did not decrease. This
suggests that CHWs have or can easily acquire information about the households they visit
regularly, and can use it to target subsidies to users. Targeting on underlying need is less clear,
however: the health effects of the home delivery by CHWs become indistinguishable from zero
in the rationing treatment.

Overall, using CHWs to target chlorine subsidies does no better than the coupon program.
That is because only a small number of households go through the hassle of redeeming coupons
  1
     Over 95% of women in the Malawi Demographic and Health Surveys reported using formal postnatal care
for their most recent birth.
   2
     There were no incentives for CHWs under the rationing treatment.




                                                   3
for free chlorine without using the product afterward, and those with higher returns to product
use are more willing to pay the hassle cost, so self-targeting under the coupon scheme is very
good. There are, however, some domains where self-targeting may not work or where a coupon
scheme may not be an option. In such cases, using CHWs as information gathering agents
could be very useful ­ e.g. to identify households that need to go for a TB screening test, do
not comply with their ARV drug regimen, etc. We note that incentives for CHWs to gather this
information may be necessary, however. As noted above, households in most need of chlorine
were somewhat less likely to receive routine CHW visits to start, in part because they are
further away.

We view our study as making two main contributions. First, we demonstrate large and sustained
health impacts of a program that provides coupons for free chlorine to households with young
children. While Dupas et al. (2016) have previously demonstrated, in the Kenya context, the
effectiveness of coupons as self-targeting micro-ordeals, that study only looked at short-term
usage and did not include health outcomes. We find that the targeting results of Dupas et al.
(2016) in Kenya are sustained over time, hold in Malawi 10 years later, and that effects on
health can be substantial, for a very low cost. This suggests that governments facing a non-
trivial water-borne disease burden may want to consider embedding a coupon program into
their existing well-baby schemes, the same way most governments around sub-Saharan Africa
have by now put in place free bed net distribution programs through prenatal and child clinics
(Dizon-Ross et al., 2017). New parents could easily receive a booklet of coupons at the time
they come for prenatal care, deliver a child and/or bring a child for immunization. Coupons
could then be redeemed at local shops or pharmacies or health facilities, depending on the
procurement system that can be set-up. Physical coupons may even become unnecessary as
countries adopt biometric IDs­a reform currently underway in Malawi, Cote d'Ivoire, Ghana,
and many others.

Second, we contribute to the growing literature on CHW programs. CHW programs across
the globe are highly heterogeneous. Those evaluated to date have been a bundle of multiple
interventions, as CHWs are typically asked to do many things: provide information and encour-
agement; provide diagnostic help and refer serious cases to the health facility; deliver essential
health products, sometimes for free and sometimes at a fee. It is unclear whether the impact of


                                                4
successful programs stems from the information provision, the encouragement, the surveillance,
or the delivery component. Our results suggest that information provision and encouragement
may only play a limited role. There is however scope for the surveillance component to be very
large when the effectiveness of the social planner's intervention depends on private information
about households, private information that the CHWs appear to be effective at discerning,
though they may not always have the incentives to do so.

The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides some background on water-
borne disease prevention and the study context. Section 3 lays the theoretical foundation for
the experimental design. Section 4 presents the study design and data. Section 5 presents the
results and Section 6 discusses cost-effectiveness. Section 7 concludes.



2       Study Background

2.1     Unclean Water, Disease Burden, and Chlorine Access

Globally, an estimated 1.9 billion people lack access to clean water, meaning that they use either
an unimproved water source or an improved source that is contaminated with fecal matter.3
Unclean water leads to water-borne diseases, chief among them diarrhea. Diarrheal disease is
the second-leading cause of childhood mortality. In countries that cannot afford to provide piped
water to dispersed, rural households, point-of-use water-treatment by households can reduce
reported child diarrhea by 29%.4 Chlorine disinfects drinking water against most bacteria and
protects it from re-contamination. Drinking water treated with dilute chlorine is safe, even if
widely used over a long period.5 Additionally, chlorinated water does not need to be boiled
or filtered, which saves users time and money spent on fuel, while conserving environmental
resources. The problem is that current usage rate of chlorine among rural households in Sub-
Saharan Africa is low ­ at baseline in 2017, in our study context of Southern Malawi, it was only
    3
     https://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/publications/hwt-scheme-round-1-report.pdf
    4
     See Wolf et al. (2018), Arnold and Colford (2007), Clasen et al. (2007), Fewtrell et al. (2005) for reviews of
this literature.
   5
     Chlorination has a long history of use, and became a standard of water treatment during the first half of
the 20th century in Europe and the United States. Long-term experience with the substance in piped water
supplies has made clear that its use is safe. The European Commission, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
and World Health Organization support the use of chlorine for water treatment as long as it is used within
acceptable dose ranges.


                                                        5
5%. Finding ways to increase chlorine use among rural households is an outstanding challenge
for the global health community as it strives to achieve the Sustainable Development Goal of
universal safe water by 2030.

In areas where a single water source is used by many households, communal infrastructure
(dispensers placed at water sites) have been proposed as a delivery mechanism with the potential
to increase chlorine usage (Kremer et al., 2011). But in areas where the number of users per
water source is low, the current standard approach is to encourage populations, via promotional
campaigns, to purchase and use chlorine bottles from local shops, and take-up remains low
under this model. For example, in Malawi and Kenya, where the NGO PSI spent over a decade
promoting a diluted chlorine product locally called "WaterGuard liquid" as well as another
point-of-use water treatment product locally called "WaterGuard powder", the usage rate of
any WaterGuard product at the onset of this study was estimated by PSI at 12% in Malawi
(2017), and 16% in Kenya.6

An alternative approach would be free distribution to parents of young children through health
centers. This approach was tested in an experimental study in Kenya in 2007, and was shown to
drastically increase usage­but also to generate wastage if not all recipients of subsidized chlorine
use it for water treatment: Dupas et al. (2016) found that only around 40% of households who
had received enough WaterGuard for a year were treating their water with it during a 6-month
spotcheck visit. One mechanism proposed to reduce wastage is to require that households pay
some hassle cost in order to get the free water treatment product. Dupas et al. (2016) show
that coupons that required retrieval of free chlorine from a local shop achieved the same level of
chlorine use as free home delivery at a considerably lower cost, since households not interested
in using the product do not bother redeeming coupons but feel compelled to accept the home
delivery.

While targeting via coupons improves the cost-effectiveness of free distribution, it falls short
of achieving widespread coverage of safe water. How can the effectiveness of free distribution
schemes (be it home delivery or coupon programs) be enhanced? As numerous countries scale
   6
     The Malawi figure comes from this report: http://www.psi.org/country/malawi; we compute the fig-
ure for Kenya as follows: 27 million month-long treatment units sold (based on https://www.pskenya.org/
wp-content/uploads/2019/04/PS-Kenya-2018-Annual-Report.pdf) for a country with 14 million house-
holds: 27 million/12 months/14 million households=0.16.


                                                  6
up the use of Community Health Workers (CHWs), one potential approach is to rely on CHWs
to promote the use of water treatment. There are three main mechanisms through which
CHWs could increase the returns to dollars invested in water treatment subsidies. First, CHWs
could increase take-up through behavior change communication (BCC); namely, explaining to
households the returns to safe water and how to treat water with chlorine. Second, CHWs could
increase take-up through a reminder effect: CHWs are typically tasked with visiting households
monthly, and these monthly visits could act as a reminder for households to treat their water.
Third, CHWs could use their local information to target the subsidies to households most likely
to put the chlorine product to good use.


2.2    WaterGuard/MadziGuard

In this study, we focus on efficient distribution of a product called WaterGuard, a dilute chlorine
solution (1.5% sodium hypochlorite) that was produced and socially marketed by Population
Health Services (PSI) in Malawi until December 2018. Production of this solution was trans-
ferred to Pharmanova Malawi Limited from December 2018 onwards (about 12 months after
our study began) under the brand name MadziGuard. ("Madzi" means water in the local
language. For simplicity, for the rest of the paper and in tables and figures we use only the
term "WaterGuard" to refer to the treatment solution). One capful of the product contains
enough chlorine solution to treat 20L of visually clean water (two capfuls is recommended for
water that is cloudy or dirty-looking). The WaterGuard product was recognized throughout
the study area: 51% of respondents reported having ever used WaterGuard at baseline (see
Table 1). Despite this, water tests show that only 4.6% of all respondents had treated their
water with chlorine at baseline.


2.3    Government's Health Surveillance Assistants

The Malawi Ministry of Health (MoH) has a cadre of Health Surveillance Assistants (HSAs)
linked to primary-level health facilities. HSAs are tasked to deliver a range of services to their
assigned communities, including information on hygiene and sanitation; immunizations; ante-




                                                7
natal and postnatal care education; and nutrition counseling, among other things.7 During
cholera outbreaks, HSAs can be asked to provide free water treatment solution to households.
Households in our sample report some non-trivial amount of interactions with HSAs on water.
51% report that they ever received water management advice from a HSA (Table 1).8 Distribu-
tion of water treatment solution by HSAs is relatively rare however, with only 4% of households
reporting that HSAs regularly dispenses WaterGuard and less than 8% having ever received
free chlorine from an HSA.


2.4     Partners In Health CHW program

We worked with the CHW program run by Partners In Health (PIH). PIH works with the MoH
to provide comprehensive care for about 150,000 people in the rural district of Neno in Southern
Malawi. PIH complements its clinical services with outreach programs including CHWs. The
CHWs employed by PIH act as `foot soldiers' to the MOH's cadre of HSAs and are able to
support the HSAs in the community and in the home. Whereas HSAs in Neno have a ratio of
about 1:2000 population, the CHWs have a ratio of about 1:150.

CHWs are trained and paid 17,000 Malawian Kwacha (MWK) a month (about 23 USD­for
reference, the annual GDP per capita in Malawi in current USD is 340). They are supposed to
visit each household in their catchment area once per month, checking on the health needs of
the entire household, and referring family members to clinics for care. Topics covered during
home visits include child nutrition, maternal health, and management of HIV, Tuberculosis and
non-communicable diseases. Summary statistics on CHWs in the study are shown in Appendix
Table A1. CHWs are 37 years old on average and 65% female. About 65% completed at least
primary school (compared to only 45% of the population in their catchment area). CHWs are
responsible for about 27 households and work about 10 hours per week on CHW activities. Over
75% have a job in addition to their CHW role and CHW work is the primary source of income
for 43% of CHWs. A Senior CHWs cadre exists who have added mentoring responsibilities
vis-a-vis other CHWs.
   7
     Government of the Republic of Malawi. 2009. Health Surveillance Agent Training Manual Facilitator's
Guide (PDF, 1.7 MB). Lilongwe, Malawi: Ministry of Health.
   8
     The likelihood of having received such advice is lower for those who live farther away from a trading center:
each kilometer reduces it by 2 percentage points.



                                                        8
3     Conceptual Framework
In many contexts, a principal would like an agent to undertake an action which cannot be
routinely observed. One tool at the disposal of the principal is to provide the agent an input
which is complementary to the desired action. In our setting, the principal subsidizes chlorine
solution to promote water treatment among households with young children. We consider a
principal who values the health benefit of a health product, non-health utility, and alternative
uses of funds. Denote bi the health benefit when i uses the health product appropriately, z the
dollar value of a unit of health to the principal, and hi the binary variable indicating whether i
uses product appropriately. The household's non-health utility is ui . Letting S denote the total
cost of subsidies to promote use of the health good and  the marginal cost of public funds,
the principal's payoff is:

                                      i (z    bi  hi + ui ) - S

Because some households may accept a subsidized health good but not use it for a health
purpose (or not use it at all), we distinguish between "takers" and "users", where the former
includes all of those who take the good, regardless of whether and how they use it, and the
latter refers to those who use the health good for the health purpose. From the perspective of
the principal considering whether to introduce a subsidy or other measures to increase usage
of the health product from some baseline level, a subsidy is preferred if the value of health
benefits generated by marginal users of the product, plus any changes in the non-health utility
of marginal and inframarginal users, exceed the opportunity cost of the subsidy spending:

                  (zbmar + dumar )usemar + duinf useinf > s(takeinf + takemar )

On the left-hand side of this inequality is the per-household benefit (suppressing subscript i)
to the principal of introducing the subsidy. The health benefit of the policy is the individual
value of this benefit, z , multiplied by usemar , the proportion of households induced to use the
product under the policy. The non-health utility benefit to such households is represented by
dumar . Households that already use the health product for the health purpose experience no
additional health benefit, but may experience an increase in non-health utility duinf through the
reduced monetary or effort cost of obtaining the product. The proportion of such households
is represented by useinf . On the right-hand side is the principal's cost of the potential policy:

                                                  9
s is the cost of the policy per household that takes up the health product. The terms takeinf
and takemar represent the proportion of households already taking the health product before
the change and those newly induced to take it, regardless of whether they use it for the health
purpose.

This simple framework helps highlight the potential tradeoffs across possible subsidy policy
designs. If usemar < takemar , i.e. the subsidy policy induces some people to take the input
but they end up not using it appropriately, then the policy leads to errors of inclusion, which
are costly. Reducing the gap between usemar and takemar will increase cost-effectiveness. One
potential way to reduce this gap is to encourage takers to put the product to its intended health
use, through information or behavioral change communication. Alternatively, the gap between
usemar and takemar can be reduced through a subsidy delivery mechanisms that screens out
non-users. Our study studies both margins: we study a program that attempts to increase
usage among takers (WASH encouragement by CHWs) as well as two screening mechanisms:
self-screening through coupon redemption, and screening by CHWs.

The effectiveness of the policy will also depend on bmar , the health return to product use for
households induced by the subsidy to take and use the input. As shown in Table 1, households in
our sample are heterogeneous in the baseline safety of their water, with about half of households
already benefiting from a protected source, suggesting that a large share of the sample may
have fairly low bmar . A subsidy delivery mechanism that helps screen out those households will
be more cost-effective. Whether it maximizes welfare depends on the value placed on health
and on the cost of the product. This highlights the importance of comparing the targeting
properties of possible subsidy policies in terms of the underlying need for water treatment, not
only usage.

Finally, the framework highlights that the higher is the baseline take-up of the product (takeinf ),
the higher is the program cost. In our context, as shown in Table 1, baseline usage is below
5%, so the potential for subsidies to be cost-effective is high.




                                                10
4     Study Design and Data Collection

4.1    Study Setting

The study took place in the region that was formerly known as Mwanza District in Southern
Malawi. In 2003, the district was split into two districts, Neno and Mwanza, under the decen-
tralization program. The two neighboring districts are relatively poor and rural. PIH works
only in Neno; there is no CHW program in Mwanza. Water-borne diseases are a leading cause
of death for children under-5. A representative survey in 2015 shows that over 20% of children
in the Southern region of Malawi had a case of diarrhea within the prior two weeks (NSO and
ICF, 2017). This may stem from the fact that very few households have piped water (less than
3% in the 2015 survey and 4% in our baseline sample).


4.2    Sample

We conducted a household listing in November 2017 in the selected study areas, enumerating
every household, for a total of 10,576 households in Neno and 3,946 households in Mwanza.
Among those, households with a child under the age of 6 were considered eligible for the study,
and a subset of those eligible were sampled for the study.

CHWs in Neno are assigned to specific clusters of households. To sample households for the
study, we stratified by these clusters. Specifically, we randomly sampled 6 eligible households
from clusters with more than 15 households, and 4 eligible households from clusters with less
than 15 households. To mimic this sampling strategy in Mwanza district, where there is no
CHW program, we created 110 areas of geographically proximate households and randomly
sampled 4 households from each. In addition to the main sample, 4 households from each
area in both Neno and Mwanza were added as "backup" households: If, during baseline data
collection, a household was no longer available, ineligible, or turned out to be outside the
catchment's area of the CHW cluster we thought they were in during the listing, the household
was replaced with one of these backup households. This backup households would inherit the
treatment status of the original.

A baseline survey was conducted between March and April of 2018. A total of 2,012 households



                                              11
from the main list were successfully surveyed and incorporated into the study. 301 further
households from the backup lists were used as replacements, giving us a final sample of 2,313.
Table 1 shows the demographics and water related characteristics of our sample. Since we
sampled households with young children, the sample is young, with mothers aged 30 on average.
The average household has just over 5 members. 65% of households use a borehole as their
primary source of drinking water and 30% use an unprotected source such as a spring. While
the sample appears quite knowledgeable about Waterguard and its effectiveness (71% think
that WaterGuard makes water safe), and although about half report ever using it, there is
widespread concern that it makes the water taste bad (46% of respondents). At the time of the
baseline survey, only 4.6% of households had drinking water in which residual chlorine could
be detected.


4.3    Experimental Design

We implemented four randomly assigned and partially nested interventions (see Figures A1
for the design and A2 for the timeline). First, the Coupon intervention provided coupons
that could be redeemed for a free bottle of WaterGuard, a point-of-use water treatment, at
a nearby shop each month for 18 months (1,248 households received coupons and 1,225 were
in the control group). In terms of the framework above, the rationale behind the coupon
program is that, as shown in Dupas et al. (2016), it can reduce the gap between takemar and
usemar by screening out non-users. The concern is that it may fail at encouraging usage among
households who may have a high health return b but either do not know it or for whom the
hassle of redeeming the coupon is high, e.g. due to distance or forgetfulness. The second and
third interventions attempt to palliate these. The second intervention is WASH promotion by
CHWs. Three months after coupons were delivered, a random subset of the CHWs were trained
on how to incorporate water hygiene discussions (in particular, chlorine treatment) into their
monthly household visits (321 CHWs received training and 106 were in a control group). The
third intervention is free home delivery: a random subset of the CHWs trained to promote
chlorine were also instructed to make free deliveries of WaterGuard to all the households in
their catchment area (106 CHWs and over 2,000 households, 458 of which are in our study
sample). While free home delivery can help reduce exclusion errors, it may create a lot of


                                             12
inclusion errors, i.e. a huge gap between takemar and usemar if distribution is not rationed.
Our fourth intervention tests whether rationing home delivery helps improve targeting. After
6 months, a "rationing" treatment was introduced for CHWs in the home delivery group: a
random subset were assigned to receive enough WaterGuard supply for only 40% or 60% of
their households (the others continued receiving enough for 100% coverage).


4.3.1   Treatment: Coupons for Free Chlorine (Household-level randomization)

Households assigned to the coupon intervention received coupons that could be redeemed for a
free bottle of WaterGuard at a local shop. Households could redeem one coupon per month for
18 months. Each coupon corresponded to one unique month (e.g. the coupon for March 2018
only be redeemed in March 2018). Coupons were attached to a calendar, the same calendar
as that given to control households. and which many households displayed on their wall (see
Appendix Figure A3). Each coupon was exchangeable for one 150mL bottle of WaterGuard,
enough to treat a standard 20L jerrycan of water approximately 30 times. One bottle, if used
correctly, is enough for roughly one month's supply of treated water (for drinking and cooking)
for a family of 5.

Shop owners were recruited to be part of the WaterGuard distribution network from whom
households could redeem coupons. We recruited shops in all of the trading centers in our
study area so that all households could redeem coupons at their closest trading center. The
average distance to the closest shop where households could redeem coupons was 2.1km (median
1.85km). Shop owners received an initial WaterGuard supply and were restocked each month
as needed (no shop ever ran out). All participating shop owners received a monthly stipend of
MKW 10,000 (roughly USD13) and signed a contract agreeing to 1) accept coupons in exchange
for WaterGuard with no additional fee, 2) only accept coupons in the month for which the
coupon was specified, 3) record each coupon redemption with a coupon serial number in a
record book, 4) retain the coupon until collected by the study team, and 5) pay the cost of
any missing bottles not recorded in the record book (approximately USD0.50). This generated
highly reliable data on coupon redemption for each household.




                                              13
4.3.2   Treatment: CHWs as WASH Promoters (CHW-level randomization)

PIH trained a random subset of CHWs on how to promote safe drinking water practices: how
to talk to households about the importance of water treatment, with emphasis on chlorine use,
in addition to other aspects of Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (e.g., proper boiling methods,
handwashing, sanitation of cooking areas and materials and the safe storage of food). Trained
CHWs were instructed to incorporate chlorine promotion into their monthly household visits.
Therefore, households in the catchment area of a CHW assigned to this arm were expected to
receive promotion of chlorine from their CHW at their home each month.


4.3.3   Treatment: Home Delivery of Free Chlorine by CHWs (CHW-level ran-
        domization)

A random subset of CHWs were trained by PIH on how to promote chlorine usage as above,
but also assigned to deliver chlorine directly to households on a monthly basis. These CHWs
received a stock of 150ml chlorine bottles at routine staff meetings held monthly. They received
exactly one bottle per month per household in their catchment area and were instructed to
deliver one bottle per household. Therefore, each household with a CHW in the home delivery
group was expected to receive a free home delivery of chlorine each month. (Whether this
happened is an outcome of interest and will be discussed in section 5.) Other materials, such as
buckets for water, were not provided. As shown in Figure A1, this group did not overlap with
the coupon arm: Households receiving some form of chlorine either received coupons or home
delivery, but never both. In addition, there was no home delivery without WASH promotion
(e.g. there is no home-delivery equivalent to the coupons-only arm).


4.3.4   Rationing Intervention (CHW-level randomization)

Eight months after the start of the home delivery treatment, 2/3 of the CHWs in that arm
were selected for the "rationing" intervention. Starting in February 2019, they were given
enough WaterGuard for only a subset of their households (1/3 of all home delivery CHWs
received enough for 60% of households and 1/3 received enough for 40%; the remaining 1/3
continued receiving enough for all households). CHWs were told that data from household
surveys suggested that only a minority of households used chlorine, therefore rationing was a


                                              14
wastage-reduction measure, and they were expected to use their local knowledge and discretion
to decide whom to give the bottles to. They were explicitly asked to try to target households
most likely to put the chlorine solution to good use.


4.3.5   Randomization Procedures

CHWs were randomly assigned to stay in the status quo (25%), WASH Training (50%), and
WASH Training + Home Delivery (25%), stratifying on gender.

In Neno, Households whose CHWs had not been assigned to home delivery were randomly
assigned to receive coupons or no coupons, stratifying on cluster. In Mwanza, households were
assigned randomly to receive coupons or no coupons, stratifying on geographic areas used for
sampling.


4.4     Data

4.4.1   Baseline Survey

The baseline survey conducted in March-April 2018 measured basic household demographics
and socio-economic status, as well as self-reported water quality and treatment, and child health.
We also tested for the presence of chlorine in the drinking water using a chlorinometer.

All households received the same calendar at the end of the interview. For households in the
Coupons treatment, 18 monthly coupons were attached to the calendar, and they received
an explanation for how to redeem the coupons. Treatment status was blinded to both the
household and the surveyor until the end of the interview.


4.4.2   Rolling Follow-up Survey

In order to trace usage over time, we conducted follow-up surveys on a rolling basis. Specifically,
we visited around 260 households every month. We aimed to visit each household twice. The
first round of visits started in May 2018 and was completed by mid-December 2018. The
second round started immediately following the completion of the first round in mid-December
2018 and ended in June 2019. The order of the visits was random, but stratified by cluster.
Households that were determined to have moved away permanently as of the first visit were not


                                                15
sampled again. From our baseline sample of 2,313 households, we completed follow-up surveys
for 2,105 households in the first round and 1,731 during the second round. The attrition in
round 2 was in part due to torrential floods that cut out access to entire sections of the sample
area for a few months. Because we had some funds left, we randomly selected 90 households to
receive a third visit in July 2019, of these 73 were surveyed.) See section 5.5.1 for an assessment
of the potential bias resulting from attrition.


4.4.3   Coupon Redemption Data

Redeemed coupons were collected from enrolled shops on a monthly basis starting in March
2018 and the numbers scanned. Households for whom a coupon stub for a given month was
not present at the shop are considered to have not redeemed the coupon.


4.4.4   CHW Survey

We completed two rounds of surveys with CHWs in Neno District. The first round of surveys
was conducted prior to the CHW-level interventions. It collected data on CHW demographics,
their roles outside the CHW program, and their beliefs with respect to community challenges.
This survey was self-administered during routine area-level monthly staff meetings: An enu-
merator attended the meeting and explained each question to CHWs that were present, and
they filled in the questionnaire on their own. This was completed in November 2017.

A second round of CHW surveys was completed in June 2019. The survey elicited CHW's views
on the intervention and asked about household attitudes towards WaterGuard and the CHW's
WaterGuard distribution activities (if applicable).


4.5     Outcomes of Interest

4.5.1   Chlorine Usage: Chlorine Tests

Household chlorine use was measured using colorimetric tests. Respondents were asked to
provide a cup of water from their drinking water reserve, and enumerators added reagent powder
which turned a shade of pink if residual chlorine was present. Enumerators compared this shade
against a provided color wheel to determine the concentration of chlorine in the water. Two


                                                  16
tests were done: one with free chlorine, which measures the concentration of available chlorine
(i.e. whether there is any chlorine left in the water to keep it safe), and one for residual measures
(i.e. whether there are any byproducts of a chlorine reaction). The two measures differed in
less than 1% of the time so the study results are identical across the two measures, and for
simplicity we focus on just one for the analysis (residual chlorine). Households with a non-zero
concentration of residual chlorine are considered to have treated their water. Households with
no drinking water reserve at the time of the visit are coded as not having treated water (158
observations (5% of total)).9


4.5.2    Child Health

We measured three common illnesses in children that can be caused by consumption of con-
taminated water: diarrhea, fever and vomiting. Our enumerators asked caretakers about illness
in all of their children under-10 years old that occurred within the last four weeks. We analyze
the health data at the child level. We create a dummy for "any illness", and also consider the
total number of illnesses experienced. We show the results for each illness separately, as well
as for different recall periods and different age groups, in the appendix. We discuss potential
reporting bias, in particular the risk of experimenter demand effect, in section 5.5.2.

We also measured coughing. Water-borne pathogens common in our setting do not have cough-
ing as a symptom, but coughing is a symptom of indoor air pollution, which is high in rural
Malawi, where wood burning is the primary source of cooking fuel (91% of households in our
sample). There are two potential indirect channels through which water treatment can reduce
indoor air pollution exposure: by reducing the need to boil water, and by reducing illness spells
during which children stay indoors. We discuss impacts on coughing in section 5.5.2.


4.6     Estimation Strategy

We provide results in both graphical and regression formats. The graphics show the raw data
month by month ­ a nice feature of our rolling follow-up survey is that we can trace out impacts
over time. This also allows us to study how treatment effects vary with seasons. The regression
  9
    Table B1 shows that results are similar when we exclude these households rather than coding them as no
treated water.



                                                   17
results are based on the following specification:


       yit =  + COU P ONi + W ASHit +  (W ASHit × COU P ONi ) + M W AN ZAi +

        (M W AN ZAi × COU P ONi ) + DELIVit +  (DELIVit × RAT IONit ) + t +                              it   (1)


where y represents the (follow-up) outcome for individual i in quarter t of the study, COU P ON
is an indicator for whether the individual is in the coupon group, W ASH is an indicator for
whether the individual's CHW has received the WASH promotion intervention (this turns from
0 to 1 in June 2018 for CHWs sampled for training), M W AN ZA is an indicator for whether a
household resides in Mwanza district, and DELIV is an indicator for whether the household's
CHW was assigned to the home delivery arm (this also turns on in June 2018 for households with
a CHW assigned to home delivery). RAT ION is an indicator for whether the household's CHW
was assigned to one of the two rationing arms (this turns on in February 2019 for households
with a CHW assigned to rationing).10 Finally, t is a vector of indicators for each quarter of
the study (i.e., quarter fixed effects). In this set up,  represents the coupon treatment effect
in Neno district for the households who did not have a CHW assigned to the WASH promotion
or delivery arm,  represents the effect of WASH promotion training in absence of the coupon
intervention,  represents the additional effect of the coupon intervention when the CHW is also
assigned to incorporate WASH promotion,  is the effect of living in Mwanza relative to Neno,
 is the additional effect of the coupon intervention in Mwanza,  is the effect of the home
delivery intervention, and  is the effect of the rationing intervention relative to home delivery
without rationing. Our main analysis pools all post intervention time periods and excludes
the baseline, since not all outcomes of interest were measured at baseline. Analyses controlling
for baseline characteristics, including baseline values of the outcome of interest when available,
yield identical results and are shown in Appendix Table B2. We cluster standard errors at the
CHW level in all analyses because the WASH promotion and home delivery interventions were
both assigned at the CHW level in Neno.11 This produces conservative standard errors for the
coupon treatment effect, since the coupons were randomized at the household level.
  10
     In the main specification (Table 2) we pool the rationing arms, but we study the impacts of rationing levels
separately in a specification focused on the Home Delivery group in Table 5.
  11
     In Mwanza clusters are households since there are no CHW program and the only intervention (coupons)
was randomized at the household level.


                                                       18
4.7    Balance between study arms at baseline

We estimate equation 1 using data from the baseline survey to assess balance on our main out-
comes prior to the start of the interventions (Table A2). This set-up allows for easy comparison
with our main coefficients. We find some slight imbalance on one of our two primary outcomes:
presence of chlorine in the water. Specifically, Neno households assigned to the coupon arm
without WASH promotion were 3.7 percentage points less likely to use chlorine at baseline than
control households. This difference is statistically significant but economically small, and will
be dwarfed by our estimates of the coupon treatment effects below, so it does not affect our
ability to estimate causal impacts, and controlling for baseline levels in the analysis do not
change the results (Table B2). Note that households assigned to coupons with WASH are not
different than control households (-0.037-0.027+0.066=0.02). Also note that when pooling all
arms that received coupons, the coefficient on coupon assignment at baseline was trivial (0.4
percentage points). For all other outcomes, we do not see any imbalance. In particular, study
arm assignment is not associated with the probability of a CHW visit in the 4-weeks prior to
the baseline survey or with child health.



5     Results

5.1    Impacts on Chlorine Usage and Child Health

Table 2 shows the impacts on our primary outcomes of interest: whether we could detect chlorine
in the household's drinking water during unannounced follow-up visits, and child health. This
table also includes results for self-reported WaterGuard (likely an upper bound) and whether
the household gave any WaterGuard away (spillover).

Both subsidy interventions had large impacts on water treatment rates. When pooling all arms
that received coupons, the coupon intervention increased the likelihood of a positive chlorine test
by 26.6 percentage points (see "Pooled Coupon Effect" at the bottom of the table), while the
home delivery intervention increased it by 19.5 percentage points. These are vast improvements
in chlorine use compared to the control group (only 4% of the control households had a positive
chlorine test at follow-up).



                                                19
These large increases in water treatment rates from the subsidies led to significant improvements
in child health as reported by the caretakers: the likelihood of a child under 10 experiencing
any of the three illnesses in the past month decreased by 9.2 percentage points (pooled effect)
in the coupon group (from a base of 43%). The number of illnesses decreases by 0.15 from a
base of 0.61, a 24% reduction. The impact of the home delivery intervention is somewhat lower
but cannot be distinguished statistically from the coupon effect. Overall, the magnitude of the
effects on chlorine usage and child health are consistent across the two interventions, with the
coupon intervention having a greater impact on both outcomes.

Figure 1 shows the percent change illness by illness for coupon and home delivery interventions,
based on the coefficient estimates shown in Table A3. The coupon intervention significantly
reduced episodes of diarrhea (25.7% reduction), fever (24.3% reduction), and vomiting (26.9%
reduction). Child illness reductions from the home delivery intervention were of important
magnitudes for all illnesses, but imprecisely estimated for individual illnesses. While there was
a significant reduction in child illnesses in Neno, the effect in Mwanza, where child health was
substantially worse on all categories at baseline (0.76 illnesses compared to 0.58 in Neno, see
Table 2, column 5), was much larger. This was particularly true for diarrhea: there was a 7.5
percentage point reduction in Mwanza compared to a 1.9 percentage point reduction in Neno
(Table A3).

Our main results use a 4-week recall for illnesses among children under 10. Table B3 shows that
our results for diarrhea are robust to different recall periods (14 days and 7 days); if anything,
the relative increase in the pooled coupon effect increases with shorter recall. (We cannot do
this exercise for vomiting and fever because we did not collect information allowing for different
recall periods for those.) Table B4 provides the results for children under 5. They are similar
to results for under 10.


5.2    WASH Promotion through CHWs does not increase usage

Although the two subsidy schemes (coupons and home delivery by CHW) generate a consider-
able increase in water treatment rates compared to baseline levels, the usage rate is far from
universal, with only 30% of households using free chlorine at a given point in time. Can the
usage rate be increased among subsidy beneficiaries through behavioral change communica-

                                               20
tion? In the terms of section 3, can usemar be increased as much as takemar ? In contrast
to our hypothesis going in, the presence of a CHW program does not seem to increase chlo-
rine usage, even when CHWs are specifically trained on WASH promotion. Direct delivery by
trained CHWs did not yield higher usage rates than the coupon scheme, and training CHWs
on WASH did not influence overall chlorine usage in the coupon group: it did not affect coupon
redemption (Figure 2), nor did it influence chlorine usage conditional on having redeemed the
coupon.12 We also note that water treatment rates are not higher in Neno (where the CHW
program operates) than Mwanza, be it without or with coupons (Table 2).


5.3     Targeting

Increasing the usage rate among takers appears difficult. This suggests that targeting subsidies
to those most likely to use the product is important. The main rationale for a coupon scheme is
that it can generate self-targeting: since there is essentially no use for a small diluted chlorine
bottle outside of water treatment, and very little (if any) resale value, households that have no
intention to use the product may not bother redeeming the coupon. Figures 2 and 3 show the
patterns of results for the coupon intervention over time. We find substantial self-targeting:
While coupon redemption decreased over time from 74% in month 1 to 35% in month 18,
chlorine usage as measured through the water tests holds steady at about 30% of coupon
households for the duration of the study. This suggests that the drop in coupon redemption
in the first few months is among people who had weaker preferences for chlorine use and that
self-targeting improved over time. What's more, we find that the health effects are also very
consistent across months, suggesting that the health return for self-selected marginal users
under the coupon scheme (bmar ) is high. This has promising implications for the efficiency of
this program in the long run.

So far we have shown that about 30% of households that received coupons treat their water
in a given month. However, it is unclear if it is the same 30% of households each month or
if households treat some months but not others. This has implications for chlorine promotion
programs, targeting chlorine to users, and for understanding chlorine preferences. We provide
  12
    This is true regardless of the CHW's characteristics, which we assessed by interacting the WASH indicator
with CHW age, education, number of households, hours spent on CHW activities, whether CHW is their primary
source of income, and whether they were a senior CHW.


                                                     21
insight into these issues by analyzing the distribution of number of coupons redeemed and by
analyzing consistency in use across the waves of water testing.

Appendix figure A5 shows that there is bunching in the distribution of number of coupons
redeemed around 0 and 1 (15% of households) and around 16, 17, and 18 (25% of households).13
To assess consistency in chlorine use, Table 3 estimates treatment effects on whether households
had a positive chlorine test at any of the two follow-up visits (column 1) and on whether they
had a positive test at all follow-up visits (column 2). The pooled coupon effect shows that
coupons increased the likelihood of having at least one positive chlorine test by 40.2 percentage
points and of consistent chlorine use by 15.5 percentage points. Thus, more than half of the
households that used chlorine as a result of the coupon intervention did not use it consistently,
even in the WASH group. This could be because households only use chlorine at specific
times ­ e.g. when a child is ill, or when the main water source is suddenly contaminated.
Alternatively, this could be because other barriers such as lack of buckets, inconvenience or
cognitive overload prevent people that would prefer to consistently use free chlorine from doing
so. This is consistent with a recent experiment in Kenya, which shows that interventions that
increase self-efficacy as well as the salience of chlorination can increase chlorine usage by 25%
(Haushofer et al., 2019).


5.3.1    Targeting on Health Returns: Heterogeneity by Baseline Water Quality

Not all households need chlorine all the time to have clean water. At baseline, 71% of house-
holds report using a protected source (public tap, borehole with handpump, protected well,
protected spring or private tap) and 50% believe that their water source is always safe. If they
are correct, then the returns to using chlorine would be very low for such households. Table
A4 zooms in on the control group, and examines the correlation between beliefs about water
cleanliness and child illness. We find a strong negative correlation between whether the respon-
dent "believes water is always safe" and child illness incidence, and likewise a strong negative
correlation between "protected source" and child illness. This suggests that water sources for
these households are truly less likely to be contaminated.
  13
    Most households had the opportunity to redeem 18 coupons but about 10% did not receive their coupons
until the first month had already passed. Also, some received their coupons towards the end of the first month
and therefore might not have had time to redeem the first coupon.



                                                     22
Ideally, the social planner would only target subsidized chlorine to households with contam-
inated water. We test for how well coupons and home delivery by CHWs target chlorine to
households with contaminated water by examining whether baseline water cleanliness predicts
chlorine use and child health at follow-up. Figure 5 shows that the coupon effect on chlorine use
was significantly larger for households with an unprotected water source (35 percentage point
increase compared to 22 percentage point increase; p<0.001). Correspondingly, the impacts on
child health is also much larger for such households. These results imply a non-trivial degree
of self-targeting based on perceived value of chlorine treatment.

In contrast, the effects of the home delivery treatment are not greater for households with
worse water access at baseline. How come? Our data shows that CHWs appear to neglect
such households relatively more than better endowed households. This is shown in Table 4,
which tests whether households who have a less clean water source are those most likely to
receive (if in the home delivery group) or take advantage of (if in the Coupon group) the free
chlorine subsidy. We find that this is not the case for the home delivery treatment: CHWs
visit those whose source is unprotected less regularly (column 1) and correspondingly deliver
free chlorine bottles less often to such households (column 2). In contrast, self-targeting under
the coupon program works well, with those with unprotected water being more likely to report
they got free chlorine. The coupon redemption data (column 3) verifies this: households with
an unprotected source redeem 19 percentage points (three) more coupons, on average, than
those with a protected source.14 Column 3 also shows that households that were further from
the shop where coupons could be redeemed were less likely to redeem coupons.

Why do CHWs fail to appropriately target households who have the greatest need for chlorine?
This may be because such households are further away, hence the costs associated with doing
a home visit are higher. Indeed, households whose distance to the trading center is greater
than the median in the sample were significantly less likely to receive regular CHW visits, and
the home delivery intervention did not change this (Column 4 of Table 4). Correspondingly,
distance reduced the impact of the home delivery intervention on receipt of free WaterGuard
(column 5). Strikingly, it did more so than in the coupon group. In other words, distance
  14
    This is true even when we do not control for distance to the shop where the coupons could be redeemed.
Average distance was significantly greater for households with an unprotected source: 2.3km vs. 1.9km, a 400m
gap (p<0.001).


                                                     23
impedes access to the subsidy more when the distance cost is paid by the delivery agent rather
than the end-user.


5.3.2   Targeting on Usage Cost: Heterogeneity by Baseline Taste Concerns

Another dimension of heterogeneity is in households' distaste for chlorinated water. The mini-
mum amount of chlorine necessary to purify water may not affect the taste of water, but dosing
correctly can be difficult for non-standard water containers, so as households err on the side
of caution, the actual quantities used to purify tend to give the water a chlorinated taste. At
baseline, while 51% of respondents had ever used Waterguard, 45% of respondents mentioned
that they think it gives water a bad taste, suggesting that this may be a serious barrier to
adoption. Column 3 of Table 4 shows that households with such beliefs at baseline redeemed 8
percentage points (14%) fewer coupons, suggesting self-targeting based on taste concerns. Fig-
ure A6 shows that the effects of the coupon scheme on chlorine use were smaller for households
who believe WaterGuard alters the taste.


5.3.3   Targeting through Ex-Post Sharing

To the extent that subsidy recipients who do not care for chlorine give the chlorine away to
other households, the overall targeting performance of the subsidy programs may be higher
than what we observe when focusing on beneficiary households only. Coupon households are
15.6 percentage points more likely to report having ever given away WaterGuard to a neighbor
than control households (Table 2). Because we provided coupons to less than 10% of households
in a village, those spillovers are diffuse, however ­ chlorine usage in the control group was still
very low at only 4% on average, not higher than at baseline. Home delivery households were
not more likely to report giving WaterGuard away; this is possibly because their neighbors were
already receiving WaterGuard from the CHW.


5.3.4   Targeting by CHWs: Results from the Rationing Experiment

Can CHWs be effective targeting agents when specifically asked to do so? Starting in February
2019, the rationing intervention randomly varied the amount of WaterGuard bottles CHWs
had to distribute. This allows us to test whether CHWs, when they are in charge of identifying


                                                24
beneficiaries, can target free chlorine to households that use it.

Table 5 shows how the rationing arms compare to the 100% coverage arm on whether the
households received a bottle in the last 4-weeks, positive chlorine tests, and any child illness.
Columns 1-3 analyze each rationing arm separately and columns 4-6 pool them. This analysis
only includes the 105 CHWs that were assigned to home delivery and fewer survey waves (261
households). Therefore, we have less power to detect effects than in our previous analyses.

Rationing supply of WaterGuard bottles was far more efficient than 100% coverage in terms
of targeting users. Despite many fewer bottles being given to CHWs, rationing had small and
insignificant effects on objectively measured WaterGuard usage among households (columns 2
and 5). This suggests that CHWs have private information about household's preferences for
WaterGuard, and can effectively target bottles to households that will use them. Figure 4 plots
the share of households that received WaterGuard and the share with positive chlorine tests by
study month. By the last study month, the share of households that receive WaterGuard and
the share that have treated water nearly converge in the rationing arms, whereas a large gap
remains in the 100% coverage arm.

The estimates of the health effects under rationing are noisy due to the reduced sample size
(fewer households over fewer months), but suggest that targeting by CHWs, while it is based on
usage, may not be based on underlying health needs: the health effects under rationing cannot
be distinguished from zero (Table 2 and Figure A4).

Overall, it seems clear from our results that absent a monitoring and/or incentive system,
targeting through CHWs performs worse than self-targeting through coupon redemption. One
prima facie puzzling result is that the self-targeting observed in the coupon scheme cannot be
reproduced through the Home Delivery by CHW scheme. Why don't households who would
go through the hassle of redeeming their coupons go through the hassle of heckling their CHW
to visit them / give them chlorine? Why don't households who would not bother to redeem
their coupon still accept the free bottle from the CHW? On the former, CHWs may not have
informed households that they were entitled to a free bottle every month, reducing the pressure
on themselves to make monthly visits, especially to far away households. Once they had to
ration, CHWs may have asked households directly: "Will you use the chlorine? I need to


                                                25
know because I do not have enough for everyone." This could explain why targeting on usage
improves under rationing, but it improved targeting only among household that CHWs cared
to approach. On why households do not opt out of the free delivery unless explicitly encouraged
to do so, the most likely explanation is that it is difficult to refuse a free health good from a
health worker, likely due to social desirability bias.


5.4    Why is chlorine promotion by CHWs not making a difference?

CHWs employed by PIH have been working in Neno to support the primary care system for
over 12 years and are a respected part of the health system in the district. In 2014-2015, CHWs
were trained and deployed to identify pregnant women and escort them to prenatal care visits,
and a synthetic control method study estimated that this led to an 18% increase in enrollment
for prenatal care (Kachimanga et al., 2020). Based on this, PIH expected that WASH advice
from CHWs would be followed, especially if it comes with the hand-delivery of a subsidized
product. Why, then, did the WASH training not improve household usage of chlorine, even
when combined with home delivery?

A first possible explanation is that CHWs have a large and growing amount of responsibilities
and might not have the time to implement the intervention as designed. This could have
led CHWs to forgo visiting some households. Moreover, during household visits, CHWs are
tasked with a long checklist of items to complete, which could crowd out chlorine promotion
during the visit. We test for these potential explanations by estimating equation (1) to predict
the probability of receiving a CHW visit in the previous 4 weeks and for the probability of a
CHW talking about chlorine during their last visit (Table 6, columns 1 and 2). Only 58.5% of
households received a home visit in the previous 4 weeks in the control group and there was
no significant difference in the chlorine promotion arm (column 1). (The figure increases to
80% for any CHW visit in the last 2 months). Interestingly, the home delivery intervention
increased CHW effort: home delivery led to a 12 percentage point (22%) increase in households
reporting a home visit from a CHW. This result suggests that the ability to deliver free goods
may motivate CHWs to visit households more regularly than they would otherwise. This is
consistent with the finding from Wagner et al. (2020) in Uganda, where CHWs asked to deliver
free ORS kits to households did more home visits than when they could sell the treatment kits


                                                26
door-to-door and keep the revenue. Nevertheless, in our settting compliance with home delivery
to all households was not perfect among CHWs, with only 58% of households receiving a home
delivery from their CHW absent any rationing (Table 6).

Column 2 Table 6 shows that over a quarter of control households receive information about
chlorine from CHW to start with, and the increase in exposure to chlorine promotion was
much lower than expected in the WASH arm. Assignment to WASH training increased the
likelihood of the CHW talking about chlorine during their previous visit by 13.5 percentage
points from 25.7% in the control arm. But interestingly, this effect is no greater than the effect
of coupons alone: households who received coupons were 11.4 percentage points more likely to
have their non-trained CHW discuss WaterGuard with them during their last visit. It could
be that since households in the coupon arm are more likely to have chlorine on hand, they
bring up the topic themselves, or that the CHW reacts to the coupons on the wall calendar.
Ultimately, the WASH intervention did not lead to a significant change in attitudes about the
need to treat water with chlorine (column 3), beliefs about the effectiveness of WaterGuard at
preventing illness (columns 5 and 6), or knowledge of correct use (column 8). It is also possible
that informing households that their water is not safe encourages households to adopt other
strategies to clean their water besides chlorine, such as boiling. Column 4 does not support
this hypothesis, showing that households in the WASH arm were no more likely to boil their
water.


5.5      Potential Threats to Internal Validity

5.5.1    Attrition

About 6% of households assessed at baseline received no follow-up visits and 22% received only
one follow-up visit.15 Table A5 regresses the number of follow-up visits per household on their
treatment assignment. This table shows that the probability of attrition was similar across
study arms. However, it is possible that households who missed a follow-up visit had different
characteristics across study arms. Table A6 shows baseline characteristics of attriters (the
608 households that had less than two follow-up visits). Differences among attriters between
  15
   The attrition in round 2 was in part due to torrential floods that cut out access to entire sections of the
sample area for a few months.


                                                     27
arms were small and mostly insignificant. Attriters in the coupon arm had less child illness
at baseline, which implies, if anything, our child health results would be biased towards zero.
However, it is still possible attriters were different on unobservable characteristics that are
correlated with our main outcomes. To bound the bias that could result from this, we include
attriters in our main regression models and assume that attriters from coupon and home delivery
assigned households had bad outcomes (no treated water and child illness) and attriters from
control households had good outcomes (treated water and no child illness).16 Table A7 shows
that under these extreme assumptions, we still see a statistically significant 6 percentage point
increase (27% increase) in chlorine use, but effects on child illness become very imprecise.


5.5.2      Reporting Bias for Health Outcomes

While our measure of chlorine usage is objectively measured through water tests, our measures
for health outcomes are self-reports by caregivers. Since study participants could obviously not
be blinded to their treatment status, one could be concerned that the impacts we observe are
due to experimenter demand effects. Wolf et al. (2018) suggest that non-blinding could lead
researchers to overestimate diarrhea reductions. In this section, we discuss various pieces of
evidence to help allay such concerns. First, we note that the health effects for the coupons persist
over time (as shown in Figure 3), while experimenter demand effects are typically short-lived.
Second, as shown in Figure 5, we see smaller impacts on child health for those reporting having a
protected source of water, as expected. Third, we observe spillover effects on respiratory health
(see column 4 of Table A3). Specifically, the incidence of coughing, very high in our sample due
to indoor air pollution (45% of children under 10 experienced coughing in the previous 4 weeks
in the control group), reduces by 15%. There is no reason to think that experimenter demand
effects would carry through to respiratory health, an illness clearly not targeted by the water
treatment subsidy program. The decrease in coughing is consistent with the observed decrease
in water boiling (Table 6), as well as the fact that children spend more time outdoors when
they are not sick with diarrhea or fever. Fourth, we see larger health impacts in Mwanza than
Neno, consistent with greater coupon usage in Mwanza, but there is no reason why experimenter
demand effects would be greater in Mwanza. Finally, the treatment that may have been the most
 16
      We exclude the WASH treatment from this exercise for simplicity



                                                     28
likely to generate social desirability bias is the WASH treatment, since it explicitly encourage
households to use chlorine. Indeed, in Table 2, we see that the WASH treatment shows a
significant effect in chlorine usage when self-reported (column 2) that is not validated with
the objective chlorine test data (column 1). Yet households in the WASH treatment do not
report fewer illnesses (columns 4 and 5), suggesting that if experimenter demand effects may
have been at play in self-reporting of chlorine usage (the rationale to do objective water tests),
they do not seem to carry through to caretaker reported health outcomes. Overall, while we
acknowledge that having objective measures of child health would have been a great addition
to this study had it been possible, we take our estimated effects on caregiver-reported health
outcomes as strongly suggestive.



6    Cost-effectiveness
In order to estimate the cost-effectiveness of the coupon and home delivery interventions, we use
administrative data on number of bottles distributed and distribution costs combined with our
treatment effect estimates. We restrict our analysis to the last 12 months of the interventions
(September 2018 onward) to get closer to steady-state cost and effectiveness estimates. We
estimate home delivery cost-effectiveness separately for the versions with 100%, 60%, and 40%
coverage.

We calculate the cost per additional 30 household-days with treated drinking water and the cost
per child illness averted. The two analyses call for different time horizons because households
with treated water is reflective of one point in time, whereas child illnesses averted add up
over time. Thus, we used monthly costs and effectiveness (averaged over all 12 months) when
estimating cost per additional 30 household-days with treated drinking water, and total costs
and effectiveness for the full 12 months when estimating the cost per child illness averted. We
use household-days because our chlorine tests only verify whether a household had chlorine tests
on a given day. Thus, each positive test is 1 household-day with treated water. We consider a
child as having illness if their caretaker report that they had diarrhea, fever, or vomiting in the
previous 4 weeks. Treatment effects for illnesses averted are from the specification in equation
1, restricting to data collected after September 1, 2018.


                                                29
Cost estimates are based on the number of WaterGuard bottles distributed and the wholesale
price (USD 0.45 per bottle). We use coupon redemption data to identify the number of bot-
tles redeemed in the coupon arm, and PIH administrative records to identify the number of
bottles handed out to CHWs in the home delivery arms. We also include the monthly cost of
distribution to shops in the coupon arm and monthly cost of distribution to CHWs in the home
delivery arm.17 The monthly distribution costs to shops are likely an upper bound because a
scaled up version could deliver to shops less frequently (e.g. every 3 months). CHWs, however,
would have difficulty transporting and storing more than one month's supply.

Table 7 shows the cost-effectiveness estimates. Panel A shows that coupons were far more cost-
effective than home delivery with 100% coverage in terms of increasing chlorine use, and that
rationing helped improve the cost-effectiveness of home delivery. Among the 872 households
that received coupons, an average of 419 coupons were redeemed per month, costing about
$258 ($0.29 per household). This led to 6,804 additional household-days with treated drinking
water.18 This gives a cost effectiveness ratio (CER) of $01.13 per 30 households-days with
treated water. We distributed more bottles in the home delivery arms because the intervention
applied to all households in the CHW's catchment area (close to 1,000 households in each arm),
whereas coupons only applied to those we directly enrolled in the study during the baseline
visit. The 100% coverage arm was the most expensive and the least cost-effective. While the
40% rationing arm has the lowest CER, the CERs for both the rationing arms are very noisy,
because we only implemented these interventions for six months rather than 18.

Panel B shows that the coupons intervention cost $2.69 to avert one child illness. The home
delivery arms were also relatively cost-effective in terms of averting illness, but less so than
coupons. The home delivery with 100% coverage intervention cost nearly twice as much per
household as the coupon intervention and is less cost-effective at $12.54 per illness averted.19
Coupons cost $6.40 per diarrhea case averted vs. $24 for home delivery (Table A8).
  17
     It cost the program roughly $25 per shop to make the deliveries each month and each shop covers about
313 households ($0.08 per household). Distribution to CHWs is more centralized since CHWs meet monthly at
the health centre, and hence cheaper at $0.02 per household per month.
  18
     On any given day 227 (0.26 x 872) additional households had a positive test. Over the entire month this is
6,804 household days.
  19
     We did not implement any of the home delivery arms for an entire 12 months because we started the 100%
coverage intervention 3 months after baseline and the rationing intervention 10 months after baseline. Therefore
we extrapolated 12 month costs using the monthly costs, which are fixed.



                                                      30
7    Conclusion
Governments of low- and middle-income countries spend relatively large sums on water and
sanitation subsidies: between 1.5 and 2% of GDP according to a recent World Bank report
(Andres et al., 2019). The incidence of this spending has recently been questioned, however.
Careful analysis of the spending in 10 countries suggests that 56% of subsidies end up in the
pockets of the richest 20% of households, while only 6% of subsidies find their way to the poorest
20% (Andres et al., 2019). The main cause of such poor targeting is that existing subsidies
typically target piped water systems, which are largely nonexistent in rural areas, where the
majority of the poor live. Even when poor households are in areas with access, most of them
are unable to afford a connection to the network (Devoto et al., 2012). Identifying targeting
mechanisms that can direct resources to the poor while excluding the more well-off is a key
priority for governments.

This paper shows that one possible such mechanism­free water treatment solution made avail-
able monthly to households with young children conditional on them coming to pick it up
from a central place­can effectively target subsidies to poor households whose drinking water is
unclean. Such a program is extremely cost-effective and substantially reduces the incidence of
water-borne diseases in low density, unconnected rural areas, with no decrease in impact over an
18-month period. It is more cost-effective than relying on existing networks of CHWs. CHWs
are worse at targeting subsidies to households that need them the most than self-targeting.
What's more, their ability to nudge more households to treat water appears very limited, and
asking them to do so may come at the expense of other tasks they have to do.

As far as we know, no country to date routinely provides free water treatment product to parents
of young children through rural clinics. This situation reminds us of the situation regarding
malaria prevention in the early 2000s (Cohen and Dupas, 2010). Since then, free distribution
of insecticide-treated bednets to pregnant women and young children has been adopted by over
thirty countries, and malaria incidence has considerably reduced as a result (World Health
Organization, 2019). Our results suggest that adopting a similar policy for point-of-use water
treatment would bring countries closer to achieving the goal of universal access to safe drinking
water set forth by the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda.


                                               31
References
Anderson, M. L. (2008). Multiple inference and gender differences in the effects of early in-
  tervention: A reevaluation of the abecedarian, perry preschool, and early training projects.
  Journal of the American Statistical Association, 103(484):1481­1495.

Andres, L. A., Thibert, M., Lombana Cordoba, C., Danilenko, A. V., Joseph, G.,
  and Borja-Vega, C. (2019).        Doing More with Less.        World Bank.      Available at
  https://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/pdf/10.1596/32277.

Arnold, B. F. and Colford, J. M. (2007). Treating water with chlorine at point-of-use to improve
  water quality and reduce child diarrhea in developing countries: A systematic review and
  meta-analysis. The American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 76(2):354­364.

Banerjee, A. V., Duflo, E., Glennerster, R., and Kothari, D. (2010). Improving immunisation
  coverage in rural india: clustered randomised controlled evaluation of immunisation cam-
  paigns with and without incentives. BMJ, 340.

Bj¨
  orkman-Nyqvist, M., Guariso, A., Svensson, J., and Yanagizawa-Drott, D. (2019). Reducing
  child mortality in the last mile: Experimental evidence on community health promoters in
  uganda. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 11(3):155­92.

Clasen, T., Schmidt, W.-P., Rabie, T., Roberts, I., and Cairncross, S. (2007). Interventions to
  improve water quality for preventing diarrhoea: systematic review and meta-analysis. Bmj,
  334(7597):782.

Cohen, J. and Dupas, P. (2010). Free Distribution or Cost-Sharing? Evidence from a Random-
  ized Malaria Prevention Experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(1):1­45.

Devoto, F., Duflo, E., Dupas, P., Parient´
                                         e, W., and Pons, V. (2012). Happiness on tap: Piped
  water adoption in urban morocco. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4(4):68­
  99.

Dizon-Ross, R., Dupas, P., and Robinson, J. (2017). Governance and the effectiveness of public
  health subsidies: Evidence from ghana, kenya and uganda. Journal of Public Economics,
  156:150 ­ 169.



                                              32
Duflo, E., Dupas, P., Ginn, T., Grace, M. B., Baraza, M., Pouliquen, V., and Sharma, V.
  (2019). Hiv prevention among youth: A randomized controlled trial of voluntary counseling
  and testing for hiv and male condom distribution in rural kenya. PLoS One, 14(7).

Dupas, P., Hoffmann, V., Kremer, M., and Zwane, A. P. (2016).            Targeting health sub-
  sidies through a nonprice mechanism: A randomized controlled trial in kenya. Science,
  353(6302):889­895.

Dupas, P. and Miguel, E. (2017). Chapter 1 - impacts and determinants of health levels in
  low-income countries. In Banerjee, A. V. and Duflo, E., editors, Handbook of Economic
  Field Experiments, volume 2 of Handbook of Economic Field Experiments, pages 3 ­ 93.
  North-Holland.

Fewtrell, L., Kaufmann, R. B., Kay, D., Enanoria, W., Haller, L., and Colford, J. M. (2005).
  Water, sanitation, and hygiene interventions to reduce diarrhoea in less developed countries:
  a systematic review and meta-analysis. The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 5(1):42 ­ 52.

Haushofer, J., John, A., and Orkin, K. (2019). Can Simple Psychological Interventions Increase
  Preventive Health Investment? NBER Working Papers 25731, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Inc.

Jamison, D. T., Gelband, H., Horton, S., Jha, P., Laxminarayan, R., Mock, C. N., and Nugen,
  R., editors (2018). Disease Control Priorities: Improving Health and Reducing Poverty,
  volume Disease Control Priorities, Vol. 9. The World Bank, 3rd edition edition.

Kachimanga, C., Dunbar, E. L., Watson, S., Cundale, K., Makungwa, H., Wroe, E. B., Malindi,
  C., Nazimera, L., Palazuelos, D., Drake, J., et al. (2020). Increasing utilisation of perinatal
  services: estimating the impact of community health worker program in neno, malawi. BMC
  Pregnancy and Childbirth, 20(1):1­10.

Kremer, M., Miguel, E., Mullainathan, S., Null, C., and Zwane, A. P. (2011). Social engineering:
  Evidence from a suite of take-up experiments in kenya. Unpublished Working Paper.

Mekonnen, Z., Gelaye, K., Were, M., Gashu, K., and Tilahun, B. (2019). Effect of mobile text
  message reminders on routine childhood vaccination: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
  Systematic Reviews, 8.


                                               33
Milkman, K. L., Beshears, J., Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., and Madrian, B. C. (2011). Using
  implementation intentions prompts to enhance influenza vaccination rates. Proceedings of
  the National Academy of Sciences, 108(26):10415­10420.

NSO and ICF (2017).         Malawi demographic and health survey 2015-16.            Technical
  report, National Statistical Office Malawi and ICF, Zomba, Malawi.             Available at
  http://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/FR319/FR319.pdf.

Wagner, Z., Asiimwe, J. B., Dow, W. H., and Levine, D. I. (2019). The role of price and
  convenience in use of oral rehydration salts to treat child diarrhea: A cluster randomized
  trial in uganda. PLoS medicine, 16(1).

Wagner, Z., Asiimwe, J. B., and Levine, D. I. (2020). When financial incentives backfire:
  Evidence from a community health worker experiment in uganda. Journal of Development
  Economics, 144:102437.

Wolf, J., Hunter, P. R., Freeman, M. C., Cumming, O., Clasen, T., Bartram, J., Higgins, J. P.,
  Johnston, R., Medlicott, K., Boisson, S., et al. (2018). Impact of drinking water, sanitation
  and handwashing with soap on childhood diarrhoeal disease: updated meta-analysis and
  meta-regression. Tropical medicine & international health, 23(5):508­525.

World Health Organization (2019). World malaria report 2019. resreport, WHO. Available at
  https://www.who.int/publications-detail/world-malaria-report-2019.




                                              34
Figures and Tables
                                       Figure 1: Percent change in child illness
                           (a) Coupons                                          (b) Home Delivery




       Any Illness                                                Any Illness




         Diarrhea                                                   Diarrhea




            Fever                                                      Fever




         Vomiting                                                   Vomiting




                     -40   -30   -20   -10     0   10   20                       -40     -30    -20 -10      0    10   20
                                   % Reduction                                                 % Reduction

                            Estimate           95% CI                                  Estimate              95% CI




Notes: Percent changes are from regressions reported in Tables 2 and A3. We used the margins command
in Stata to estimate the share of children that had each illness with and without the intervention and each
point represents the percent difference in the intervention group relative to the control group. 95% confidence
intervals are based on the upper and lower ends of the confidence interval of the difference divided by the level
in the control group.




                                                             35
                       Figure 2: Coupon redemption and verified usage, over time


         100                                                                   Coupon Redemption
                                                                               Coupon+WASH
                                                                               Coupon Only
                                                                               Positive Chlorine Test
         80



                                                                               Coupon+WASH
                                      Start of WASH interventon                Coupon Only
                                                                               WASH Only
                                                                               Control
         60
       %
         40
         20
         0




           Baseline         Jun18         Aug18      Oct18     Dec18   Feb19     Apr19       Jun19
                                                       Study Month


Notes: Positive chlorine test results are pooled in 2-month bins to reduce noise (e.g., May and June 2018 are
pooled). An average of 267 households were surveyed each month. All water tests from the baseline period
(March and April 2018) were conducted before the households received coupons. However, coupon redemption
started for some households before all households received coupons.

                 Figure 3: Share of children with illness in previous 4 weeks, over time
           100




                                                                                              Coupon
                                                                                              Control
           80
           60
       %
           40
           20
           0




            Baseline         Jun18        Aug18      Oct18     Dec18   Feb19     Apr19       Jun19
                                                       Study Month


Notes: Lines plot share of children under 10 years old from surveyed households that had at least one illness
among diarrhea, fever, and vomiting. Results pooled in 2-month bins to reduce noise. Each group pools
respondents from the Non-WASH and WASH sub-groups.


                                                         36
Figure 4: Home Delivery Group: Receipt of free WaterGuard and verified use by rationing
assignment
    100




                                                                                    WG Last 4 Weeks
                                                                                    Full Coverage
                                                                                    60% Ration
                                                                                    40% Ration
    80




                                                                                    Positive Chlorine Test
                                                                                    Full Coverage
                                                                                    60% Ration
                                                                                    40% Ration
    60
  %
    40
    20




                                                Start of rationing intervention
    0




          3-4                    1-2                    1-2                       3-4                     5-6
                                            Months Before/After Rationing




Notes: Dashed lines plot the share of surveyed households that had chlorine treated water (tested by the study
team) for the 4 months prior to the start of rationing (February 2019) and 6 months while rationing was ongoing.
Shares are averaged across two months to reduce noise. Solid lines plot the share of surveyed households that
reported receiving a free bottle of WaterGuard in the previous 4 weeks.




                                                      37
           Figure 5: Heterogeneity in effect sizes, by whether water source is protected

                                         Chlorine Use                        No Child Illness




                    Coupons




              Home Delivery




                              .1        .2         .3         .4     0      .05     .1      .15     .2

                               Protected Water Source         Unprotected Water Source



Notes: Estimates are from separate regressions that subset on households based on whether they had a pro-
tected water source. Regressions include indicators for Coupon and Home Delivery assignment. Child illness
was measured within the previous month for children under 10 years old. The illness effects sizes are the absolute
value of the any illness coefficients (positive means less illness). Protected source includes piped water, public
tap, borehole with handpump, protected well, and protected spring. Points represent the effect size relative
to the control group and error bars are 95% confidence intervals. Standard errors are clustered at the CHW
level in Neno, and at the household level in Mwanza. For Coupons, differences in effect sizes are significant for
chlorine use (tested using interaction terms), but not child illness. Differences in effect sizes are not significant
for Home Delivery.




                                                         38
                                Table 1: Description of sample

                                                                            P-Value of Joint
                                                                               Test for
 Variables                                         Mean     Std. Dev.
                                                                             Orthogonality
 Demographics
 Age                                                30.2       9.10              0.703
 Education (None)                                  0.104      0.306              0.453
 Education (Standard 1/4)                          0.240      0.427              0.993
 Education (Standard 5/8)                          0.475      0.499              0.943
 Education (Secondary+)                            0.179      0.383              0.967
 Wealth Index                                       -.00       2.37              0.418
 Household Size                                     5.15       1.82              0.746
 Age of Youngest Child                              2.30       1.47              0.275

 Chlorine Beliefs and Use
 Ever Used WaterGuard                              0.513      0.499              0.212
 Believes Chlorine Makes Water Safe                0.714      0.451              0.266
 Believes Chlorine Makes Water Taste Bad           0.462      0.498              0.258
 Positive Chlorine Test                            0.046      0.209              0.095

 Water Source
 Any Protected Source                              0.706      0.455              0.301
 Protected: Piped                                  0.036      0.187              0.077
 Protected: Borehole                               0.647      0.477              0.405
 Protected: Well or Spring                         0.021      0.145              0.906
 Believes Own Water Source Always Safe             0.504      0.500              0.445

 HSA Interaction
 HSA gave water management advice                  0.511      0.499              0.714
 HSA dispenses WaterGaurd                          0.043      0.203              0.363
 HSA gave free chlorine                            0.079      0.270              0.619
Notes: Data source: Baseline surveys conducted between March and April 2018. P-value of joint
test for orthogonality was estimated using F-test after regressing the variable on indicators for
treatment assignment: coupon, WASH, coupon X WASH, home delivery, home delivery X Ra-
tioning, Coupon X Mwanza, and Mwanza. Mwanza was omitted from the F-test. Wealth Index
was created using principle components analysis based on household assets.




                                              39
                 Table 2: Impacts on WaterGuard adoption and child health

                                    (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)           (5)
                                                Self-
                                 Positive                   Gave Wa-
                                              Reported                   Any Child     Number of
 VARIABLES                       Chlorine                   terGuard
                                              Chlorine                    Illness       Illnesses
                                  Test                        Away
                                                Use

 Coupon                          0.259***      0.304***     0.124***     -0.0838***     -0.184**
                                 (0.0270)      (0.0327)      (0.0204)      (0.0298)     (0.0841)
 Coupon X Mwanza                   0.0608        0.0410       0.0326        -0.0120       -0.110
                                 (0.0396)      (0.0443)      (0.0309)      (0.0449)      (0.126)
 WASH                             0.00746      0.0326**      -0.00797      -0.00744      0.0215
                                 (0.0145)      (0.0144)     (0.00838)      (0.0287)     (0.0772)
 Coupon X WASH                    -0.0164       -0.0163     0.0537**        -0.0125       -0.135
                                 (0.0351)      (0.0402)      (0.0268)      (0.0374)      (0.112)
 Home Delivery                   0.195***      0.239***        0.0123     -0.0629**      -0.162*
                                 (0.0259)      (0.0262)      (0.0120)      (0.0299)     (0.0861)
 Home Delivery X Rationing        0.00118        0.0315       0.00721        0.0505       0.123
                                 (0.0416)      (0.0428)      (0.0180)      (0.0325)      (0.104)
 Mwanza                           -0.0152      0.00728       -0.00829      0.0615*      0.273***
                                 (0.0134)      (0.0146)     (0.00985)      (0.0319)     (0.0822)

 Observations                      3,793         3,576         3,893        6,623         6,623
 Controls                           No            No            No           No             No
 Quarter FE                         Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
 Pooled Coupon Effect            0.266***      0.306***      0.156***    -0.0922***     -0.145***
 Total Rationed HD Effect        0.196***      0.270***       0.0195       -0.0124       -0.0216
 P-value of Coupons vs. HD        0.0385       0.00921         0.001        0.149         0.264
 Number of clusters                 847           841           848          844           844
 Neno control group mean          0.0401        0.0331        0.0124        0.430         0.583
Notes: Data are from followup surveys conducted on a rolling basis between May 2018 and July
2019. The order in which households were surveyed was randomized, with stratification at the
CHW level. Households were sampled to be surveyed twice, with an average gap of 6.4 months
between the two follow-ups. Child illness was measured within the previous month for children
under 10 years old. Any child illness (Column 4) indicates whether the child had any of the ill-
nesses we measure (diarrhea, vomiting, and fever), and was constructed from caretaker reports.
Column 5 shows a poisson regression of the count of illnesses reported (0 to 3). Child health out-
comes control for child's age. The pooled coupon effect is the weighted average of the effect in the
three arms with coupons: Neno WASH, Neno no WASH, and Mwanza. The Total Rationed HD
effect is the effect of HD under rationing compared to the control. Standard errors clustered at
the cluster level in parentheses. A cluster is a CHW catchment's area in Neno and a household in
Mwanza. HD stand for Home Delivery. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                               40
              Table 3: Consistency in WaterGuard use

                                        (1)                  (2)
                                   At least one
                                                      Always Positive
 VARIABLES                           Positive
                                                       for Chlorine
                                   Chlorine Test

 Coupon                                 0.402***         0.155***
                                        (0.0399)          (0.0290)
 Coupon X Mwanza                         0.0533             0.0402
                                        (0.0589)          (0.0422)
 WASH                                    0.0273             0.0139
                                        (0.0258)          (0.0125)
 Coupon X WASH                           -0.0579           -0.0436
                                        (0.0552)          (0.0367)
 Home Delivery                          0.348***         0.122***
                                        (0.0401)          (0.0260)
 Mwanza                                 0.00784            -0.0116
                                        (0.0269)         (0.00820)

 Observations                             1,499             1,499
 Pooled Coupon Effect                   0.390***          0.146***
 p-value of Coupons vs. HD                0.417             0.612
 Number of clusters (CHWs)                 763               763
 Neno control group mean                 0.0636            0.0116
Notes: Data are collapsed to the household level and include only
households that had at least 2 follow-up surveys after their assigned
intervention started. Follow-up surveys were conducted on a rolling
basis between May 2018 and July 2019. The order in which house-
holds were surveyed was randomized, with stratification at the CHW
level. Households were sampled to be surveyed twice, with an av-
erage gap of 6.4 months between the two follow-ups. `At least one
Positive chlorine Test' indicates that the household's drinking water
had a positive chlorine test during at least one of the follow-up visits.
`Always Positive for Chlorine' indicates that the household had a pos-
itive chlorine test at all of the follow-up visits. The pooled coupon
effect is the weighted average of the effect in the three arms with
coupons: Neno WASH, Neno no WASH, and Mwanza. Standard er-
rors clustered at the cluster level in parentheses. A cluster is a CHW
catchment's area in Neno and a household in Mwanza. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                   41
                     Table 4: Targeting on baseline needs and preferences

                                            (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)
                                                                      Share
                                         CHW visit      Free WG                 CHW visit     Free WG
 VARIABLES                                                          Coupons
                                         last month    last month               last month   last month
                                                                    Redeemed

 Unprotected Water Source                 -0.091**         0.026    19.19***
                                           (0.037)       (0.024)     (2.49)
 Home Delivery X Unprotected Source         -0.042        -0.079
                                           (0.063)       (0.078)
 Rationing X Unprotected Source             -0.041         0.079
                                           (0.104)       (0.093)
 Coupon X Unprotected Source                 0.063         0.073
                                           (0.044)       (0.048)
 Home Delivery                            0.134***      0.530***                 0.127***     0.573***
                                           (0.031)       (0.040)                  (0.040)      (0.048)
 Rationing                                  -0.029     -0.160***                  -0.106*    -0.249***
                                           (0.048)       (0.055)                  (0.056)      (0.065)
 Coupon                                      0.011     0.325***                    0.014      0.372***
                                           (0.024)       (0.026)                  (0.026)      (0.029)
 Thinks WG makes water taste bad             0.013      -0.048**     -7.90***      0.009      -0.040**
                                           (0.018)       (0.020)       (2.26)     (0.018)      (0.020)
 Mwanza                                                               8.33***
                                                                       (2.70)
 Far from Trading Center (TC)                                       -12.78***    -0.065**      0.020
                                                                       (2.28)     (0.033)     (0.022)
 Home Delivery X Far from TC                                                       0.009      -0.135*
                                                                                  (0.054)     (0.069)
 Rationing X Far from TC                                                          0.151*      0.233**
                                                                                  (0.087)     (0.095)
 Coupon X Far from TC                                                              0.037       -0.060
                                                                                  (0.043)     (0.047)
 Constant                                 0.575***     0.059***     55.18***     0.576***     0.056**
                                           (0.026)      (0.022)      (1.95)       (0.028)     (0.023)

 Observations                              2,993          1,811       838         2,992        1,810
 Control Group Mean                        0.602         0.0545                   0.602        0.0545
 Mean of Dep. Var                                                     53.36
Notes: Protected water source includes piped water, public tap, borehole with hand pump, protected well,
and protected spring. Columns 1, 2, 4 and 5 restricted to Neno district and include controls for presence
of an ART patient, TB patient and age of youngest child as well as trimester fixed effects. Column 3 is
restricted to Coupon sample and is at the household level. Free WaterGuard in last 4-Weeks (columns 2
and 5) is self-reported and available for follow-up 2 only. Far from Trading Center means that distance
is greater than median (1.85km). "Thinks WG makes water taste bad" indicates if the household agreed
or strongly agreed at baseline with the statement "WaterGuard makes water taste bad". Standard errors
clustered at cluster level in parentheses. A cluster is a CHW catchment's area in Neno and a household in
Mwanza. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


                                                  42
                          Table 5: Home Delivery: Rationing results

                                  (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)
                                 Free                              Free
                                Water-    Positive      Any       Water-     Positive      Any
 VARIABLES                      Guard     Chlorine     Child      Guard      Chlorine     Child
                                 Last      Test        Illness     Last       Test        Illness
                               4-Weeks                           4-Weeks

 Rationing 60%                  -0.136     0.0133      0.0319
                               (0.0865)   (0.0783)    (0.0557)
 Rationing 40%                 -0.195**    -0.0408     0.0288
                               (0.0762)   (0.0737)    (0.0529)
 Rationing Pooled                                                -0.170**     -0.0181     0.0302
                                                                 (0.0716)    (0.0670)    (0.0479)

 Observations                    261         261        468         261        261         468
 Quarter FE                      Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
 Number of CHWs                  105         105        105         105        105         105
 Non-rationing group mean       0.609       0.178      0.349       0.609      0.178       0.349
Notes: Data are from follow-up surveys. Sample restricted to Neno households sampled for the
Home Delivery treatment and surveyed after the introduction of rationing (February, 1 2019).
Columns 4-6 pool 60% and 40% rationing levels. Free WaterGuard in last 4-Weeks (columns 1
and 4) is self-reported and chlorine tests (columns 2 and 5) were measured using household's wa-
ter supply. Child illness analysis at the child level (column 6). Child illness was measured within
the previous month for children under 10 years old and control for child's age. Standard errors
clustered at the cluster level in parentheses. A cluster is a CHW catchment's area in Neno and
a household in Mwanza. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                               43
                                                 Table 6: Mechanisms of CHW interventions

                                                                     Beliefs about         Beliefs about WG
                                           CHW effort                                                            Knowledge about WG
                                                                cleanliness of water          effectiveness
                                     (1)            (2)          (3)            (4)       (5)            (6)       (7)         (8)
                                                                                                                Reported
                                                  CHW                                  Thinks        Thinks      WG as
                                                               Thinks
                                                  talked                                 WG            WG        way to
                                                                water                                                       Knowledge
                                  CHW visit       about                     Boiled     protects    completely     make
      VARIABLES                                               source is                                                     of correct
                                  last month     chlorine                   water      against      effective     water
                                                              "always"                                                          use
                                                during last                             health       against      clean
                                                                 safe
                                                   visit                                 risks      diarrhea    without
                                                                                                                 prompt

      Coupon                        0.0401       0.114***       0.0433    -0.0390**    -0.000345      0.0277    0.0827***    0.346***
                                  (0.0305)       (0.0339)     (0.0303)     (0.0161)     (0.0228)    (0.0320)     (0.0308)    (0.0306)
      WASH                          0.0315       0.135***      0.0123       0.0144      0.00693      -0.0113     -0.00212    0.0569*
                                  (0.0332)       (0.0317)     (0.0399)     (0.0180)     (0.0196)    (0.0293)     (0.0323)    (0.0328)
      Coupon X WASH               -0.00905        0.00815      -0.0109      -0.0187       0.0169      0.0571       0.0272   -0.124***




44
                                  (0.0411)       (0.0434)     (0.0395)     (0.0215)     (0.0279)    (0.0421)     (0.0405)    (0.0412)
      Home Delivery               0.165***       0.438***       0.0214    -0.0392**       0.0247    0.0702**    0.103***     0.180***
                                  (0.0337)       (0.0334)     (0.0417)     (0.0161)     (0.0208)    (0.0344)     (0.0323)    (0.0378)
      Home Delivery X Rationing    -0.0676        -0.0487     0.00390      -0.00223      -0.0196    -0.00327      -0.0475     0.0652
                                  (0.0466)       (0.0434)     (0.0465)     (0.0179)     (0.0321)    (0.0479)     (0.0452)    (0.0417)

      Observations                  3,138         2,846        3,129         3,134       3,138        3,138       3,138       3,138
      Quarter FE                     Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
      Number of clusters (CHWs)      435           435          435           435         435          435         435         435
      Neno control group mean       0.585         0.257        0.564        0.0842       0.879        0.407       0.551       0.474
     Notes: Neno sample only since there is no CHW program in Mwanza. Data are from follow-up surveys conducted on a rolling basis between
     May 2018 and July 2019. The order in which households were surveyed was randomized, with stratification at the CHW level. Households
     were sampled to be surveyed twice, with an average gap of 6.4 months between the two follow-ups. All outcomes were self-reported. Stan-
     dard errors clustered at the cluster level in parentheses. A cluster is a CHW catchment's area in Neno and a household in Mwanza.***
     p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                  Table 7: Cost-effectiveness


                                  A. Cost Per Additional Household with Treated Water
                                               (One Month Time Horizon)
                                                                Addi-
                                                                          Cost per
                                Bottles                         tional
                                            Cost                             30
                       N         Dis-                 Effect     HH-                  95% CI
                                           Per HH                         HH-days
                               tributed                          days
                                                                          Treated
                                                               Treated

 Coupons              872        419         $0.29      0.26      6,804        $1.13      $1.00-$1.31
 Home Delivery
 40% Coverage        1,038       415         $0.19      0.19      5,921        $1.05      $0.59-$4.30
 60% Coverage         9,57       574         $0.29      0.23      6,746        $1.23      $0.75-$3.40
 100% Coverage        974        974         $0.47      0.24      7,031        $1.95      $1.50-$2.60

                                            B. Cost Per Child Illness Averted
                                               (12 Month Time Horizon)
                                Bottles                                     Cost per
                                            Cost                 Cases
                       N         Dis-                 Effect                  Case          95% CI
                                           Per HH               Averted
                               tributed                                     Averted

 Coupons              872       5,027        $3.55      -0.11     1,150        $2.69      $2.01-$4.07
 Home Delivery
 40% Coverage        1,038       4,983       $2.40      -0.01      104        $23.87       $1.77-NA
 60% Coverage         957       6,890        $3.48      -0.01       64        $52.17       $2.43-NA
 100% Coverage        974       11,684       $5.64      -0.04      438        $12.54       $4.28-NA
Notes: We use only the last 12 months of data (September 2018 onward) to reflect steady state costs
and effectiveness. Cost-effectiveness (far right columns) is relative to the control group. 95% CI esti-
mates use the upper and lower end of the 95% confidence interval of the effect size. NA means that
the 95% confidence interval of the effect size goes through zero. We convert effect sizes to household-
days with treated water because we only test a water source on one day. Values in panel A are for
one month (averaged across 12 months). Number of households for the coupon arm is all households
that received coupons. Number of households in the Home Delivery arms are the total households
assigned to Home Delivery including those that were not surveyed. Bottles distributed are the num-
ber of coupons redeemed in the coupon arm and number of bottles given to CHWs in Home Delivery
arms. Bottles cost $0.45 (USD). Distribution of bottles costs $0.08 in the coupons arm and $0.02 in
the delivery arm. Effects for coupon and Home Delivery with 100% coverage are from Table 2 re-
stricting to the last 12 months. Effects for 60% and 40% coverage add the effects for 100% coverage
to the coefficients in Table 5.




                                               45
Appendix A
              Figure A1: Experimental design and sample sizes per treatment arm

                                                                                 Household Level Randomization
                                                                                   Coupons         No Coupons
                                                                                   N = 220          N = 220
 Sample 1: Mwanza                           No CHW
                                                                                  Households       Households
                                      Status quo CHW                               N = 241          N = 240
                                       (N = 106 CHWs)                             Households       Households

                                 WASH Training: CHW
                                                                                  N = 468                       N = 468
   Sample 2: Neno               encourages water treatment
                                                                                 Households                    Households
 CHW Randomization                  (N = 214 CHWs)

                                 Home Delivery: CHW
                                encourages water treatment                                                      N = 458
                                 and provides free bottles                                                     Households
                                    (N = 107 CHWs)




                                            Figure A2: Study timeline

Data Collection
Baseline Survey
Follow-up Survey Wave 1
Follow-up Survey Wave 2
Interventions
Coupons
WASH Intervention
Home Delivery
Rationing
                          Mar   Apr   May   Jun   Jul   Aug    Sep   Oct   Nov   Dec   Jan   Feb   Mar   Apr    May   Jun   Jul   Aug
                                                        2018                                                   2019




                                                               46
                    Figure A3: Example wall calendar with attached coupons




Notes: Households not sampled for coupons received an identical calendar, but without the coupons attached
at the bottom.




                                                   47
Figure A4: Share of children with illness in previous 4 weeks, over time (Home Delivery Com-
pared to Control)
    100


                                                                                         Control
                                                                                         Home Delivery
                                                                                         100% Coverage
                                                                                         60% Coverage
    80




                                                                                         40% Coverage
                                   Start of Home Delivery
    60
  %
    40




                                                          Start of Rationing
    20
    0




      Baseline          Jun18       Aug18       Oct18     Dec18           Feb19     Apr19       Jun19
                                                  Study Month




Notes: Lines plot share of children under 10 years old from surveyed households that had at least one of the
three illnesses we measure (diarrhea, fever, or vomiting) over 18 months. Time points are averaged across two
months to reduce noise (e.g., May and June 2018). An average of 267 households were surveyed each month.




                                                     48
                  Figure A5: Distribution of coupon redemption over 18 months




                       140
                       120100
                 Frequncy
                    80 60
                       40
                       20
                       0




                                0   1   2   3   4   5   6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
                                                         Total Coupons Redeemed


Y-axis is number of households. The x-axis is the number of coupons redeemed. There was a maximum of 18
months of coupon redemption for each household. About 15% of households did not receive their coupons until
the first month had already passed and thus could redeem a maximum of 17.




                                                             49
Figure A6: Heterogeneity in effect sizes, by whether household thinks WaterGuard makes water
taste bad

                                           Chlorine Use                        No Child Illness




                   Coupons




              Home Delivery




                              .15     .2        .25       .3    .35 -.05   0        .05       .1   .15

                                 Thinks Chlorine Makes Water Taste Bad
                                 Does Not Think Chlorine Makes Water Taste Bad



Notes: Estimates are from separate regressions that subset on households based on whether they agreed
or strongly agreed that WaterGuard makes water taste bad during the baseline survey. Regressions include
indicators for Coupon and Home Delivery assignment. Child illness was measured within the previous month
for children under 10 years old. The illness effects sizes are the absolute value of the any illness coefficients
(positive means less illness). Points represent the effect size relative to the control group and error bars are
95% confidence intervals. Standard errors are clustered at the CHW level in Neno, and the household level in
Mwanza. For Coupons, the p-value for the difference in effect sizes is 0.07 for chlorine use. Other differences in
effect sizes are not significantly different from zero.




                                                           50
                Table A1: CHW characteristics and differences between arms

                                                                  WASH vs.        Free Delivery
                                                     Mean
                                                                   Control         vs. Control
                                                   (std. dev)    (std. error)      (std. error)
 Age                                                   37.0         0.119              -.28
                                                      (8.70)       (0.998)            (1.08)
 Female                                               0.650         0.030             0.033
                                                     (0.477)       (0.056)           (0.064)
 Completed primary school                             0.653          -.03              -.11
                                                     (0.476)       (0.055)           (0.065)
 Number of children                                    4.28          -.43              -.01
                                                      (2.13)       (0.265)           (0.295)
 Number of households in catchment area                26.8          -.61              -.28
                                                      (10.2)        (1.27)            (1.42)
 Hours per week on CHW activities                      10.5         0.068              1.29
                                                      (4.72)       (0.500)           (0.745)
 Other job in addition to CHW                         0.753         0.052             0.019
                                                     (0.431)       (0.053)           (0.062)
 CHW primary source of income                         0.432          -.00              -.08
                                                     (0.496)       (0.059)           (0.068)
 Senior CHW                                           0.128          -.00              -.00
                                                     (0.335)       (0.039)           (0.045)
 Share of households using chlorine at baseline       0.051         0.010             0.011
                                                     (0.126)       (0.013)           (0.015)
Notes: Standard deviation of the mean and standard error of the difference in parentheses. Share of
households that used chlorine is the share of households assigned to the CHW whose drinking water
tested positive for chlorine residual at baseline. Around 4 households per CHWs were sampled at
baseline.




                                              51
                    Table A2: Balance between groups at baseline

                                      (1)                (2)                (3)
                                   Positive         CHW Visit in         Any Child
 VARIABLES
                                 Chlorine Test      Last 4 Weeks          Illness

 Coupon                             -0.0368*            -0.0131            -0.0448
                                    (0.0211)           (0.0373)           (0.0352)
 Coupon X Mwanza                      0.0313                               0.0107
                                    (0.0283)                              (0.0490)
 WASH                                -0.0273            0.0149             -0.0153
                                    (0.0182)           (0.0449)           (0.0318)
 Coupon X WASH                     0.0659***           -0.00646             0.0124
                                    (0.0253)           (0.0483)           (0.0426)
 Home Delivery                       -0.0339            -0.0409            -0.0195
                                    (0.0252)           (0.0658)           (0.0495)
 Home Delivery X Rationing            0.0399           -0.00405           -0.00473
                                    (0.0249)           (0.0645)           (0.0514)
 Mwanza                              -0.0205                              0.115***
                                    (0.0212)                              (0.0352)

 Observations                        2,083              1,756              3,664
 Pooled Coupon Effect               0.00419            -0.0174            -0.0361
 P-value of joint F-test            0.0960              0.790              0.597
 Number of clusters                   838                435                874
 Neno control group mean            0.0605              0.638              0.716
Notes: Data source: Baseline surveys conducted between March and April 2018. Col-
umn 3 outcome is at the child level. Standard errors clustered at the cluster level in
parentheses. A cluster is a CHW catchment's area in Neno and a household in Mwanza.
Child illness was measured within the previous month for children under 10 years old.
F-test jointly tests whether the following coefficients are equal to zero: Coupons, WASH
Training, Coupons X WASH Training, home delivery, home delivery X Rationing, and
Coupons X Mwanza. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                          52
          Table A3: Health outcomes: breakdown by illness (children under 10)

                                   (1)               (2)          (3)          (4)
 VARIABLES                       Diarrhea           Fever        Vomit        Cough

 Coupon                            -0.0190         -0.0687**      -0.0134     -0.0734**
                                  (0.0169)          (0.0282)     (0.0161)      (0.0308)
 Coupon X Mwanza                -0.0746***         -0.000205      -0.0172        0.0237
                                  (0.0278)          (0.0442)     (0.0281)      (0.0469)
 WASH                             0.00201          -0.000187     0.00689       0.00724
                                  (0.0168)          (0.0275)     (0.0157)      (0.0269)
 Coupon X WASH                    0.00776            -0.0358      -0.0242       -0.0226
                                  (0.0230)          (0.0341)     (0.0206)      (0.0387)
 Home Delivery                     -0.0206          -0.0519*      -0.0156     -0.0642**
                                  (0.0170)          (0.0285)     (0.0166)      (0.0324)
 Home Delivery X Rationing          0.0243            0.0330     0.00465         0.0509
                                  (0.0228)          (0.0304)     (0.0176)      (0.0391)
 Mwanza                         0.0720***            0.0441     0.0614***      0.0596*
                                  (0.0218)          (0.0321)     (0.0210)      (0.0318)
 Child Age (Years)              -0.0352***        -0.0116***   -0.00574***   -0.0215***
                                 (0.00206)         (0.00258)    (0.00167)     (0.00315)

 Observations                      6,628             6,625        6,629         6,629
 Quarter FE                         Yes               Yes          Yes           Yes
 Pooled Coupon Effect           -0.0318***        -0.0855***   -0.0285***    -0.0788***
 P-value of Coupons vs. HD         0.596            0.0740        0.639         0.526
 Number of clusters (CHWs)          845               844          845           845
 Neno control group mean           0.124             0.352        0.106         0.454
Notes: Data are from followup surveys conducted on a rolling basis between May 2018
and July 2019. The order in which households were surveyed was randomized, with strat-
ification at the CHW level. Households were sampled to be surveyed twice, with an av-
erage gap of 6.4 months between the two follow-ups. Child illness was measured within
the previous month for children under 10 years old. The results restricting the sample to
under 5 years old are shown in B4. The pooled coupon effect is the weighted average of
the effect in the three arms with coupons: Neno WASH, Neno no WASH, and Mwanza.
Standard errors clustered at the cluster level in parentheses. A cluster is a CHW catch-
ment's area in Neno and a household in Mwanza. p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                             53
Table A4: Association between beliefs about water cleanliness and child illness (Control group)

                               (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)
                              Any         Any         Any         Any         Any        Any
 VARIABLES                   Child       Child       Child       Child       Child      Child
                             Illness     Illness     Illness     Illness     Illness    Illness

 Water always safe         -0.084***   -0.077***   -0.071***
                            (0.015)     (0.015)      (0.016)
 Mwanza                                0.075***     0.076***               0.085***    0.085***
                                        (0.018)      (0.019)                (0.018)     (0.019)
 Age                                                  0.001                              0.001
                                                     (0.001)                            (0.001)
 Education: Primary 1-4                               0.024                              0.013
                                                     (0.032)                            (0.032)
 Education: Primary 5-8                               0.015                              0.002
                                                     (0.027)                            (0.027)
 Education: Secondary+                                0.009                              -0.001
                                                     (0.023)                            (0.024)
 Wealth Index                                      -0.011***                           -0.010***
                                                     (0.004)                            (0.004)
 Household Size                                      0.009*                              0.008*
                                                     (0.005)                            (0.005)
 Child Age                                            -0.009                             -0.008
                                                     (0.006)                            (0.006)
 Protected Source                                              -0.092***   -0.092***   -0.080***
                                                                (0.016)     (0.016)     (0.017)
 Constant                   0.586***    0.566***   0.491***    0.606***    0.587***    0.516***
                             (0.011)     (0.012)    (0.038)     (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.039)

 Observations                4,183       4,183       4,106       4,177       4,177       4,106
Notes: Water Always Safe is from a survey question asking respondents how often their primary
water source is safe to drink. Protected source includes piped water, public tap, borehole with
handpump, protected well, and protected spring. Child illness was measured for children under
10 years old using caretaker reports of diarrhea, vomiting, and fever in the previous 4-weeks. Ro-
bust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                              54
  Table A5: Testing for differential attrition across study arms

                                                (1)
 VARIABLES                           Number of Follow-up Visits

 Coupon                                         0.027
                                              (0.034)
 Coupon X Mwanza                               -0.026
                                              (0.047)
 WASH                                          0.022
                                              (0.030)
 Coupon X WASH                                 -0.008
                                              (0.041)
 Home Delivery                                  0.000
                                              (0.032)
 Mwanza                                        0.054
                                              (0.034)

 Observations                                  2,307
 Controls                                        No
 Pooled Coupon Effect                          0.0292
 P-value of Coupons vs. HD                     0.135
 Number of clusters (CHWs)                      874
 Neno control group mean                       1.646
Notes: Estimates are from a poisson regression model that regresses
the number of follow-up visits for each household on treatment as-
signment. Most households had the potential for 2 follow-up visits,
but 73 randomly selected households had 3 follow-up visits due to
extra resources remaining after 2 follow-up waves were completed.
HD stands for Home Delivery.




                                55
       Table A6: Balance between groups on baseline characteristics of attriters

                                      (1)                (2)                (3)
                                   Positive         CHW Visit in         Any Child
 VARIABLES
                                 Chlorine Test      Last 4 Weeks          Illness

 Coupon                             -0.0272             -0.0450            -0.0852
                                   (0.0304)            (0.0907)           (0.0670)
 WASH                                0.0101             -0.0150            -0.0513
                                   (0.0317)            (0.0741)           (0.0570)
 Coupon X WASH                       0.0467              0.0388             0.0326
                                   (0.0409)             (0.110)           (0.0830)
 Home Delivery                     -0.0441*              -0.153            -0.0359
                                   (0.0245)            (0.0979)           (0.0780)
 Home Delivery X Rationing         0.0440**              0.122             -0.0347
                                   (0.0205)            (0.0917)           (0.0793)
 Mwanza                             0.0171                                 0.109*
                                   (0.0423)                               (0.0653)
 Coupon X Mwanza                   0.00516                                 -0.0538
                                   (0.0535)                               (0.0986)

 Observations                         608                540                984
 Pooled Coupon Effect              -0.00158            -0.0192           -0.0765**
 P-value of joint F-test           0.00217              0.715              0.301
 Number of clusters                   408                315                416
 Neno control group mean            0.0441              0.616              0.759
Notes: Regressions use baseline data from households that have fewer than 2 follow-up
visits. Column 3 outcome is at the child level. Standard errors clustered at the clus-
ter level in parentheses. A cluster is a CHW catchment's area in Neno and a household
in Mwanza. Child illness was measured within the previous month for children under
10 years old. F-test jointly tests whether the following coefficients are equal to zero:
Coupons, WASH Training, Coupons X WASH Training, home delivery, home delivery
X Rationing, and Coupons X Mwanza.




                                          56
Table A7: Lower bound Coupon and Home Delivery treatment effects (sensitivity to attrition)

                                        (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)
                                                                             Any Child
                                     Chlorine:     Chlorine:   Any Child
                                                                              Illness:
      VARIABLES                         No          With       Illness: No
                                                                               With
                                     Attrition     Attrition    Attrition
                                                                             Attrition

      Coupon                         0.250***      0.0392**     -0.0989***      0.0130
                                     (0.0179)       (0.0198)      (0.0185)     (0.0181)
      Coupon X Mwanza                0.0685**      0.0899**       0.00496      0.00173
                                     (0.0340)       (0.0371)      (0.0388)     (0.0373)
      Home Delivery                  0.186***      -0.000890    -0.0698***      0.0186
                                     (0.0252)       (0.0246)      (0.0234)     (0.0231)
      Mwanza                          -0.0153       -0.0387*     0.0552**     0.0523**
                                     (0.0120)       (0.0233)      (0.0270)     (0.0254)
      childage years                                            -0.0332***   -0.0313***
                                                                 (0.00277)    (0.00279)

      Observations                     3,614         4,289         6,305       6,981
      Pooled Coupon Effect           0.267***      0.0602***    -0.0979***     0.0134
      P-value of Coupons vs. HD       0.0259         0.115         0.222       0.811
      Number of clusters (CHWs)         847           874           844          873
      Neno control group mean         0.0401         0.218         0.430       0.381
    Notes: Estimates are based on the same regression equations as table 2 but without
    the rationing arm and without quarter fixed effects. The sample without attrition
    includes all households for which outcome data was collected. The sample with at-
    trition adds synthetic observations for all households with a baseline survey that did
    not have follow-up data in one or both follow-up waves. Observations in the control
    arm with missing surveys were all assumed to have had good outcomes (treated water
    and no illness) and observations from the treatment arms (Coupons and Home De-
    livery) were all assumed to have had bad outcomes (no treated water and illness. We
    exclude the WASH treatment from this exercise for simplicity since it had not effect.




                                              57
                     Table A8: Cost-effectiveness (diarrhea cases averted)

                                Bottles                                      Cost per
                                            Cost                  Cases
                       N         Dis-                  Effect                 Illness        95% CI
                                           Per HH                Averted
                               tributed                                      Averted

 Coupons              872       5,027        $3.55      -0.05       484        $6.40      $4.27-$12.80
 Home Delivery
 40% Coverage        1,038       4,983       $2.40      0.00        58         $43.02       $3.00-NA
 60% Coverage         957       6,890        $3.48      0.02       -206         NA          $4.89-NA
 100% Coverage        974       11,684       $5.64      -0.02      227         $24.22       $7.89-NA
Notes: We use only the last 12 months of data (September 2018 onward) to reflect steady state costs
and effectiveness. Cost-effectiveness (far right columns) is relative to the control group. 95% CI esti-
mates use the upper and lower end of the 95% confidence interval of the effect size. NA means that the
95% confidence interval of the effect size goes through zero or the effect on diarrhea cases is positive.
Number of households for the coupon arm is all households that received coupons. Number of house-
holds in the Home Delivery arms are the total households assigned to Home Delivery including those
that were not surveyed. Bottles distributed are the number of coupons redeemed in the coupon arm
and number of bottles given to CHWs in Home Delivery arms. Bottles cost $0.45 (USD). Distribution
of bottles costs $0.08 in the coupons arm and $0.02 in the delivery arm. Effect sizes for coupon and
Home Delivery with 100% coverage are from Table A3 regressions restricting to the last 12 months.
Effects for 60% and 40% coverage add the effects for 100% coverage to the rationing coefficients.




                                               58
Appendix B: Robustness Checks
 Table B1: Robustness to coding water treatment variable (coding no water as missing)

                                                           (1)
                                                         Positive
                     VARIABLES                           Chlorine
                                                          Test

                     Coupon                             0.267***
                                                        (0.0277)
                     Coupon X Mwanza                    0.0739*
                                                        (0.0410)
                     WASH                               0.00764
                                                        (0.0149)
                     Coupon X WASH                       -0.0107
                                                        (0.0362)
                     Home Delivery                      0.202***
                                                        (0.0263)
                     Home Delivery X Rationing          0.00445
                                                        (0.0433)
                     Mwanza                              -0.0164
                                                        (0.0138)

                     Observations                          3,635
                     Quarter FE                             Yes
                     Pooled Coupon Effect                0.280***
                     P-value of Coupons vs. HD            0.0289
                     Number of clusters (CHWs)              837
                     Neno control group mean              0.0417
                     Anaylsis is identical to column 1 of table 2,
                     but households with no drinking water were
                     excluded rather than coded as not having
                     treated water. This excludes about 5% of
                     observations.




                                          59
Table B2: Impacts on WaterGuard adoption and child health (controlling for outcomes at
baseline)

                                          (1)         (2)        (3)           (4)          (5)
                                                     Self-      Gave
                                       Positive
                                                   Reported     Water-     Any Child    Number of
 VARIABLES                             Chlorine
                                                   Chlorine     Guard       Illness      Illnesses
                                        Test
                                                     Use        Away

 Coupon                                0.263***    0.309***    0.126***    -0.0807***    -0.180**
                                       (0.0269)    (0.0332)     (0.0214)    (0.0307)     (0.0851)
 Coupon X Mwanza                        0.0661*     0.0494       0.0310     -0.00477       -0.111
                                       (0.0397)    (0.0449)     (0.0318)    (0.0454)      (0.125)
 WASH                                  0.00466     0.0320**     -0.00878     0.00276       0.0435
                                       (0.0147)    (0.0148)    (0.00886)    (0.0281)     (0.0736)
 Coupon X WASH                          -0.0189     -0.0199    0.0562**      -0.0176       -0.107
                                       (0.0354)    (0.0409)     (0.0278)    (0.0380)      (0.113)
 Home Delivery                         0.192***    0.238***       0.0102    -0.0486*       -0.113
                                       (0.0268)    (0.0272)     (0.0124)    (0.0288)     (0.0802)
 Home Delivery X Rationing             -0.00479     0.0289       0.0109       0.0413       0.0931
                                       (0.0412)    (0.0428)     (0.0186)    (0.0330)      (0.102)
 Mwanza                                 -0.0180    0.00186      -0.00936     0.0451      0.207***
                                       (0.0137)    (0.0148)     (0.0102)    (0.0320)     (0.0801)
 Treated Water (Residual Chlorine)      0.0686*     0.0374       -0.0278     -0.0324      -0.0518
                                       (0.0371)    (0.0379)     (0.0213)    (0.0293)     (0.0939)
 Any Illness (Baseline)                                                     0.137***
                                                                            (0.0155)
 Number of Illnesses (Baseline)                                                          0.270***
                                                                                         (0.0230)

 Observations                            3,649       3,442       3,746        6,370        6,370
 Controls                                 Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes           No
 Quarter FE                               Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
 Pooled Coupon Effect                  0.270***    0.312***    0.159***    -0.0900***    -0.137***
 P-value of Coupons vs. HD              0.0349     0.00848       0.001       0.0649        0.158
 Number of clusters                       837         831         838          834          834
 Neno Control Group mean                0.0401      0.0331      0.0124        0.430        0.583
Notes: Baseline controls indicate that we control for the dependent variable at baseline. Data are
from followup surveys conducted on a rolling basis between May 2018 and July 2019. The order in
which households were surveyed was randomized, with stratification at the CHW level. Households
were sampled to be surveyed twice, with an average gap of 6.4 months between the two follow-ups.
Child illness was measured within the previous month for children under 10 years old. Any child
illness (Column 4) indicates whether the child had any of the illnesses we measure (diarrhea, vomit-
ing, and fever), and was constructed from caretaker reports. Column 5 is a poisson regression of the
number of illnesses reported. All child health regressions control for child's age. The pooled coupon
effect is the weighted average of the effect in the three arms with coupons: Neno WASH, Neno no
WASH, and Mwanza. Standard errors clustered at the cluster level in parentheses. A cluster is a
CHW catchment's area in Neno and a household    60 in Mwanza. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
   Table B3: Robustness of diarrhea results to different recall duration

                                   (1)            (2)            (3)
                                Diarrhea       Diarrhea       Diarrhea
 VARIABLES                     Case in Last   Case in Last   Case in Last
                                4 Weeks         14 days        7 days

 Coupon                            -0.0190       -0.0258*        -0.0189
                                  (0.0169)       (0.0151)       (0.0134)
 Coupon X Mwanza                -0.0746***      -0.0522**      -0.0462**
                                  (0.0278)       (0.0246)       (0.0218)
 WASH                             0.00201         -0.0127       -0.00243
                                  (0.0168)       (0.0143)       (0.0125)
 Coupon X WASH                    0.00776         0.00999      -0.000344
                                  (0.0230)       (0.0191)       (0.0175)
 Home Delivery                     -0.0206       -0.0286*        -0.0199
                                  (0.0170)       (0.0154)       (0.0137)
 Home Delivery X Rationing          0.0243        0.0252        0.00230
                                  (0.0228)       (0.0205)       (0.0166)
 Mwanza                         0.0720***       0.0463**       0.0378**
                                  (0.0218)       (0.0195)       (0.0171)
 Child Age (Years)              -0.0352***     -0.0264***     -0.0205***
                                 (0.00206)      (0.00185)      (0.00167)

 Observations                      6,628          6,628          6,628
 Quarter FE                         Yes            Yes            Yes
 Pooled Coupon Effect           -0.0318***     -0.0326***     -0.0292***
 P-value of Coupons vs. HD         0.596          0.903          0.947
 Number of clusters (CHWs)          845            845            845
 Neno Control Group Mean           0.124          0.106         0.0806
Notes: Child diarrhea was measured within the previous month for children
under 10 years old (Column 1). When a case was reported, a follow-up ques-
tion asked if the case was ongoing and if not, then how many days ago the
case ended. We use these questions to identify diarrhea cases in the previ-
ous 14 days and previous 7 days. The pooled coupon effect is the weighted
average of the effect in the three arms with coupons: Neno WASH, Neno no
WASH, and Mwanza. Standard errors clustered at the cluster level in paren-
theses. A cluster is a CHW catchment's area in Neno and a household in
Mwanza. p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                    61
       Table B4: Health outcomes: breakdown by illness (children under 5)

                                  (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)
 VARIABLES                      Diarrhea       Fever        Vomit        Cough

 Coupon                           -0.0291    -0.0635**     0.00536        -0.0563
                                 (0.0223)     (0.0302)     (0.0193)      (0.0344)
 Coupon X Mwanza                -0.104***     -0.00671     -0.0581*        0.0173
                                 (0.0370)     (0.0493)     (0.0337)      (0.0520)
 WASH                            0.00353      0.00396        0.0188        0.0242
                                 (0.0220)     (0.0298)     (0.0183)      (0.0301)
 Coupon X WASH                    0.0158       -0.0468      -0.0388       -0.0392
                                 (0.0308)     (0.0368)     (0.0239)      (0.0436)
 Home Delivery                    -0.0225      -0.0451      0.00880       -0.0615
                                 (0.0225)     (0.0326)     (0.0204)      (0.0374)
 Home Delivery X Rationing         0.0265       0.0253     0.00136         0.0720
                                 (0.0324)     (0.0403)     (0.0223)      (0.0475)
 Mwanza                         0.102***       0.0472     0.100***      0.0734**
                                 (0.0291)     (0.0360)     (0.0255)      (0.0355)
 Child Age (Years)             -0.0485***      0.00493     -0.00402    -0.0151***
                                (0.00407)    (0.00501)    (0.00350)     (0.00550)

 Observations                     4,498         4,496        4,500        4,500
 Quarter FE                        Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
 Pooled Coupon Effect          -0.0452***    -0.0867***   -0.0257***   -0.0706***
 P-value of Coupons vs. HD        0.813        0.0966        0.459        0.952
 Number of clusters (CHWs)         819           818          819          819
 Neno control group mean          0.165         0.380        0.107        0.476
Notes: Data are from followup surveys conducted on a rolling basis between May
2018 and July 2019. The order in which households were surveyed was randomized,
with stratification at the CHW level. Households were sampled to be surveyed twice,
with an average gap of 6.4 months between the two follow-ups. Child illness was
measured within the previous month for children from caretaker reports. The pooled
coupon effect is the weighted average of the effect in the three arms with coupons:
Neno WASH, Neno no WASH, and Mwanza. Standard errors clustered at the cluster
level in parentheses. A cluster is a CHW catchment's area in Neno and a household
in Mwanza. p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                        62
