                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DO UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE BENEFITS IMPROVE MATCH QUALITY?
                EVIDENCE FROM RECENT U.S. RECESSIONS

                                        Ammar Farooq
                                       Adriana D. Kugler
                                       Umberto Muratori

                                      Working Paper 27574
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27574


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2020


This research uses restricted microdata from the U.S. Census Bureau's Longitudinal Employer
Household Dynamics (LEHD) Program, which was partially supported by the following National
Science Foundation Grants SES-9978093, SES-0339191 and ITR-0427889; National Institute on
Aging Grant AG018854; and grants from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. All results have been
reviewed to ensure that no confidential data are disclosed. All results have been approved by the
Disclosure Review Board. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. This research was
performed at the Georgetown Federal Statistical Research Data Center under FSRDC Project
Number 1812. All errors are our own. We acknowledge the generous financial support from the
Washington Center for Equitable Growth. We would like to thank George Akerlof, Joe Altonji,
Heather Boushey, David Card, Raj Chetty, Larry Kahn, Kory Kroft, Jesse Rothstein, and
Emmanuel Saez for comments on this paper, and especially Matt Notowidigdo for his thoughtful
suggestions and Henry Hyatt for advise on the use of the algorithm to measure AKM and use of
LEHD data. Adriana Kugler is the corresponding author. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of their employers nor of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Ammar Farooq, Adriana D. Kugler, and Umberto Muratori. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Unemployment Insurance Benefits Improve Match Quality? Evidence from Recent U.S.
Recessions
Ammar Farooq, Adriana D. Kugler, and Umberto Muratori
NBER Working Paper No. 27574
July 2020
JEL No. C55,E24,H23,J21,J31,J64,J65

                                         ABSTRACT

We present new evidence on the impact of more generous unemployment insurance (UI) on
workers' ability to find jobs better suited to their skills. Using Longitudinal Employer-Household
Dynamics data, we find the UI extensions introduced in the U.S. improved the quality of worker-
job matches. Using Current Population Survey data, we also find that longer UI benefit durations
decrease the mismatch between workers' educational attainments and the educational
requirements of jobs. We find bigger effects of UI on match quality for those more likely to be
liquidity--constrained women, non-whites and less-educated workers--,suggesting UI
extensions improve the functioning of the labor market.

Ammar Farooq                                    Umberto Muratori
Uber Technologies                               Department of Economics
1455 Market Street                              Georgetown University
San Francisco, CA 94103                         37th and O Streets, NW
af448@georgetown.edu                            Washington, DC 20057
                                                um22@georgetown.edu
Adriana D. Kugler
Georgetown University
McCourt School of Public Policy
37th and O Streets NW, Suite 311
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
ak659@georgetown.edu
1.     Introduction

       Unemployment insurance (UI) has long been seen as a government benefit that helps

workers keep up their consumption through periods of unemployment until they can get a new

job. A long-held view often highlighted by critics of UI is that when workers receive UI, they

may put less effort into their search for a new job simply prolonging their periods of

unemployment (i.e., the "moral hazard effect"). Recent work finds, however, that longer

unemployment spells may also be due to credit-constrained workers searching longer for a better

job match when they received more generous UI benefits (i.e., the "liquidity effect"). Card,

Chetty and Weber (2007) and Chetty (2008) both find that the majority of the positive impact of

UI on unemployment durations can be accounted by the "liquidity effect" and not the "moral

hazard effect". In addition, contrary to most studies focusing on European data, Nekoei and

Weber (2017) find a positive effect of UI on reemployment wages supporting the view that UI

may improve subsequent match quality.

       In this paper, we reexamine if UI increases wages by looking at the unemployment

insurance extensions introduced during the past two recessions in the U.S. Importantly, we

examine if the effect of UI on wages is due to better employee-employer matches from improved

sorting; due to workers moving to higher paying firms; or due to stronger bargaining power of

workers. Understanding these mechanisms can help explain why various studies find different

average effects on wages. In addition, what mechanism is at work can also have different welfare

implications of UI.

        We exploit the fact that the UI extensions, during the past two recessions, had different

durations in different states during each month, depending on whether each state qualified or not

for the various extensions introduced by legislation. We first use the Longitudinal Employer-


                                               2
Household Dynamics (LEHD) data to examine if, indeed, offering UI benefits for longer periods

of time increases wages. Moreover, we examine if the effect comes from workers and firms

matching better with each other or from workers moving to higher paying firms. An advantage of

the LEHD is that it provides employer-employee data allowing us to control for many other

factors that may affect earnings. We can focus on employers that are higher paying than others,

even given their industry and location, and on individuals who are higher-paying, even though

their education, age, gender, and race/ethnicity are the same. We use the Abowd-Kramars-

Margolis (AKM) decomposition to estimate firm and worker fixed effects and then rank firms

and workers by their percentile of pay and create a rank similarity index that captures how close

the ranks of each firm and worker pair are.

       We find that longer duration of UI benefits due to the introduction of the extensions

increases the quality of employer-employee matches (i.e., reduces the difference in rank between

the quality of the employer and employee). In particular, an increase in UI duration of 53 weeks,

from 26 weeks (the average duration of UI in most states during normal times) to 79 weeks

(close to the average UI benefit duration at the end of 2009) increases the similarity in the

ranking by 1 percent. We also find this effect is greater for women than men, for minority than

white workers, for less educated than more educated workers and for older than younger

workers, all of whom are more likely to be credit-constrained. We also find that the increased

duration of UI after the extensions increases the part of earnings that is unexplained by all other

worker or firm characteristics, even after controlling for the bargaining power of workers as

measured by unionization, pointing that this likely captures the match quality between the

employer and employee. On the other hand, we do not find evidence that higher UI benefit

duration during the Great Recession leads workers to move to higher paying firms.



                                                3
       We also use the Current Population Survey (CPS) to examine the impact of UI duration

extensions during the Great Recession. Consistent with our LEHD results, we find that

increasing UI benefit duration significantly decreases the mismatch between the educational

attainment of workers and the educational requirements in their new jobs after their

unemployment spells for women, non-whites, and less educated workers. Moreover, we find that

increasing the weeks of UI benefit duration from 26 to 79 weeks increases the educational

requirements in the occupation in the new job relative to the previous job by 14.4%. These

results point towards workers finding better jobs (given firm quality) in which they are no longer

over-educated.

       Our results from the LEHD and CPS both indicate that increasing the generosity of

unemployment insurance improves the quality of employee-employer matches and the

functioning of the labor market. We do not find that higher UI iss associated with higher firm-

effects during the Great Recession. Instead, we find that UI generosity allows workers to search

longer and eventually find jobs better suited to their skills. This means that while some workers

may move to better firms others may move to worse firms, depending on their individual

rankings. Thus, while the "liquidity effect" is welfare enhancing, the fact that it works through

improved employee-employer matches may mean that UI is less welfare enhancing than if UI

uniformly increased employer quality for all workers.

       In addition, the increased reallocation from more generous UI is likely to improve

efficiency and to free up other jobs a worker would have taken, but which would not have been a

good fit for this worker. In turn, this UI recipient who finds a job well-suited for herself opens

these jobs up for other workers. This likely generates a chain reaction that allows all other

workers to also match up with better employers given their qualifications and to improve labor



                                                4
market efficiency. If such an externality is present, then UI would be even more welfare

enhancing.

        The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In the next section, we present a brief

survey of the related literature. In Section 3, we provide the institutional background on federal

unemployment insurance programs in the U.S. and their extensions during the last few

recessions. We describe the LEHD and CPS data in Section 4. We explain our empirical

methodology in Section 5 and present our results from the LEHD in Section 6 and from the CPS

in Section 7. Finally, we conclude in Section 8.

2.      Literature Review

        A robust finding in the empirical literature studying UI benefits is that the length of

unemployment spells is positively related to the duration of UI benefits.1 Despite the consensus

that higher UI benefits lead to longer durations of unemployment, however, the magnitude of the

effect varies across studies (see Card et al., 2007; Lalive, 2007; Van Ours and Vodopivec, 2008;

Card et al., 2015; Farber and Valletta, 2015; Farber et al., 2015; Schmieder et al., 2016; and

Nekoei and Weber, 2017).

        There are two interpretations of the impact of UI benefit duration on longer

unemployment spells. The first interpretation is that UI benefits decrease the job search efforts of

workers because it raises the reservation wage of job seekers and/or because it generates moral

hazard. Earlier research such as Moffitt (1985), Katz and Meyer (1990), Meyer (1990), and Card

and Levine (2000) found support for this interpretation. Recent studies such as Rothstein (2011),

Farber and Valletta (2015), and Farber, Rothstein and Valletta (2015) have examined the

disincentive effects of UI extensions during and after the Great Recession. They found small but

1
  There are also a large literature examining the impact of UI benefit amounts on unemployment duration (Card et
al., 2015; Hunt, 1995; Johnston and Mas, 2018; Landais, 2015), which we do not review in detail here since we do
not focus on UI benefit amounts in our paper.

                                                        5
significant decreases in the probability of leaving unemployment, mostly driven by the decrease

in the likelihood of moving out of the labor force and with little impact on the decline in the

likelihood of exiting to employment. Mulligan (2012) argues that the decline in job search effort

due to the extensions in the UI benefits may partially explain the slow recovery and the

persistence of high unemployment rates. However, Kroft and Notowidigdo (2016) find that the

moral hazard cost of UI is pro-cyclical, while the consumption smoothing benefit is acyclical.

Thus, the adverse effects of UI benefits might be quantitatively small in a deep recession like the

Great Recession when labor demand was weak, and the return to job search was lower.2

        The second interpretation of the relationship between UI benefits and unemployment

spells is that extensions in UI benefits allow workers to search for better jobs. Under this

perspective, UI extensions correct distortions in the labor market and lead to better employment

outcomes and higher productivity. Acemoglu and Shimer (1999) develop a theoretical model in

which more generous UI encourages risk-averse workers to seek higher productivity jobs.

Marimon and Zilibotti (1999) investigate the case in which agents are risk-neutral. Their search-

matching model with risk-neutral agents and two-sided ex-ante heterogeneity predicts that UI

benefits reduce employment, but also improve job matches. Chetty (2008) also shows that

prolonged unemployment spells due to more generous UI can partly be attributed to liquidity-

constrained individuals being able to search for longer. He finds that 60% of the increased

duration of unemployment spells is due to the liquidity effect and the remaining 40% to the

moral hazard effect. Card, Chetty and Weber (2007) also find that that the representative job

searcher is much closer to credit-constrained behavior than to the permanent income hypothesis.

2
  Other studies have, instead, examined the impact of UI benefit generosity on labor demand and have found mixed
results. Hagedorn et al. (2015) exploit the discontinuity of UI benefits at state borders and find that higher
reservation wages due to extended benefits reduce firm vacancy creation rates. These findings are, however, in sharp
contrast with Marinescu's (2015) work using online job postings, which finds no effects of UI extensions on labor
demand.

                                                         6
         The key implication from the theory that higher UI should increase wages due to

liquidity-constrained individuals' ability to search for longer and find better jobs has also been

explored empirically by a handful of papers using data from European countries. Among them,

Lalive (2007), Schmieder et al. (2016), and Nekoei and Weber (2017) use different variations of

age-based regression discontinuity designs by comparing individuals around an age cutoff that

makes them eligible for more generous UI benefits durations.3 On the other hand, Card, Chetty

and Weber (2007) use a tenure-based regression discontinuity design comparing Austrian

workers just before and after the 36 month cutoff for UI benefit eligibility. Finally, Van Ours and

Vodopivec (2008) exploit the 1998 reform of the Slovenian UI system to identify the effect of

the reduction in UI benefits. In particular, they compare the outcomes pre- and post-reform for

workers who were employed for more than a year and a half prior to their unemployment spell,

and who were exempted from the reform, and for others who were not exempt.

         These previous studies find mixed results on re-employment wages. Card et al. (2007),

Lalive (2007), and Van Ours and Vodopivec (2008) find no effect of UI on re-employment

wages, while Schmieder et al. (2016) find a negative impact of UI on wages. The paper by

Nekoei and Weber (2017) is the only one of these studies that finds positive and statistically

significant estimates of the impact of UI on re-employment wages, which they interpret as being

due to increased job searches by the unemployed. Nekoei and Weber(2017) reconcile their

results with previous results by explaining that depending on the heterogeneity of the population

the "liquidity effect" or the "moral hazard effect" may dominate.



3
  The age cutoffs and the number of UI weeks granted are country-specific. Nekoei and Weber (2017) use Austrian
data and compare individuals around 40 years old that represent the cutoff after which individuals are eligible for 39
weeks of UI benefits instead of 30 weeks. Schmieder et al. (2016) use German administrative data and compare
individuals younger and older than 42 years old, the age cutoff for eligibility for 18 months of UI benefits rather
than 12 months. Finally, Lalive (2007) exploits the discontinuous changes in UI benefit duration at age 50 which are
embedded in the Austrian UI system implemented in the regional extended benefit program.

                                                          7
        Our paper contributes to this last branch of the literature by investigating the impacts of

extensions in the duration of UI benefits on wages, the quality of employer-employee matches

(as predicted by Marimon and Zilibotti (1999)), and the quality of jobs (as predicted by

Acemoglu and Shimer (1999)) in the U.S. labor market, with a particular focus on the Great

Recession. Our paper differs from the previous literature we use direct measures of similarity

between worker and firm fixed effects as well as a direct measure of whether the firm uniformly

pays high wages to investigate how UI benefits affect sorting and firm quality.4 Nekoei and

Weber (2017) provide some evidence suggesting that the positive effects of UI on wages are due

to unemployed workers finding new jobs in larger firms, but their estimates are imprecise. They

also examine the impacts of UI on the likelihood of moving firms, industries, occupations and

geographic location and find no effects, though their occupation measure is very coarse. While

they interpret this as lack of evidence on the impact of UI on reallocation, this analysis does not

capture employer-employee matches. To our knowledge, our paper is the first paper that studies

the effect of UI benefits on direct measures of employer-employee match quality and firm

quality. Similar to Nekoei and Weber (2019), we may also expect to find bigger effects on wages

and our match quality and firm quality measures than other studies, given the small effects of UI

on the likelihood of exiting into employment found by Farber, Rothstein, and Valletta (2015).

3.      Institutional Background

        In the U.S., the UI system is a joint federal-state program. The Federal government sets

minimum taxes, benefits, and standards, but each state is free to go beyond these minima. To

qualify for UI, workers must have paid into the UI system through their employer, usually for the

last four quarters before the start of the claim. They must also have received a minimum level of


4
  Our measures of sorting between employers and employees at the individual match level are computed using the
estimation of employer and employee fixed-effects in the spirit of Abowd et al. (1999) as explained in Section 5.

                                                       8
earnings in the base period, which varies across states.5 In addition, to qualify for benefits,

workers must be currently totally or partially unemployed and must have lost their jobs other

than for cause. Finally, the unemployed must be looking for work, and, in many states, they must

show they have applied for jobs during the week for which they are claiming UI benefits.

         In the vast majority of states, unemployed workers can claim UI benefits for up to 26

weeks. Eleven states offer 26 weeks of benefits uniformly to all workers. In another 31 states, the

duration of UI benefits is capped at 26 weeks, but unemployed workers can only claim UI

benefits for fewer weeks, depending on their contributions. Only Montana and Massachusetts

provide more than 26 weeks of benefits. Montana pays benefits for up to 28 weeks, and

Massachusetts pays benefits for up to 30 weeks, but only during periods of high unemployment.

There are also 10 states which only provide benefit payments for less than 26 weeks. Florida and

North Carolina provide 12 weeks of benefits; Alabama and Georgia provide up to 14 weeks of

benefits; Arkansas and Kansas up to 16 weeks; and Michigan, Missouri, and South Carolina

provide benefit payments for up to 20 weeks.6

         Additional weeks of benefits are granted during recessions through Federal programs to

ensure that workers who lose their jobs do not suffer massive drops in their income and

consumption. There are two major Federal programs used to extend the duration of UI benefits

during recessions. The first is the Extended Benefits (EB) program, which is a permanently

authorized program established by Congress in 1970. The Federal-State Extended

Unemployment Compensation Act establishes the provision of financial support to extend

benefits for individuals who have exhausted their state UI benefits when unemployment rates are

5
    State-by-state laws with regards of minimum contributions are included in this report:
https://oui.doleta.gov/unemploy/comparison/2010-2019/comparison2019.asp.
6
  These states are included in the analysis that use the CPS data. However, of these states, only Arkansas and Kansas
are included in the analysis based on LEHD data, as we do not have access to data from the other states through the
Census Research Data Center.

                                                         9
high. The EB Program grants an extension of UI benefits by 13 and 20 additional weeks if the 3-

month state average unemployment rate exceeds 6.5% and 8.5%, respectively. The additional

weeks of UI benefits can be claimed once the regular UI benefits are exhausted or once the

extended weeks granted in the temporary programs are exhausted.

       The second type of programs that typically extend the duration of UI benefits during

recessions are federally-funded temporary UI benefit extension programs, which have been

introduced during each recession since the late 1950s. Although these programs have changed

over time in name, duration, and conditions to qualify, they all provide additional weeks for

unemployment insurance benefits on top of the ordinary state UI benefits. Temporary

Unemployment Compensation (TUC) programs were introduced between June of 1958 and June

of 1959, between April 1961 and June of 1962, and between January of 1972 and March of 1973

for an additional period of 13 weeks. Federal Supplemental Benefits or Compensation (FSB or

FSC) programs were introduced between January 1975 and January of 1978, and between

September of 1982 and June of 1985 for various lengths of time. In the recession of the early

2000s, between March of 2002 and March of 2004, the TUC program was re-introduced,

granting up to 13 or 26 additional weeks of benefits. Finally, the temporary benefit programs

were renamed Emergency Unemployment Compensation (EUC) Programs between November

1991 and April 1994, and during and in the aftermath of the Great Recession, between July of

2008 and January of 2014.

       The TUC 2002 Program consisted of two separate levels or tiers. Individuals who

exhausted their regular state UI benefits were automatically eligible for 13 weeks of benefits. By

contrast, the second tier contains a trigger mechanism and established a threshold requirement

related to the state's unemployment rate. States with a 3-month average unemployment rate



                                               10
above 6.5% were eligible for an additional 13 weeks of UI benefits. The TUC 2002 Program

jointly with the EB Program guaranteed up to a maximum of 72 weeks of UI benefits.

       The EUC Program introduced in the last recession was extended several times. It became

increasingly more complicated by adding more tiers over time. To simplify the exposition,

Figure 1 provides a schematic summary of the available benefits during the Great Recession.

Initially, EUC was launched from July 2008 to March 2009 and allowed the unemployed to

claim an additional 13 weeks of benefits. In November 2008, the program expanded to allow 20

instead of 13 weeks of benefits. Between March and December 2009, the program changed from

a one tier to a two-tier program, with those in the first tier continuing to receive 20 weeks and

those in the second tier receiving an additional 13 weeks of benefits. Between December of 2009

and February 2010, the program consisted of four tiers. The first two tiers were activated

unconditionally for all states and offered 20 and 14 additional weeks, respectively. The last two

tiers were conditioned on state-specific unemployment rates. The third tier offered 13 extra

weeks in states with a 3-month average unemployment rate above 6%, while the last tier offered

6 additional weeks of unemployment benefits to individuals residing in states with a 3-month

average unemployment rate above 8.5%. This same four-tier program was then extended six

more times through new legislation until May 2012. From May to September 2012, the program

went back to a four-tier system with benefits of up to 20, 14, 13, and 6 weeks in Tiers 1 through

4, respectively. Starting in June 2012, the second tier required a 3-month total unemployment

rate above 6% in the state to qualify, and the third and fourth-tiers now required unemployment

rates above 7% and 9%, respectively. Finally, between September 2012 and January 2014, the

program changed the four Tiers maximum benefit weeks to 14, 14, 9, and 10, respectively.




                                               11
        Since states could trigger "on" and "off" tiers 3 and 4 due to changes in their

unemployment rates, UI benefit durations varied in a given year within each state and also varied

across states. Since June 2012, states could also trigger "on" or "off" from Tier 2. Together with

ordinary UI benefits and the additional weeks granted under the EB program, the EUC allowed

individuals to use up to 99 weeks of UI benefits.

        Figure 2 shows heatmaps constructed by using the monthly maximum amount of UI

benefit weeks in three different periods.7 The first row shows the ordinary UI benefits between

January 2000 and December 2001, and between January 2005 and July 2008. The middle row

refers to the early 2000s recession extension between January 2002 and December 2004. Finally,

the bottom row reports the heatmaps for the Great Recession extension between August 2008

and December 2013. The maps on the left side include all U.S. states, while the maps on the right

focus on the 20 states we use in the LEHD analysis. 8 Comparing the top to the two bottom panels

in Figure 2 shows that the duration of UI benefits is always extended during downturns. In our

analysis, we not only take advantage of variations in UI durations between recessions and

expansions, but we also exploit variation on a monthly or quarterly during a recession. Figure 2

also shows a significant increase in the dispersion of UI benefits duration during recessions.

While most states in our sample grant 26 weeks of UI benefits in normal times, the maps during

the early 2000s recession and the Great Recession show much more variation in terms of

duration of UI benefits.

        Figures 3 and 4 examine each source of variation -across states and over time- further.

Figure 3 reports the variation in weeks of UI benefits across states by quarter for the full sample



7
  The UI benefit weeks are grouped in Figure 2 based on the availability of weeks from the EB Program and the
Four-Tiered EUC Program between December 2009 ­ May 2012 as showed in Figure 1.
8
  For graphical purposes, we omit Alaska and Hawaii in the maps.

                                                     12
of states (Panel A) and the 20 states in the LEHD data (Panel B).9 There are two main takeaways

from this figure. First, there is little variability in UI durations during expansionary periods, but

the variation grows widely during quarters in recessionary periods when the UI extensions were

introduced. Second, there is little variation in UI durations during the early 2000s, while the

interquartile range in the duration of UI benefits was much wider during the Great Recession.

While the maximum weeks of UI benefits the unemployed could obtain were 79 weeks by the

second half of 2009, the maximum duration of UI benefits increased to 99 weeks for most states

during the aftermath of the Great Recession. Yet, there are a few states with significantly lower

benefit durations. The minimum amount of UI benefit weeks during the financial crisis is about

15 weeks below the number of weeks at the 25% percentile.

       Figure 4 shows the variation in the duration of UI benefits over the period 2000-2013 for

each individual state (red states are in both the LEHD and CPS data, while blue states are only

included in the CPS data). We observe a large variation in UI benefits within states. The range

between the minimum and the maximum amount of UI weeks is between 26 and 99 weeks for

65% of the states ­ 33 out of the 50 states and the District of Columbia. Figure 4 also highlights

that the availability of large extensions of UI benefits is a rare event. Indeed, the maximum

amount of UI benefit weeks is a little over 20 weeks for most states at the 75% percentile.

Importantly, this figure shows that there is substantial variation across states.

4.      Data

        In this section, we first describe the data sources used in the empirical analysis and, then,

present the descriptive statistics for the population of interest.




9
 Although we have collected weeks of UI benefits at the monthly frequency, this figure shows the quarterly average
of the duration of UI benefits coming from the monthly data.

                                                       13
4.1.    Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) Data

        Our primary source of data is the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD).

The LEHD infrastructure File system consists of restricted microdata information on earnings

disbursements paid by employers to their employees as part of unemployment insurance. Those

records cover nearly all private sector employment as well as state and local government

employment. The coverage does not extend to self-employment or workers hired by the federal

government.

        The Census Bureau collaborates with its state partners through the Local Employment

Dynamics (LED) cooperative federal-state program to compile the LEHD data infrastructure.

Each LED partner state collects earnings data from Unemployment Insurance (UI) administrative

files. The LED partner states also extract information from the Bureau of Labor Statistic's

Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW) administrative files. The Census Bureau

receives these files and complements them with information on individual characteristics that are

internally maintained. 10

        The records in the LEHD infrastructure correspond to any individual's UI-covered

earnings paid by an employing tax-payer entity identified by a State Employer Identification

Number (SEIN).11 An individual is included in a quarter in the LEHD infrastructure if at least

one employer reports earnings of at least one dollar for that individual during that quarter. We

denote individuals to be employed in a quarter if they receive a non-zero earning from at least

one employer in that quarter. We classify individuals to be non-employed in quarters in which

they do not receive earnings from an employer during those quarters and assign them zero


10
  See Abowd et al. (2009) for a detailed description of the LEHD infrastructure File system.
11
  SEINs identify tax-payer entities. There is no one-to-one correspondence between tax-payer entities and firms.
Although most firms have a unique tax identifier, there are few firms, usually large firms, that may have multiple
SEINs due to tax advantages.

                                                       14
earnings. 12 We then construct our earnings measure by deflating the current earnings using the

CPI Index adjusting for the Regional Price Parities Index to account for the difference in

purchasing power between states.13

        Each record is also completed with information on employers and individuals. The

employers' data comes from each state's Department of Employment Security administrative

files that are collected as part of the Covered Employment and Wages (CEW) program, jointly

administered between the BLS and the Employment Security Agencies. Individuals'

demographic characteristics integrated into the LEHD infrastructure come from two

administrative data sources, the Person Characteristics File (PCF) and the Composite Person

Record (CPR), both maintained by the Census Bureau. Individuals are uniquely identified by a

Protected Identification Key (PIK) that tracks them across states and time.

        The LEHD infrastructure contains matches between each employer-employee pair. This

feature enables us to explore the effects of UI benefits extensions on labor market sorting during

the last two recessions. We assign to each individual the maximum number of statutory UI weeks

available based on the state of either their last or current employer. As the LEHD records are

reported on a quarterly basis, and we have collected UI benefits weeks at a monthly frequency,

we aggregate the weeks of UI benefits by averaging monthly benefit weeks to the quarterly level.

        The Census Bureau has granted us access to 20 U.S. states, which account for about 50%

of the U.S. labor market. The states included in our analysis are Arizona, Arkansas, California,

Colorado, Delaware, District of Columbia, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Maine,




12
   Since we only have access to 20 U.S. states, we cannot distinguish between non-employed individuals and
individuals who have moved to one of the states which we do not have access to. We abstract from this possibility
and we classify all these individuals as non-employed.
13
   The BEA calculates the RPP starting only in 2008. As the Regional Price Parities Index has very little volatility
over time, we use an average over the available years to adjust the years before 2008.

                                                        15
Maryland, Nevada, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Texas, Washington, and Wisconsin.

These 20 states have joined the LEHD microdata at different times. 14

         The core of the empirical analysis focuses on the effect of UI on the quality of employer-

employee matches in the aftermath of the Great Recession. This was the period with the largest

extension of UI benefits and the greatest variation across states. In this sub-period, 2008-2013,

all 20 states participate in the LEHD. We also present the empirical results for the period from

the first quarter of 2000 to the fourth quarter of 2013. DC and Arkansas entered the LEHD

infrastructure after the beginning of this period ­ DC in the second quarter of 2002 and Arkansas

in the third quarter of 2002.15

         We restrict our analysis to the main job, which we define as the job with the employer at

which that worker earns most of her earnings in a quarter. We restrict the sample only to workers

who have had at least two different employers over the period 2000-2013. The sample includes

both employed and non-employed workers. We restrict our sample to workers of working-age

between 20 and 65 years old. The final sample for the empirical analysis consists of

approximately 100,000,000 individuals for the period 2000-2013, and approximately 82,000,000

individuals for the period 2008-2013.16

         Table 1 reports the summary statistics of the U.S. working population for the full period

from 2000-2013 (Columns (1)-(3)) as well as for our main period of analysis -the period 2008-

2013 (Columns (4)-(6)). Column (1) reports the summary statistics for the 20 U.S. states we have

access to from 2000-2013, while Columns (2) and (3) provide summary statistics for the states

with UI duration above and below the average UI duration across all 20 states for the full



14
   See Vilhuber (2018) for the exact dates in which each state has joined the LEHD program.
15
   The empirical results we present below are robust to the exclusion of these two states.
16
   Due to Census disclosure rules, we cannot report the exact number of observations in our dataset.

                                                         16
period.17 The shares of male and female workers are about the same (52% vs. 48%). The

working population in our sample is predominantly composed of white workers (80%). The

share of workers with some college or more is higher than the percentage of workers with high

school or less (57% vs. 43%).18 There are more educated workers in states with UI benefit

duration above the average in all states compared to those in states offering shorter UI benefit

periods. Otherwise, workers in more and less generous UI states are similar in terms of gender,

race, and age. The average quarterly earnings are around $4,600 in the full sample and in the

sub-samples of workers living in states that offer UI benefits for longer and shorter periods.

        The population characteristics are very similar for the full period (2000-2013) and the

sub-period 2008-2013. Columns (4)-(6) shows summary statistics for the period 2008-2013 for

all workers and workers in states with UI benefits duration above and below the average. The

share of men (51% vs. 52%), whites (79% vs. 80%), and those with college (56% vs. 57%) are

somewhat lower during the 2008-13 sub-period compared to the full period, but the average age

is slightly higher (40 vs. 39 years of age). As for the full time period, the states with more and

less generous benefits look very similar in terms of worker characteristics, except that workers in

the more generous states are more educated. Quarterly earnings at around $4,700 during the

period of the Great Recession and similar for workers living in more than less generous states.

17
   The average number of weeks of UI is computed over the period 2000-2013 among the 20 states available to us
through the LEHD program. The average UI is equal to 46 weeks. For comparability, we classify the states in the
both periods, 2000-2013 and 2008-2013, using the same cutoff. Although the average UI for the sub-period 2008-
2013 is higher (around 63 weeks), the classification between states above and below UI average is substantially
unchanged by using the average over the period 2000-2013 or the average over the period 2008-2013. That is the
case because most of the variation in the UI benefits that determines the classification between states above and
below UI average comes from the sub-period 2008-2013. We classify states as above the mean as the states whose
average over the 2000-2013 is above the mean across all states. States below the mean are classified following a
similar procedure. The states with UI benefits above the average are: Arizona, California, Colorado, Delaware,
District of Columbia, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Nevada, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, and Washington. The states with
UI benefits below the average are: Arkansas, Iowa, Kansas, Maine, Maryland, Oklahoma, Texas, and Wisconsin.
18
   Our estimates are similar to the ones reported from the Current Population Survey (CPS). The main difference is
in level of education attainment. As the education achievements in the LEHD are imputed and based on the 2000
education distribution, it is thus not surprising that the share of more educated workers is lower in the LEHD than
recent estimates from the CPS.

                                                        17
4.2.     CPS Data

         We also use the Monthly Public Data files from the Current Population Survey to

examine the impact of the UI benefits extensions on wages and the job skill requirements for

workers after unemployment spells. Households in the CPS are interviewed four months, then let

go for eight months, then interviewed again for another four months. Every month one-eighth of

the households enter the sample, and a similar number leaves the sample. Households are asked

questions about wage income and hours worked in their fourth and eighth interviews, and we

only use information from these months when analyzing outcomes. We leverage the longitudinal

and rotating structure of the CPS sample to construct longitudinal histories of workers. In

addition to the unique structure, the monthly CPS also collects extensive demographic

characteristics and labor market information, including information on current employment

occupation, past occupation (for those who are unemployed), education, age, gender, race,

marital status, and state.

         One of the main differences between the CPS and the LEHD is that while in the LEHD,

we only observe the spell of non-employment, the CPS collects individual information on

unemployment duration. This feature of the data enables us to construct the available UI benefits

at the individual level as our main explanatory variable for our CPS analysis. The available UI

benefits are calculated as the difference between the statutory UI benefits weeks in a state at a

point in time minus the duration of unemployment for an unemployed individual in the sample.

We restrict our CPS analysis to the period 2008-2013.19




19
  We restrict the analysis only to the Great Recession and its aftermath for two reasons. First, the BLS increased the
sample size of the CPS in the early 2000s. Second, as showed in the previous sections, most of the variation in UI
benefits comes from the Great Recession and its aftermath.

                                                         18
        We link individuals from one month to the next using household and individual

identifiers following the procedure outlined by Shimer (2012).20 We then construct two different

samples for our analysis. The first sample is restricted to workers who are present in the CPS in

months 3, 4, 7 and 8 so that we made a transition from unemployment to employment either

from month 3 to 4 or from month 7 to 8, or both. We use this sample to study how UI benefits

extensions impact the job skill requirements for workers who move from unemployment to

employment.

        We use two distinct measures that capture the skill requirements. The first measure

consists of the difference in the educational requirements the occupations in the current and

previous jobs. To construct the educational requirements, we collect data from the U.S. Labor

Department's O*NET database. The O*NET program gathers data on requirements for entry-

level jobs, work styles, and task content within occupations by surveying each occupation's

working population. We construct educational requirements by relying on the following survey

question: "If someone was being hired to perform this job, indicate the level of education that

would be required." The answers to the previous question are collected from the current

employees.21 The responses are recorded as a categorical variable. 22 To obtain a numerical proxy

for the educational requirements for each occupation, we convert the categorical responses into

years of education by multiplying the shares of responses for each category by the number of

years required to attain the corresponding education level. For example, if 80% of respondents in

the O*NET survey respond that a Ph.D. is required to perform the job of an Economist while



20
   In order to rule out spurious matches based on household and individual identifiers we perform checks such as the
sex and the age of the individual is consistent from one month to the next.
21
   The survey respondents are reminded that their answers do not have to refer to the level of education that an
incumbent or current employee has achieved, but they have to refer to a new hire.
22
    The categorical variable can take the following options: less than high school, high school, some college,
associate' some college, associate, and graduate degree.

                                                        19
20% say that a Masters' degree is required, then we assign 17.6 (0.8 x 18 + 0.2 x 16) years of

education as the requirement for Economists. We use these educational requirements of the

workers' current jobs to construct our measure of educational mismatch as the difference

between the workers' educational attainments and the level of education required in their current

jobs. Thus, the educational mismatch is measured in terms of the difference in years of

education, and it can take either positive or negative values reflecting whether a person is over-

qualified or under-qualified for the job. 23

        The second measure we construct is an indicator that takes the value of one if the number

of years of education required by the new occupation is greater than the number of years of

education required by the previous occupation and zero otherwise.24

        The second sample we have constructed is used to measure the earnings of workers who

exit the labor market at a particular point in time. This sample is constructed by using the CPS

monthly data files from IPUMS. We create longitudinal histories of workers several months

apart by using the personal identifiers provided by IPUMS. As we are interested in wage

outcomes for longer transitions, we focus on workers who have participated in all the 4-months

in the CPS before leaving the sample 25 and we restrict our sample to workers who transitioned

from unemployment to employment any time during months 1 through 3 and analyze their wages

in month 4. As individuals may transit from unemployment to employment in one of the months

from 1 through 3, we assign the available UI benefits for the month in which the individual made

the transition. We use the this sample to study the medium-term effects on hourly wages.26


23
   We have also implemented alternative definitions of the educational mismatch such as using the mode of the
responses as the required level of education for each occupation rather than the mean. Although these robustness
checks are not reported in the paper, they generate quantitatively similar results.
24
    Notice that this variable would take a value of 0 for workers who do not change their occupation upon re-
employment.
25
   In the analysis, we use individual weights from the 8th month.
26
   The nominal wages reported in the CPS are deflated by the 2010 national CPI to convert them in real wages.

                                                      20
        Table 2 reports the descriptive statistics for the CPS. Column (1) shows the descriptive

statistics for the entire sample, while columns (2) and (3) show the descriptive statistics for those

in states with UI benefits duration above and below the average benefit weeks, respectively. 27

The first row of Table 2 shows that 81.5% of people exiting unemployment move to occupations

with higher education requirements than their previous job. The share of those moving to jobs

with higher education requirements after being unemployed is the same for those in states with

UI benefit weeks above the average and those in states with shorter UI benefits durations. The

third row shows that, on average, workers have 0.13 more years of education than it is actually

required on the job, but that this mismatch is lower in more generous states where UI benefits

duration is longer (0.11 vs. 0.19). The average age for those in the sample is 37 years old. Also,

81% of those in the sample are white, 58% are male, and 47% have some college or more as the

highest educational attainment. Workers living in states with more generous UI benefits are more

educated, younger, less likely to be white and male. It is worth highlighting that these summary

statistics are not representative of the entire U.S. population. The differences are explained by

the fact that our sample is restricted only to individuals who moved from unemployment to

employment. For example, as a lower share of more educated workers is unemployed, it is

reasonable to obtain a lower share of more educated individuals in the sample than in the

national statistics. The last row of Table 2 reports the average hourly wages in month 4 after

exiting from unemployment. The average hourly wage for the entire sample of states is about

$12.50 US Dollars. The average wage for workers in states with UI benefit weeks above the


27
  The states above the average available UI are Alabama, Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Georgia, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan,
Nevada, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Tennessee, Texas,
Washington, West Virginia, and Wisconsin. The states below the average available UI are Arkansas, Florida,
Hawaii, Iowa, Kansas, Louisiana, Maryland, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, New
Hampshire, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South Carolina, South Dakota, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, and
Wyoming.

                                                    21
average is slightly lower than for those in states with shorter UI benefits durations ($12.17 vs.

$12.74).28

4.3.    State Controls

        The extension of the UI benefits is concurrent with weak economic conditions, and some

of the "tiers" were activated at the realization of extreme adverse economic events. Those weak

economic conditions may also affect the quality of the matches between employers and

employees. To address this potential issue in the identification of the effect of UI on labor market

sorting, we include in the empirical specification state-specific macroeconomic variables to

capture the deterioration of the economic environment when UI extensions are activated.

        We collect unemployment rates for every state over time from the Local Area

Unemployment Statistics (LAUS) at the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). The BLS reports local

unemployment rates at a monthly frequency. Since the LEHD microdata has quarterly

periodicity, we average the 3-month unemployment rates within each quarter to obtain a

quarterly rate. In the case of the monthly CPS data, instead, we use the monthly unemployment

rates. The unemployment rate has reached its peak in the aftermath of the Great Recession with a

spike of nearly 10%, driven mostly by large drops in demand and increases in layoffs.

        We also include a second macroeconomic control -the quarterly gross state product

(GSP)- from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). The BEA computes quarterly GSP data

starting from 2005. For years before 2005, GSP series are calculated only annually. We assume




28
  The states above the mean of available UI are: Alabama, Alaska, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware,
District of Columbia, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Maine, Nevada, New Jersey, North Carolina, Ohio, Oregon,
Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Tennessee, Texas, Washington, West Virginia, and Wisconsin. The states below the
mean of available UI are: Arizona, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Iowa, Kansas, Louisiana, Maryland,
Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, New Hampshire, New Mexico,
New York, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South Carolina, South Dakota, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, and Wyoming.

                                                       22
that for years before 2005, all quarters have the same value, and this value is equal to the annual

GSP.29

         The last control variable we use in some of the empirical specifications is the

unionization coverage rate. Unionization coverage rates include both active union members as

well as non-affiliated workers whose jobs are covered by a union or an employee association

contract. The data are collected from the BLS as part of the Current Population Survey (CPS).

The BLS reports annual rates for the period 2000-2013 by state. The annual rates are calculated

as averages over the calendar year. In the empirical analysis, we assume that all quarters have the

same annual unionization coverage rate.

5.       Empirical Methodology

         In this section, we first describe how we compute the quality of employers and

employees. We then present three alternative strategies to identify the causal effect of extensions

in UI benefits duration on the quality of the match between employers and workers.

5.1.     Employer and Employee Quality Estimation

         We derive the quality for each employer and employee by implementing a variation of

the individual fixed effects methodology proposed in Abowd et al. (1999), and more recently, in

Card et al. (2018). We estimate the following model:

                   log( ) =   +   +  +  +   +   (1)

where  is the wage for worker  hired by employer  in state  in year  and quarter , 

are the employee fixed effects that capture the time-invariant worker characteristics that affect

earnings,  are the employer fixed effects which capture firm-specific pay premium,  are the

state fixed effects,  are the year fixed effects,  are the seasonal fixed effects, and finally,

29
  While the GSP is at quarterly frequency, the CPS data are monthly. We assume that all months in a quarter have
the same value and that this value is equal to the quarterly statistic.

                                                      23
 is the error term. We include year and seasonal fixed effects separately to capture both the

fact that real wages may be changing over time, for example, due to productivity and that real

wages may change due to changes in demand during high and low seasons that vary similarly

every year.

         Individual fixed effects are computed by implementing a variation of the algorithms used

in Guimarães and Portugal (2010) and Crane et al. (2018).30 Appendix B includes a detailed

description of the steps of the computational algorithm. We estimate the individual fixed effects

via an iterative procedure. We initialize the algorithm by guessing the worker types. We use as

our initial guess the average of the workers' log earnings after controlling for life cycle

patterns.31 Then, we compute the employer fixed effects by removing the individual fixed effects

from log earnings. The algorithm, then, computes iteratively the state, year, and seasonal fixed

effects by progressively removing the previously computed fixed effects from the log earnings.

Finally, we update the worker and employer fixed effects and calculate the 2 . The algorithm

stops when convergence in the goodness-of-fit criterion is achieved, which we set to be a

difference of less than 0.001 between the 2 's in two consecutive iterations.32

         Although the quantification of the effects of UI on job matches uses only observations for

the period 2000-2013, the estimation of the employee and employer fixed effects is based on the

longest time series available. Short time series may generate imprecise estimates of the

individual fixed effects due to the "limited mobility" bias. 33 The use of the longest time series

possibly attenuates this bias and returns more precise estimates of the fixed effects.


30
   We are grateful to Henry Hyatt for having shared with us the SAS codes for his computational algorithm.
31
   Specifically, we regress the log earnings against the workers' age and squared age to absorb life cycle patterns for
workers belonging to different birth cohorts.
32
   Convergence is achieved in approximately 10 iterations.
33
   See Abowd et al. (2004) and Andrews et al. (2008) for a discussion of the "limited mobility" bias and its effect on
the individual fixed effects estimates. The "limited mobility" bias in the estimation of the worker fixed effects

                                                          24
5.2.    Fixed Effects Ranking Approach

        The first approach we use to get at the quality of matching is to measure positive

assortative matching between employers and employees directly. 34

        We compute the percentile of each employer and employee fixed effects derived from

equation (1). For any employee  hired by employer , we then calculate the absolute value of the

difference between the percentile of employee  and the percentile of employer . This measure

captures the distance in the position of an employer and an employee relative to their peers.

        The distance between an employer and an employee is bounded between zero and one.

The zero distance means that an employer and an employee are in the same percentile of their

distribution. The distance of one implies that either an employer with the highest quality matches

to an employee with the lowest quality or the other way around. The larger is the gap between an

employer and employee, the more dissimilar they are. For interpretational purposes, we write the

measure of positive assortative matching as one minus the absolute value of the difference

between the employer and employee percentile:

                                     = 1 - | -  | (2)

where  is the percentile for employee , and  is the percentile for employer .

        This measure of positive assortative matching between an employer and an employee in

equation (2) will then become our dependent variable in the following equation:

                 =  1 -1 +  2 log(-1 ) + -1 +  (3)

where -1 is the lagged unemployment rate and ln-1 is the lagged log of the gross state

product in state s in the previous period. We include these controls to make sure that we capture


occurs because the moves of workers across firms that helps identify these fixed effects is not frequent enough.
Thus, the bias is bigger when there are fewer movers.
34
   We also examine the impact of UI on the likelihood of being employed by an employer with firm-ffects above the
mean firm-effect in the sample.

                                                       25
the state of the economy in each labor market. -1 are the maximum UI benefits weeks

mandated in the state  in the previous period. A positive value of  is, thus, interpreted as a

positive effect of UI extensions on assortative matching, i.e., employers hire more similarly

ranked employees.

        Extensions in UI benefits occur when economic conditions are weak. Weak economic

conditions themselves may affect employer-employee matches.35 This is why in the empirical

model, we control for observable state's aggregate macroeconomic variables, such as

unemployment rate and gross product, to directly capture the variation in job quality matches

linked to weak economic conditions. In particular, we control for these to ensure that we

distinguish the effect of the cycle from the effect of the unemployment insurance benefit

duration. This is important because UI benefits were extended nationwide for longer periods

when the state of the economy worsened.

        Moreover, additional tiers of UI benefits sometimes triggered in response to higher

unemployment rates in a state. Since worse labor market conditions may be related to hiring into

worse jobs but also coincides with extended benefits, this may bias the effects of UI generosity

on the quality of matches downwards. Finally, we used lagged explanatory variables by a quarter

to address the possibility that better matches between employers and employees may be more

productive and may lead to an increase in gross product, a decline in the unemployment rate, and

UI benefits duration. The identification assumption we make is that past state economic

conditions affect the current quality of matches, but the current quality of matches does not affect

the previous economic conditions.

35
  Mueller (2017) shows that there are compositional changes in the pool of unemployed workers over the U.S.
business cycle. Specifically, during recessions the pool of unemployed workers shifts towards workers with high
wages in their previous job. Sedlácek and Sterk (2017) and Moreira (2017) show that businesses births during
downturns differ from businesses births during upturns. In fact, firms that start up during downturns start on a
smaller scale and remain smaller over their entire lifecycle.

                                                      26
        Legislative changes in UI benefits voted by Congress occurred due to weak economic

conditions and aimed to ensure that unemployed workers during recessions do not suffer

significant drops in incomes. As the current project focuses on the role of UI benefits extensions

in potentially improving the functioning of the U.S. labor market through better matches between

employers and employees, it is reasonable to think that the legislative changes are exogenous to

individual matches. Therefore, we believe these legislative changes are a suitable natural

experiment to investigate the causal effect of UI benefits on job quality matches. While

discontinuity or kinked designs provide a clean method to identify UI impacts, an advantage of

our identification design is that it can capture general equilibrium effects that will not be

captured when one is examining local average treatment effects around a discontinuity.

        We also investigate whether there are heterogeneous effects of UI benefits duration on

match quality for different groups of workers. Specifically, we estimate models with interactions

of the UI benefits durations with indicators for the following groups: men (vs. women); white

(vs. non-white) workers; more-educated (vs. less-educated) workers; younger (vs. older)

workers.36

5.3.    Residuals Approach

        The second measure of the quality of employer-employee matches is the residuals from

the log wage model in equation (1). The residual term captures unobserved variables and, among

other things, the quality of the match between worker  and employer  in state  in year  and

quarter . The residual term can also contain other effects on wages, including the bargaining

power of workers or positive shocks to worker human capital. We include controls for the

unionization coverage rate in state  at time  to control for the bargaining power of workers.


36
  We define a young worker as a worker younger than 40 years old. The choice of the threshold is motivated by the
average age of the population in our sample reported in Table 1.

                                                       27
While the residual is a proxy for the employer-employee match quality, we use it as an

alternative measure. We estimate the following model:

         =  1 -1 +  2 log(-1 ) +  3 -1 (4)

                                       +-1  +   

where  are the residuals from equation (1) where  is the combination of the year and quarter

subscripts, -1 is the state unemployment rate, ln-1 is the log of the gross state

product, -1 is the unionization rate, -1 is the main variable and it

measures the generosity of the UI benefits duration in state , and  is the error term. We

cluster the standard error at the state level to capture the correlation in the error terms. We expect

 to be positive, meaning that more generous UI benefits improve the employer-employee

matches. As before, we control for the lagged values of the state economic conditions, including

the unemployment rate and the gross domestic product, to ensure we do not confound the effects

of the unemployment benefit duration with the economic conditions in the state.

       As before, we also estimate the differential effects of the UI benefits on different groups

by the interaction of the UI benefit variable with a dummy for being a man, a dummy for being

white, a dummy for having some college or more, or a dummy for being 40 years old or younger.

5.4.   Effects on Skills Requirements

       In our third empirical approach, we examine how UI extensions decrease the educational

mismatch between worker education and the skills required for the job and increase the

educational requirements in the new job relative to the previous job. The third approach enables

us to study whether UI extensions allows workers to find better jobs where they are no longer

over-educated.

       Our estimation strategy is similar to the work of Rothstein (2011), Farber and Valletta


                                                 28
(2015), and Farber et al. (2015), who also use individual-level data from the CPS. We estimate

the following model:

                  =  1 -1  + 2 log(-1 ) + -1 (5)

                                      + +  +  +   +  

where  are the re-employment job quality or the education mismatch measures.

-1 measures the available duration of benefits in each state during each month for

a given individual  calculated as the total UI benefits weeks in the state  at a point in time

minus the duration of unemployment for an unemployed individual in the sample. We control for

state effects  , year effects  , and month effects  to make our analysis consistent with the

previous specifications, which also controlled for these fixed effects. In addition to the fixed

effects, we include a set of individual demographic characteristics as controls. The set of

individual controls  includes age, squared age, years of education, a dummy for race, a

dummy for gender, a dummy for marital status.37 As above, we also include the lagged

unemployment rate and GSP to disentangle the impact of the policy changes from the effect of

weak labor demand on match quality.

6.      LEHD Results: Impacts on Firm-Worker Match Quality

        Several studies proxy the impact of UI benefits on the quality of jobs by examining the

impact on wages. Individual wages, however, capture many other effects aside from the quality

of the match, including unobservable worker characteristics, quality of the employer, and

bargaining power. To illustrate the differences between our approach and the previous analysis

that simply examine the impact on wages, we first report the impact of UI benefit duration on

wages in Table 3. Column (1) in Table 3 shows the impact of unemployment insurance duration

37
  In the LEHD analysis we do not include this set of individual demographic characteristics as controls because we
control for individual fixed effects that absorb all these characteristics.

                                                        29
on the logarithm of earnings for the period from 2000 to 2013. UI benefits show no impact on

earnings for the period for which we have data. However, Column (2) in Table 3 shows a

positive effect of UI duration on earnings during the period of the Great Recession. The results

show that an increase of 53 weeks, from the standard benefits of 26 weeks to 79 weeks (the

maximum benefits at the end of 2009), increases wages by 2.6%. In these regressions, we

already control for the unemployment rate in the state and gross state product in addition to state,

year, and seasonal fixed effects. As expected, a higher unemployment rate in the past reduces

earnings, though the effect is insignificant. By contrast, the effect of GSP on wages is positive

and significant at the 5% level.

6.1.   Impacts on Ranking Measure

       Instead of looking at wages, which captures many other effects, we examine the impact

of UI duration on the distance between the ranking of firms and workers. Table 4 shows the

results on ranking for the full period from 2000 to 2013 as well as for the period of the Great

Recession. Column (1) in Panel A in Table 4 shows the impact of UI duration on the similarity in

the ranking. The effect indicates that an increase of 53 weeks in UI benefits increases the

similarity between the worker and firm ranking by 1%. Column (1) in Panel B in Table 4 shows

the effects of UI benefit extensions during the Great Recession. The effects are bigger during the

Great Recession ­an increase of 53 weeks increases the similarity between workers' and firms'

rankings by 1.1%. To ensure we do not confound the effect of labor market conditions with UI

benefit duration, we control for the lagged unemployment rate and gross state product in all of

our estimations. The effect of the unemployment rate (UR) is negative but insignificant, and the

effect of Gross Domestic Product (GSP) is positive and significant at the 5% level. These results

suggest that if a worker can receive UI benefits for a longer period, she will be able to find a job



                                                30
with an employer that is closer to her in terms of quality. This worker then is likely to leave

another job open for someone else who is also likely to be better matched, and in turn that other

worker can also leave vacant another job and relieve it to someone else, generating a chain

reaction that makes many other workers, beyond the one receiving the UI extension, match better

in the labor market.

       We examine models with interactions to check whether the impacts are bigger on

workers by gender and race. Column (2) in Panels A and B in Table 4 show that the interaction

term of the UI duration on the male dummy is negative and statistically significant. The effects

of UI benefits are, thus, bigger on women than men. An increase of 53 weeks of UI benefits

increases similarity in the ranking by 1.3% for women and by 0.9% for men. Similarly, the

effects were greater for women than men during the Great Recession. Column (3) in Panels A

and B in Table 4 show that the interaction term of UI duration with a dummy for white workers.

The interaction term with the white dummy is negative and statistically significant. The results

show that an increase of 53 weeks improves the match quality by 1.2% for minority workers and

by 0.9% for whites for the entire period. During the Great Recession, minority workers benefit

even more from extended benefits; indeed, a 53 weeks extension increases the ranking similarity

by 1.3%.

       Columns (4) and (5) in Panels A and B of Table 4 also show the differential effects of UI

extensions on workers with different levels of education and different ages. Column (4) shows

that the interaction with the dummy for those with some college or more education is negative

and significant. Thus, the least educated benefit more from UI benefit extensions both during the

whole period as well as during the Great Recession sub-period. For instance, for the full period,

an increase of 53 weeks of UI increases the similarity in the ranking by 1.3% for less educated



                                               31
workers and by 1% for more educated workers. Column (5) in Panels A and B also show that the

interaction with the under 40 years old group is negative and statistically significant. Older

workers benefit more from UI benefits both during the Great Recession and during the whole

period. The results show that an increase of 53 weeks improves the ranking similarity by 1.7%

for those over 40 and by 0.5% for workers under 40.

       The larger effects on women, minorities, and less educated workers suggest that workers

with greater credit constraints probably benefit most from having access to unemployment

insurance benefits for a longer period of time. The larger effects for older workers also likely

reflects that workers with families may be more likely to benefit from receiving UI benefits for a

longer period instead of having to accept the first job that they receive an offer from.

6.2.   Impacts on Residual Measure

       Table 5 shows results in the wage residuals are the outcome, controlling for the state UR,

GSP, and unionization coverage rates in the state. Column (1) in Panels A and B show the results

for the full sample. The results for the full period of the analysis show no effects, but the effects

of UI benefits on improved residual wages are positive during the Great Recession sub-period.

The magnitude shows that an increase of 53 weeks in the duration of UI benefits (the equivalent

of increasing maximum benefits from 26 weeks to 79 weeks) increases unexplained wages by

1.1%, and an increase of 73 weeks in the duration of UI benefits (i.e., an increase in maximum

benefits from 26 to 99 weeks) increases unexplained wages by 1.5%, which is much lower than

the 2.6% increase in log wages when not controlling for other factors. These specifications show,

negative and significant effects of the lagged unemployment rate and positive and significant

effects of lagged GSP. However, the results show no effect of unionization coverage rates on

residual wages suggesting that bargaining power through unionization does not explain much of



                                                 32
the unexplained component of wages.

       Columns (2)-(5) in Panels A and B of Table 5 show differential effects on different

demographic groups. As before, these results show that the impact of UI benefit duration is

bigger for women and non-whites both for the full period and for the Great Recession (columns

(2) and (3) in Panels A and B). Column (4) in Table 5 also shows greater effects on the less

educated for the Great Recession, though the results show the opposite for the entire period. By

contrast, these results show no differential effects between older and younger workers. Thus,

these results confirm that women, minorities and less educated workers, all of whom typically

face greater credit constraints, benefit the most from more generous UI benefits.

7.     CPS Results: Impacts on Educational Requirement Matches

       In this section, we examine the impact of UI benefits on wages and educational mismatch

using CPS data. We first examine the impact of UI benefits on wages and then turn to the

impacts of UI benefits on match quality as measured by the disparity between a workers'

educational attainments and the educational requirements of their jobs and on getting access to

jobs with higher educational requirements.

       Column (3) in Table 3 shows similar effects of UI on wages with the CPS data, as we

found with the LEHD in Columns (1) and (2) in Table 3. The results in Column (3) show that 53

additional weeks of available unemployment benefits increase wages by 4.4%. The relation of UI

to wages is, thus, even bigger than the 2.6% increase in wages we found with LEHD data.

However, in this case, the lagged unemployment rates and lagged GSP do not have a significant

impact on wages.

       Table 6 shows results of the impact of UI on whether an individual gets a better quality

job and a job better matched to their skills.



                                                33
       We start by analyzing whether access to longer UI benefits leads to any decreases in the

mismatch between worker education and the skills required for the job in Panel A of Table 6.

Column (1) in Panel A of Table 6 shows that higher available weeks of benefits reduce

mismatch, but the effect is not statistically significant. Columns (2)-(5) show models with

interactions. The main effect is significant in all of these cases except for in the model in Column

(5) which includes the young vs. old interaction. Also, the only interaction term which is

significant, but in the opposite direction, is the one with more educated workers. These estimates,

thus, show that the effects are bigger for women, non-whites, and less educated workers. The

findings imply that an increase in the availability of UI benefits reduces the mismatch between

the educational attainment of the person and the educational requirement of the job. An increase

of 53 weeks of available UI benefits reduces the mismatch by 60% for women and for non-

whites, and by about 100% for those with less than a college degree.

       Panel B in Table 6 shows the effects of UI benefits on the difference in education

requirements of the job upon exiting unemployment compared to the worker's last job. We find

that workers who have access to more weeks of UI benefits can find jobs that have higher

education requirements than the ones they were doing before. Thus, we find evidence that having

access to a safety net that allows workers to search longer can lead to occupational upgrading.

The estimate from Column (1) implies that an additional 53 weeks of UI benefits increases the

likelihood that workers end up in jobs with higher education requirement by 11.7 percentage

points or by 14.4%. Columns (2) through (5) show models with interactions with a male dummy,

a white dummy, a college dummy, and a dummy if the person is younger than 40 years old.

None of these interactions are significant, but the main effect is significant in all of these cases,

meaning that the effects are bigger for women, non-whites, non-college graduates, and older



                                                 34
workers. Given the evidence in Marinescu (2017) showing that firms do not change skills

requirements in response to UI during the Great Recession, we interpret this as reflecting

workers' response to UI by finding better jobs in which they are not over-educated. Note that this

is consistent with the lack of finding of UI improving the quality of firms workers move to, since

workers could be moving to better jobs in new occupations even if they stay in firms of the same

quality.

           Thus, like the evidence from the LEHD, the results from the CPS show that more

generous unemployment insurance during the Great Recession increased wages. Moreover, our

CPS results show that more generous UI improved the quality of matches and the quality of jobs

obtained after unemployment, so as to reduce over-education.

8.         Conclusion

           This paper provides new evidence that more generous UI benefits improve sorting in the

labor market. Most previous papers in this area focus on the adverse effects of unemployment

insurance benefits in terms of prolonging unemployment spells. By contrast, there is a much

slimmer body of literature focusing on the potential positive effects of unemployment benefits.

There are a small number of convincing papers showing the consumption smoothing effects of

UI and an equally small but less conclusive number of studies examining the impact of UI on

earnings in Europe.

           Here, we provide new evidence on the positive impact of UI extensions on wages in the

U.S. during the last two recessions using both LEHD and CPS data. Moreover, we examine if

this positive impact of UI on wages is due to improved employer-employee matches or

movements to higher paying firms. Using employer-employee data from the LEHD, we find that

increasing the weeks of UI benefits reduces the difference in the quality rankings between



                                                 35
workers and employers. The fact that match quality improves weighs against an interpretation

that UI increases the bargaining power of workers vis-à-vis employers. If that was the case, there

would be more (not less) disparity between the worker and the firm ranking. By contrast, we find

that higher UI is not associated with higher wage premiums paid by firms during the Great

Recession. We similarly find that the unexplained part of earnings increases when UI benefits

durations are lengthened even after controlling for bargaining power from unionization, and we

find that the impact on wages over-estimates the impact on match quality. We find that the effect

of UI benefits duration on these two measures of match quality is greater for less-educated

workers, women, and minority workers, all of whom are more likely to be credit-constrained.

       We also find positive impacts of UI extensions during the Great Recession using CPS

data. We find evidence that greater duration of UI benefits reduces the mismatch between the

actual educational attainment of workers and educational requirements for jobs and, thus,

reduces the phenomenon of over-education for women, non-whites and less educated workers.

We also find that a greater number of weeks of UI benefits increases the likelihood of finding a

job with higher educational requirements after unemployment, which we interpret as being due

to the workers' ability to find better jobs where they are no longer over-educated even if they

remain in a firm of the same quality.

       Our paper provides evidence using different measures and different data sets that more

generous UI improves the functioning of the labor market by allowing better sorting of workers

and employers. In particular, we find that UI benefits those who are more likely to be liquidity

constrained by allowing them to search for a longer period of time until they find jobs better fit

to their skills. Our evidence is, thus, consistent with the "liquidity effect" dominating the "moral

hazard effect" of UI extensions and UI benefits enhancing welfare.



                                                36
       At the same time, UI benefits may also have distributional effects. Our findings imply

that not only will better workers be matched to better firms, but also worse workers may be

matched with worse employers. Thus, lower performing workers may now earn less because

they are no longer matched with higher productivity firms. While more even matches may be

efficient, more balanced matches may reduce earnings for lower performing workers who may

had previously been able to find a job with a better employer. In this sense, the welfare

enhancing role of UI may be smaller when UI affects employee-employer assignments rather

than the creation of better jobs.

       There is, however, another distributional effect of UI which likely enhances welfare. UI

can improve the likelihood that lower performing workers are now able to get a job rather than

remain unemployed because other jobs are now freed up by UI recipients moving to better jobs.

The change in search behavior by UI recipients is likely to have positive externalities on many

other workers in their labor market. When a worker waits to get another job that is better suited

to their skills, they turn down other jobs that may also be better suited for others in the same

labor market. These externalities enhance the welfare effects of UI extensions like those

introduced during the past few recessions.

       Our paper suggests that UI extensions during the Great Recession probably helped to

mitigate the big wage drops experienced by displaced workers due the loss of valuable specific

worker-employer matches found by Lachowska, Mas and Woodbury (forthcoming). The UI

extensions were also likely important in boosting workers' wages given the inability to move to

higher paying firms due to the collapse in firm-wage ladders during this time documented by

Haltiwanger et al. (2018). Similarly, the Pandemic Unemployment Assistance (PUA) introduced

recently as part of the CARES Act or future legislation in response to the COVID-19 Recession



                                               37
will potentially play a role in increasing wages after workers are able to get back to work

following the economic fallout related to the pandemic.




                                               38
References

Abowd, John M., Bryce E. Stephens, Lars Vilhuber, Fredrik Andersson, Kevin L. McKinney,
    Marc Roemer, and Simon D. Woodcock. 2009. "The LEHD Infrastructure Files and the
    Creation of the Quarterly Workforce Indicators." In Producer Dynamics: New Evidence
    from Micro Data, edited by Timothy Dunne, J. Brad Jensen, and Mark J. Roberts.
    University of Chicago Press

Abowd, John, Francis Kramarz, Paul Lengermann, and Sebastien Perez-Duarte. 2004. "Are
    Good Workers Employed by Good Firms? A Test of a Simple Assortative Matching Model
    for France and the United States," Mimeo

Abowd John M., Francis Kramarz, and David Margolis. 1999. "High Wage Workers and High
    Wage Firms," Econometrica, 67(2): 251-333.

Acemoglu Daron, and Robert Shimer. 1999. "Efficient unemployment insurance," Journal of
    Political Economy 107(5): 893-928.

Andrews, Martyn J., Len Gill, Thorsten Schank, and Richard Upward. 2008. "High Wage
     Workers and Low Wage Firms: Negative Assortative Matching or Limited Mobility
     Bias?," Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 171 (3), 673­697.

Card David, Ana Rute Cardoso, Joerg Heining, and Patrick Kline. 2018. "Firms and Labor
     Market Inequality: Evidence and Some Theory," Journal of Labor Economics, 36(S1): 13-
     70.

Card David, Raj Chetty, and Andrea Weber Andrea. 2007. "Cash on Hand and Competing
     Models of Intertemporal Behavior: New Evidence form the Labor Market," Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 122(4): 1511-1560.

Card David, Andrew Johnston, Pauline Leung, Alexandre Mas, and Zhuan Pei. 2015. "The
     Effect of Unemployment Benefits on the Duration of Unemployment Insurance Receipt:
     New Evidence from a Regression Kink Design in Missouri, 2003-2013," American
     Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 105(5):126-130.

Card David, and Phillip Levine. 2000. "Extended Benefits and the Duration of UI Spells:
    Evidence from the New Jersey Extended Benefit Program," Journal of Public Economics,
    78(1): 107-138.

Chetty, Raj. 2008. "Moral Hazard versus Liquidity and             Optimal   Unemployment
     Insurance," Journal of Political Economy, 116(2): 173-234.

Crane Leland, Henry Hyatt, Seth Murray. 2018. "Cyclical Labor Market Sorting," Mimeo.




                                            39
Farber Henry S., Jesse Rothstein, and Robert G. Valletta. 2015. "The Effect of Extended
     Unemployment Insurance Benefits: Evidence from the 2012­2013 Phase-Out," American
     Economic Review, 105(5): 171-176.

Farber Henry S., and Robert G. Valletta. 2015. "Do Extended Unemployment Benefits Lengthen
     Unemployment Spells? Evidence from Recent Cycles in the US Labor Market," Journal of
     Human Resources, 50(4): 873-909.

Guimarães Paulo, and Portugal Pedro, 2010. "A Simple Feasible Procedure to Fit Models with
    High-dimensional Fixed Effects," Stata Journal,10(4):1-22.

Hagedorn Marcus, Fatih Karahan, Iourii Manovskii, and Kurt Mitman. 2013. "Unemployment
    Benefits and Unemployment in the Great Recession: The Role of Macro Effects," NBER
    Working Paper No. 19499..

Haltiwanger, John, Henry Hyatt, Lisa Kahn, Erika McEntarfer. 2018. "Cyclical Job Ladders by
     Firm Size and Firm Wage," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 10(2): 52-85.

Hunt, Jennifer. 1995. "The Effect of Unemployment Compensation on Unemployment Duration
     in Germany," Journal of Labor Economics, 13(1): 88-120.

Johnston, Andrew. 2018. "Potential Unemployment Insurance Duration and Labor Supply: The
     Individual and Market-Level Response to a Benefit Cut," Journal of Political Economy,
     126(6): 2480-2522.

Katz Lawrence F., and Bruce D. Meyer, 1990. "The Impact of the Potential Duration of
     Unemployment Benefits on the Duration of Unemployment," Journal of Public Economics,
     41(1): 45-72.

Kroft Kory, and Matthew Notowidigdo. 2016. "Should Unemployment Insurance Vary with the
     Unemployment Rate? Theory and Evidence," Review of Economic Studies, 83(3): 1092-
     1124.

Lachowska, Marta, Alexandre Mas and Stephen Woodbury. 2018. "Sources of Displaced
     Workers' Long-term Earnings Losses," forthcoming American Economic Review.

Lalive Rafael. 2007. "Unemployment Benefits, Unemployment Duration, and Post-
     Unemployment Jobs: A Regression Discontinuity Approach," American Economic Review,
     97(2): 108-112.

Landais, Camille. 2015. "Assessing the Welfare Effects of Unemployment Benefits using the
     Regression Kink Design," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(4): 243-278.

Marimon Ramon, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 1999. "Unemployment vs. Mismatch of Talents:
      Reconsidering Unemployment Benefits," Economic Journal, 109(455):266-291.



                                            40
Marinescu, Ioana, 2017. "The General Equilibrium Impacts of Unemployment Insurance:
     Evidence from a Large Online Job Board," Journal of Public Economics, 150: 14-29.

Meyer Bruce D., 1990. "Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment Spells," Econometrica,
    58(4): 757-782.

Moffitt Robert, 1985. "Unemployment Insurance and the Distribution of Unemployment Spells,"
     Journal of Econometrics, 28(1): 85-101.

Moreira, Sara. 2017. "Firm Dynamics, Persistent Effects of Entry Conditions, and Business
    Cycles," Working Papers 17-29, Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Census Bureau.

Mueller, Andreas I. 2017. "Separations, Sorting, and Cyclical Unemployment," American
     Economic Review, 107(7): 2081-2107.

Mulligan, Casey, 2012. The Redistribution Recession: How Labor Market Distortions
     Contracted the Economy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Nekoei Arash, and Andrea Weber. 2017. "Does Extending Unemployment Benefits Improve Job
    Quality?," American Economic Review, 104(2): 527-561.

Rothstein, Jesse. 2011. "Unemployment Insurance and Job Search in the Great Recession,"
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 42(2): 143-213.

Schmieder Johannes F., Till von Wachter, and Stefan Bender. 2016. "The Effect of
    Unemployment Benefits and Nonemployment Durations on Wages," American Economic
    Review, 106(3): 739-77.

Shimer, Robert. 2012. "Reassessing the ins and outs of unemployment," Review of Economic
    Dynamics, 15(2): 127-148.

Sedlácek Petr, and Vincent Sterk. 2017. "The Growth Potential of Startups over the Business
     Cycle," American Economic Review, 107(10): 3182-3210.

Van Ours Jan C., and Milan Vodopivec.2008. "Does Reducing Unemployment Insurance
    Generosity Reduce Job Match Quality?," Journal of Public Economics, 92(3-4): 684-695.

Vilhuber, Lars. 2018. "LEHD Infrastructure S2014 files in the FSRDC," Working Papers 18-27,
     Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Census Bureau.




                                            41
         Table 1: Descriptive Statistics of Workers' Characteristics, LEHD 2000-2013

                                                     2000-2013                             2008-2013

                                                       States       States                   States       States
                                            All        Above        Below         All        Above        Below
                                           States       UI           UI          States       UI           UI
                                                      Average      Average                  Average      Average
Share of Men                               0.5175       0.5192      0.5142       0.5139      0.5146       0.5125

Share of Whites                            0.7964       0.7935      0.8024       0.7911      0.7879       0.7973

Share with Some College or More            0.5677       0.5788      0.5453       0.5619      0.5743       0.5377

Age (years)                                 39.08       39.20        38.84       39.62        39.75       39.37


Quarterly earnings                          4,614       4,628        4,584       4,693        4,688        4,704
                                           (211.4)     (203.3)      (233.6)     (211.7)      (209.4)      (218.5)

Notes: The average number of weeks of UI is computed over the period 2000-2013, and it is equal to 46 weeks. The
states with UI benefits above the average are Arizona, California, Colorado, Delaware, District of Columbia, Idaho,
Illinois, Indiana, Nevada, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, and Washington. The states with UI benefits below the average
are Arkansas, Iowa, Kansas, Maine, Maryland, Oklahoma, Texas, and Wisconsin.




                                                        42
   Table 2: Descriptive Statistics of Workers' Characteristics, CPS

                                                           2008-2013

                                                          States            States
                                             All         Above UI          Below UI
                                            States       Average           Average
Share of Workers that Move to a
Job with Higher Education                    0.815          0.815            0.815
Requirement

Difference in Education                    -0.0405        -0.0183           -0.0510
Requirement between New and                (1.353)        (1.334)           (1.362)
Old Job

Education Mismatch (Years)                   0.131          0.185            0.105
                                            (1.895)        (1.846)          (1.918)

Years of Education                           12.99          12.97            13.01
                                            (2.126)        (2.175)          (2.080)

Share of Men                                 0.583          0.573            0.587

Share of White                               0.809          0.789            0.818

Share with Some College or More              0.471          0.476            0.469

Age (years)                                  36.83          36.61            36.93


Hourly Wage upon Exit from                   12.49          12.17            12.74
Unemployment (USD)                          (1.782)        (1.795)          (1.770)

Notes: The statistics in all rows but the last are computed using the Monthly Data files
from the Current Population Survey for the period 2008-2013. The last row uses the
CPS monthly data files from IPUMS to construct longitudinal histories of workers. The
states are classified as above or below the mean based on the "short sample" averages.
The states above the average UI are Alabama, Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado,
Connecticut, Delaware, District of Columbia, Georgia, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana,
Kentucky, Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan, Nevada, New Jersey, New York, North
Carolina, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Tennessee, Texas, Washington,
West Virginia, and Wisconsin. The states below the average UI are Arkansas, Florida,
Hawaii, Iowa, Kansas, Louisiana, Maryland, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri,
Montana, Nebraska, New Hampshire, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South
Carolina, South Dakota, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, and Wyoming.




                                          43
                            Table 3: Effects on UI Duration on log wages

                                                                   LEHD                              CPS

                                                          (1)                   (2)                   (3)
                                                     2000-2013              2008-2013             2008-2013

Unemployment Insurance Duration                      0.0001397            0.0004995***           0.000831***
                                                     (0.0002679)           (0.0001752)            (0.000280)

Unemployment Rate                                    -0.007230               -0.002270              -0.0116
                                                     (0.005166)             (0.002706)             (0.00808)

Gross State Product                                   0.1903**              0.2574***              -2.05e-09
                                                      (0.06964)             (0.04148)           (0.000000330)

No. Observations                                   3,419,000,000          1,485,000,000              9824

R2                                                    0.002661              0.002773                 0.023

State FE                                                 Yes                    Yes                   Yes

Year FE                                                  Yes                    Yes                   Yes

Seasonal FE                                              Yes                    Yes                   Yes

Notes: Results in columns 1 and 2 are based on the LEHD data and include the following states: Arizona,
Arkansas, California, Colorado, Delaware, District of Columbia, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Maine,
Maryland, Nevada, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Texas, Washington, and Wisconsin. Earnings in
Columns 1 and 2 are deflated by using the CPI Index adjusted for the Regional Price Parities Index to account for
differences in purchasing power between states. Results in column 3 use the "longitudinal" sample from the
monthly CPS data. The CPS sample includes all 50+1 states. While in columns 1 and 2, the frequency of the
seasonal FE is quarterly; in column 3, the seasonal frequency is monthly. Column 3 includes as controls a set of
individual demographic characteristics such as age, squared age, number of years of education, and dummies for
the race, gender, and marital status. The wages in Column 3 are deflated by the 2010 national CPI. Standard errors
are included in parenthesis and are clustered at the state level. The asterisks *, **, and *** reflect the 10%, 5%,
and 1% significance levels, respectively.




                                                        44
    Table 4: Effects of UI Duration on Ranking Difference between Workers and Firms, LEHD 2000-2013
                                             (1)                 (2)                   (3)                  (4)                    (5)
                                                                 Men                 Whites            More-educated              Young
                                        All Workers              vs.                   vs.                  vs.                    vs.
                                                                Women               Non-whites         Less-educated               Old
                                                                           Panel A: Period 2000-2013
UI Duration                               0.0001**              0.0002**             0.0002**              0.0002**             0.0002***
                                          (0.0001)              (0.0001)             (0.0001)              (0.0001)              (0.0001)
Group Dummy                                                    0.0339***            0.0187***             0.0146***             0.0307***
                                                                (0.0009)             (0.0034)              (0.0009)              (0.0017)
UI Duration × Group Dummy                                     -0.0001***            -0.00004**           -0.00004***           -0.0002***
                                                                (0.0000)             (0.0000)              (0.0000)              (0.0000)
Unemployment Rate                          -0.0008               -0.0008              -0.0006               -0.0009               -0.0007
                                          (0.0011)              (0.0011)             (0.0011)              (0.0011)              (0.0011)
Gross State Product                       0.0040**              0.0039*              0.0045**              0.0040*               0.0039*
                                          (0.0019)              (0.0019)             (0.0019)              (0.0020)              (0.0019)

No. Observations                       3,419,000,000         3,419,000,000        3,419,000,000         3,419,000,000        3,419,000,000
  2
R                                          0.0005                0.0062               0.0015                0.0014                0.0037

                                                                           Panel B: Period 2008-2013
UI Duration                              0.0002***             0.0002***            0.0002***             0.0002***             0.0002***
                                          (0.0001)              (0.0001)             (0.0001)              (0.0001)              (0.0001)
Group Dummy                                                    0.0305***            0.0194***             0.0120***             0.0260***
                                                                (0.0008)             (0.0033)              (0.0009)              (0.0019)
UI Duration × Group Dummy                                     -0.00002**            -0.00005**            -0.00001*            -0.0001***
                                                                (0.0000)             (0.0000)              (0.0000)              (0.0000)
Unemployment Rate                         -0.0018*              -0.0018*             -0.0017*              -0.0020*             -0.0018**
                                          (0.0010)              (0.0009)             (0.0010)              (0.0010)              (0.0009)
Gross State Product                       0.0036*               0.0035*              0.0041**              0.0037*               0.0036*
                                          (0.0018)              (0.0018)             (0.0018)              (0.0018)              (0.0018)

No. Observations                       1,485,000,000         1,485,000,000        1,485,000,000         1,485,000,000        1,485,000,000
R2                                         0.0003                0.0054               0.0012                0.0010                0.0024
Notes: The states included in the analysis are Arizona, Arkansas, California, Colorado, Delaware, District of Columbia, Idaho, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Maine, Maryland, Nevada, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Texas, Washington, and Wisconsin. The variable
"Group Dummy" changes from columns 2 to 5. In Column (2), it takes the value of 1 if an employee is male and 0 otherwise. In Column (3), it
takes the value of 1 if an employee is white and 0 otherwise. In Column (4), it takes the value of 1 if an employee's highest education is some
college or more and 0 otherwise. In Column (5), it takes the value of 1 if an employee is younger than or equal to 40 years old and 0 otherwise.
Standard errors are included in parenthesis and are clustered at the state level. The asterisks *, **, and *** reflect the 10%, 5%, and 1%
significance levels, respectively.




                                                                      45
                      Table 5: Effects of UI Duration on Wage Residuals, LEHD 2000-2013
                                              (1)                 (2)                   (3)                  (4)                    (5)
                                                                  Men                 Whites            More-educated              Young
                                        All Workers               vs.                   vs.                  vs.                    vs.
                                                                 Women               Non-whites         Less-educated               Old
                                                                            Panel A: Period 2000-2013
UI Duration                                 0.0002              0.0004***             0.0004***               0.0002                0.0002
                                           (0.0001)              (0.0001)              (0.0001)              (0.0002)              (0.0001)
Group Dummy                                                    0. 0098***             0.0068**             0.0061***                0.0008
                                                                (0.0013)              (0.0032)              (0.0012)               (0.0016)
UI Duration × Group Dummy                                      -0.0003***            -0.0002***            0.0001***               0.0000
                                                                (0.00003)             (0.00005)            (0.00003)              (0.00004)
Unemployment Rate                         -0.0031**             -0.0031**            -0.0032***             -0.0031**             -0.0031**
                                           (0.0012)              (0.0012)             (0.0011)               (0.0012)              (0.0012)
Gross State Product                       0.0026**              0.0026**              0.0025**              0.0026**              0.0026**
                                          (0.0009)              (0.0009)              (0.0010)              (0.0009)              (0.0009)
Union Representation                        0.0003                0.0003                0.0003                0.0003                0.0003
                                           (0.0003)              (0.0003)              (0.0003)              (0.0003)              (0.0002)

No. Observations                        3,419,000,000         3,419,000,000        3,419,000,000         3,419,000,000         3,419,000,000
  2
R                                          0.00001               0.00005               0.00003               0.00005               0.00001

                                                                            Panel B: Period 2008-2013
UI Duration                               0.0002**              0.0003**              0.0004***             0.0003**              0.0002**
                                          (0.0001)              (0.0001)               (0.0001)             (0.0001)              (0.0001)
Group Dummy                                                       -0.0025               0.0025             0.0224***                0.0009
                                                                 (0.0043)              (0.0026)             (0.0019)               (0.0039)
UI Duration × Group Dummy                                      -0.0002***            -0.0002***            -0.0001***               0.0000
                                                                 (0.0000)             (0.0000)               (0.0000)              (0.0000)
Unemployment Rate                        -0.0030***            -0.0030***            -0.0032***            -0.0030***            -0.0030***
                                          (0.0009)               (0.0009)             (0.0009)               (0.0009)              (0.0009)
Gross State Product                       0.0054***             0.0054***             0.0051***            0.0054***             0.0054***
                                           (0.0013)              (0.0013)              (0.0012)             (0.0013)              (0.0013)
Union Representation                        -0.0001               -0.0001               -0.0010               -0.0002               -0.0001
                                           (0.0001)              (0.0001)              (0.0001)              (0.0001)              (0.0001)

No. Observations                        1,485,000,000         1,485,000,000        1,485,000,000         1,485,000,000         1,485,000,000
R2                                         0.00004                0.0001                0.0001                0.0001               0.00004
Notes: The states included in the analysis are Arizona, Arkansas, California, Colorado, Delaware, District of Columbia, Idaho, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Maine, Maryland, Nevada, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Texas, Washington, and Wisconsin. The variable
"Group Dummy" changes from Columns (2) to (5). In Column (2), it takes the value of 1 if an employee is male and 0 otherwise. In Column
(3), it takes the value of 1 if an employee is white and 0 otherwise. In Column (4), it takes the value of 1 if an employee's highest education is
some college or more and 0 otherwise. In Column (5), it takes the value of 1 if an employee is younger than or equal to 40 years old and 0
otherwise. Standard errors are in parenthesis and are clustered at the state level. The asterisks *, **, and *** reflect the 10%, 5%, and 1%
significance levels, respectively.




                                                                       46
            Table 6: Effects of UI Duration on Educational Requirement Matches, CPR 2008-2013
                                              (1)                 (2)                  (3)                   (4)                   (5)
                                                                  Men                Whites             More-educated             Young
                                        All Workers               vs.                  vs.                   vs.                   vs.
                                                                 Women              Non-whites          Less-educated              Old
                                                                   Panel A: Mismatch in Years of Education
Available UI Duration                     -0.000665            -0.00142**           -0.00140**            -0.00270***            -0.000438
                                         (0.000494)            (0.000651)           (0.000594)             (0.000509)           (0.000638)
Group Dummy                                                    -0.176***             -0.229***
                                                                (0.0508)              (0.0613)
Available UI Duration ×                                         0.00125               0.000970            0.00434***             -0.000396
Group Dummy                                                    (0.000794)            (0.000850)           (0.000551)            (0.000678)
Unemployment Rate                         0.0444**              0.0444**              0.0441**             0.0447**              0.0445**
                                          (0.0206)              (0.0206)              (0.0206)             (0.0205)              (0.0206)
Gross State Product                    0.00000158***        0.00000159***         0.00000158***         0.00000151***         0.00000158***
                                       (0.000000302)        (0.000000303)         (0.000000302)         (0.000000302)         (0.000000303)

No. Observations                            14994                 14994                14994                 14994                 14994
  2
R                                           0.518                 0.518                 0.518                 0.519                0.518
                                                          Panel B: Probability of Higher Educational Requirements

Available UI Duration                    0.00221***            0.00239***            0.00214**            0.00234***            0.00223***
                                         (0.000520)            (0.000615)            (0.000864)           (0.000541)            (0.000511)
Group Dummy                                                      0.0387                0.0208
                                                                (0.0579)              (0.0637)
Available UI Duration ×                                         -0.000291            0.0000918             -0.000280             -0.000318
Group Dummy                                                    (0.000865)            (0.00110)            (0.000508)            (0.000520)
Unemployment Rate                         -0.0543**            -0.0543**             -0.0543**             -0.0543**             -0.0543**
                                           (0.0206)             (0.0206)              (0.0206)              (0.0206)              (0.0206)
Gross State Product                     -0.000000413         -0.000000416           -0.000000413        -0.000000409          -0.000000413
                                       (0.000000537)         (0.000000537)         (0.000000537)        (0.000000533)         (0.000000537)

No. Observations                            13759                 13759                13759                 13759                 13759
R2                                          0.007                 0.007                 0.007                 0.007                0.007

Notes: All specifications include state, year, and month fixed effects, and a set of individual demographic characteristics such as age,
squared age, the number of years of education, and dummies for the race, gender, and marital status. The variable "Group Dummy"
changes from columns 2 to 5. In Column (2), it takes the value of 1 if an employee is male and 0 otherwise. In Column (3), it takes the value of
1 if an employee is white and 0 otherwise. In Column (4) and Column (5), we do not include any dummy variable because we include
continuous variables for the age and the number of years of education. Standard errors are included in parenthesis and are clustered at the state
level. The asterisks *, **, and *** reflect the 10%, 5%, and 1% significance levels, respectively.




                                                                      47
      Figure 1: UI Duration during and in the aftermath of the Great Recession


                 Panel A: One-Tiered EUC Program, July 2008 - March 2009
                              Regular UI                        EUC Tier 1
                            Up to 26 weeks                    Up to 13 weeks
                                                    Up to 20 weeks from November 2008




               Panel B: Two-Tiered EUC Program, March 2009 - December 2009
                       Regular UI              EUC Tier 1              EUC Tier 2
                     Up to 26 weeks          Up to 20 weeks         Up to 13 weeks



               Panel C: Four-Tiered EUC Program, December 2009 ­ May 2012
  Regular UI            EUC Tier 1             EUC Tier 2             EUC Tier 3          EUC Tier 4
Up to 26 weeks        Up to 20 weeks         Up to 14 weeks        Up to 13 weeks       Up to 6 weeks



               Panel D: Four-Tiered EUC Program, May 2012 ­ September 2012
  Regular UI            EUC Tier 1             EUC Tier 2             EUC Tier 3          EUC Tier 4
Up to 26 weeks        Up to 14 weeks         Up to 14 weeks         Up to 9 weeks       Up to 10 weeks




                                                  48
            Figure 2: Maximum Weeks of UI Benefits across States and over Time
               Panel A: All States                                 Panel B: 20 LEHD States




Notes: The states included in Panel B are: Arizona, Arkansas, California, Colorado, Delaware, District of
Columbia, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Maine, Maryland, Nevada, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Tennessee,
Texas, Washington, and Wisconsin.




                                                     49
                          Figure 3: UI Benefits Variations within Quarters




Note: The states included in Panel B are: Arizona, Arkansas, California, Colorado, Delaware, District of Columbia,
Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Maine, Maryland, Nevada, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Texas,
Washington, and Wisconsin.




                                                       50
Figure 4: UI Benefits Variations within States




                     51
Appendix A


    Figure A1: UI Benefits Duration and Unemployment Rate by States




                                  52
53
Appendix B


       We estimate worker and firm fixed effects via an iterative algorithm that is a modified
version of the algorithm used by Crane et al. (2018). Our goal is to obtain the employee and
employer fixed effects that determine earnings ln  for worker  employed at firm  in state
 from year  and quarter  which are defined via the following formula:
                            ln  =   +   +   +  +  
where  is the worker effect,  is the firm effect,  is the state effect,  is the year effect, and
 is the quarter effect. We solve for  ,  ,  ,  , and  for the universe of our 20 states of
matched employer-employee data. We solve using the following iterative algorithm:
   1) Compute initial guess for the worker effects  as the average log earnings of each
       worker
   2) Estimate the firm effects  as the average by firms of the difference ln  -  
   3) Calculate the goodness of fit (2
                                       )
   4) Estimate the state effects  as the average by states of the difference ln  -   -
        
       
   5) Estimate the year effects  as the average by year of the difference ln  -   -
        -   
       
   6) Estimate the quarter effects  as the average by quarters of the difference ln  -
        -  -    -   

   7) Update the worker effects  as the average by individuals of the difference as
       ln  -  -    -    - 
   8) Update the firm effects  as the average by firms of the differenceln  -  -    -
         -  
   9) Recalculate the goodness of ( 2
                                      )
   10) Check for convergence as the difference between ( 2
                                                           - 2
                                                               ). If convergence is achieved,
       terminate the algorithm. If convergence is not achieved, define 2
                                                                         = 2
                                                                             and proceed back
       to step 4




                                              54
