Conflicting Interests and the Effect of Fiduciary Duty -- Evidence from Variable Annuities
Mark L. Egan, Shan Ge, and Johnny Tang
NBER Working Paper No. 27577
July 2020, Revised in August 2020
JEL No. D18,D22,G22,G24,G28

                                          ABSTRACT

We examine the drivers of variable annuity sales and the impact of a proposed regulatory change.
Variable annuities are popular retirement products with over $2 trillion in assets in the United
States. Insurers typically pay brokers a commission for selling variable annuities that ranges from
0% to over 10% of investors' premium payments. Brokers earn higher commissions for selling
inferior annuities, in terms of higher expenses and more ex-post complaints. Our results indicate
that variable annuity sales are roughly five times more sensitive to brokers' financial interests
than investors'. To help limit conflicts of interest, the Department of Labor proposed a rule in
2016 that would hold brokers to a fiduciary standard when dealing with retirement accounts. We
find that after the proposed fiduciary rule, the sales of high-expense variable annuities fell by
52% as sales became more sensitive to expenses and insurers increased the relative availability of
low-expense products. Based on our structural model estimates, investor welfare improved as a
result of the fiduciary rule under conservative assumptions.

Mark L. Egan                                     Johnny Tang
Harvard Business School                          Littauer Center
Baker Library 365                                Harvard University
Soldiers Field                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
Boston, MA 02163                                 jtang01@g.harvard.edu
and NBER
megan@hbs.edu

Shan Ge
New York University
Kaufman Management Center 9-81
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
sge@stern.nyu.edu
      Conflicting Interests and the Effect of Fiduciary Duty --
                           Evidence from Variable Annuities
                                Mark Egan, Shan Ge, and Johnny Tang



                                                     Abstract

          We examine the drivers of variable annuity sales and the impact of a proposed regulatory
      change. Variable annuities are popular retirement products with over $2 trillion in assets in the
      United States. Insurers typically pay brokers a commission for selling variable annuities that
      ranges from 0% to over 10% of investors' premium payments. Brokers earn higher commissions
      for selling inferior annuities, in terms of higher expenses and more ex-post complaints. Our
      results indicate that variable annuity sales are roughly five times more sensitive to brokers'
      financial interests than investors'. To help limit conflicts of interest, the Department of Labor
      proposed a rule in 2016 that would hold brokers to a fiduciary standard when dealing with
      retirement accounts. We find that after the proposed fiduciary rule, the sales of high-expense
      variable annuities fell by 52% as sales became more sensitive to expenses and insurers increased
      the relative availability of low-expense products. Based on our structural model estimates,
      investor welfare improved as a result of the fiduciary rule under conservative assumptions.

      JEL Codes: G24, G28, D14, D18, G22

      Keywords: Variable Annuity, Brokers, Conflicts of Interest, Fiduciary Duty




  
    Mark Egan: Harvard Business School and NBER, megan@hbs.edu. Shan Ge: Stern School of Business, New York
University, sge@stern.nyu.edu. Johnny Tang: Harvard University, jtang01@g.harvard.edu. We are grateful for com-
ments and suggestions by Ralph Koijen, Andrei Shleifer, Richard Rosen, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, Motohiro Yogo, and
the seminar participants at Ohio State University, New York University, and the WFA Early Career Women in Finance
Conference. Shan Ge acknowledges financial support of the Center for Global Economy and Business at NYU.
1        Introduction
Variable annuities are one of the most popular retirement products in the United States. As of 2018,
American households held over $2.2 trillion of assets in variable annuity accounts. Despite their
prevalence, variable annuities have been criticized for having high expenses and are the most com-
monly cited financial product in brokerage customer complaints (Egan et al. (2019)).1 Part of the
criticism pertains to the distribution of variable annuities.2 Variable annuities are sold through bro-
kers who are typically paid a commission by the insurance company for selling its products. There
is substantial heterogeneity in commissions, ranging from 0 to over 10% of the investment, which
provides strong incentives for brokers to sell certain variable annuities over others and potentially
creates conflicts of interest between brokers and their clients. Concerns over conflicts of interest
in these types of retirement products prompted the United States Department of Labor (DOL) to
propose a rule imposing fiduciary duty on brokers, which was announced in 2015 and issued in
2016. The rule would obligate brokers to act in their clients' best interests when selling retirement
products such as variable annuities. Although the rule was ultimately vacated in 2018, the annuity
industry underwent many changes to comply with the rule starting in around 2016.
        This paper has two goals. First, we study the drivers of variable annuity sales and examine
how sales respond to broker and investor incentives. We find that while investor incentives matter,
broker incentives play a more important role in determining sales. Moreover, brokers' incentives
conflict with their clients': brokers earn higher commissions for selling inferior annuities that have
higher expenses, as well as fewer and worse-performing investment options. Second, we examine
how the proposed fiduciary rule, which was intended to limit conflicts of interest, impacted the
variable annuity market in the United States. We examine how the composition of variable annu-
ities both offered by insurers and sold by brokers changed in response to the DOL rule. We find
that the rule helped reduce conflicts of interest. In response to the rule, annuity sales flows became
twice as sensitive to expenses as before the rule and the sales of annuities with expenses in the top
quartile fell by 52%. Moreover, the relative availability of high-expense products declined follow-
ing the rule. To assess the overall implications of the proposed rule change, we build and estimate
a structural model of variable annuity demand that allows us to quantify how the DOL fiduciary
rule impacted investor surplus. On one hand, investors should benefit from the rule change, as it
reduces conflicts of interest. However, on the other hand, investors may be hurt by the rule change
if it reduces the supply of financial advice.
        We construct a panel dataset on variable annuity distribution using data on sales and product
characteristics from Morningstar and regulatory filings. A key novel feature of our dataset is that
we observe the commission rate that insurers pay to brokers for selling variable annuities. This vari-
able allows us to separate the effect of brokers' preferences from those of investors. Conditional
    1
     Examples: https://www.wsj.com/articles/how-to-avoid-paying-high-fees-for-variable-annuities-14
57001002[accessed 7/30/2020]
   2
     See e.g. FINRA (https://www.finra.org/sites/default/files/InvestorDocument/p125846.pdf [accessed
7/30/2020])



                                                    1
on the risks and return characteristics of a variable annuity, investors should be indifferent towards
the associated brokerage commissions. In addition to commissions, we also observe detailed char-
acteristics of the variable annuity products (i.e. expense ratios, investment options, benefits/riders,
etc.). We match commission rates and product characteristics with quarterly product sales data.
       Our analysis consists of four parts. First, we study what factors drive the sales of variable
annuities by analyzing how sales are related to product expense ratios, brokerage commissions,
and other characteristics of the products. We find a strong negative relationship between expense
ratios and sales, consistent with the notion that investors dislike high-expense products. We also
find that brokerage commissions play a critical role in driving investment flows. Our estimates
suggest that a one standard deviation increase in brokerage commissions is associated with a 17%
increase in variable annuity sales. Our baseline estimates suggest that variable annuity sales are
five times more sensitive to broker incentives than to investor incentives. These results are robust
to accounting for a wide range of product characteristics including investment options and returns,
availability of benefits and riders, and the insurance companies underwriting the products. We also
exploit variation within the same product across share classes, where an insurer offers the same
variable annuity with different expense ratios and commission rates, which helps mitigate concerns
about omitted variables. We find similar patterns across share classes of the same variable annuity.
       Second, we present evidence of conflicts of interest in the variable annuity market. We start by
examining the types of variable annuities that brokers are incentivized to sell. We document that
there is substantial heterogeneity in brokerage commissions. Commissions range from 0% to over
10% of the principal invested and the standard deviation is 2.3%. The level and heterogeneity in
commissions could create conflicts of interest if they incentivize brokers to sell products that are not
desirable for investors. Indeed, consistent with commissions creating conflicts of interest, we find
that, on average, brokers are incentivized to sell higher-expense products and products with worse
investment options, as measured by the variety and performance of the investment options. A one
percentage point increase in expense ratios is associated with a 1.8 percentage point increase in
brokerage commissions. Collectively, our results suggest that these high-powered broker incentives
distort investment decisions for investors.
       Furthermore, consistent with the idea that brokers are incentivized to sell inferior products,
we find that products with high expenses--which tend to have high commissions--are associated
with a greater number of investor complaints and higher rates of broker misconduct. To measure
investor complaints, we utilize data from the Financial Industry Authority's (FINRA) BrokerCheck
website (see Egan et al. (2019) for a further description of the data). We observe the universe of
investor complaints, including those pertaining to variable annuities.3 Our findings suggest that
ex-post, higher-expense variable annuities are worse for investors as indicated by more frequent in-
vestor complaints against brokerage firms that sell these products. This finding also helps rule out
alternative explanations that higher-expense variable annuities have unobservable (to the econo-
   3
   By rule (FINRA 4530) brokerage firms are required to report all written investor complaints which includes letters,
email, text messages, tweets, etc. within 30 days.



                                                          2
metrician) characteristics that make them more desirable for investors, which would potentially
explain why insurers pay higher commission rates on these products. We also find that brokerage
firms that sell higher-expense products have higher rates of customer complaints and regulatory
offenses as measured as per Egan et al. (2019). These results on complaints and misconduct,
together with the positive relationship between broker commissions and expense ratios, suggest
that brokers are incentivized to sell products that are less desirable for investors, consistent with
conflicts of interest in the market.
      In the third part of our analysis, we study the effect of the proposed DOL fiduciary rule. The
proposed fiduciary rule was intended to reduce conflicts of interest in retirement-related invest-
ment products such as variable annuities. In 2015, then-President Obama announced the fiduciary
rule, which was issued by the DOL in 2016 and set to be enforced starting in early 2017. While
enforcement of the rule was delayed in 2017 and the rule was ultimately vacated in 2018, survey
evidence indicates that brokers and insurers started complying with the fiduciary rule during this
proposal and implementation period. Our results suggest that the total variable annuity sales fell
by roughly 19% year-over-year after the regulation was issued by the DOL in 2016. The drop in
variable annuity sales was primarily driven by a decline in high-expense variable annuity sales;
sales of low-expense variable annuities remained constant over this period. The results suggest
that, in response to the proposal of the rule, brokers began complying with the rule by placing
greater weight on investor interests. We also find that insurers responded to the rule by increas-
ing the relative availability of low-expense products available for sale. Our findings are consistent
with anecdotal evidence from annual reports of brokerage firms and insurers, where they reported
changing their business practices in anticipation of the rule. These results imply that the regulatory
change improved the distribution of products available to investors along the extensive margin, in
terms of the annuities available for sale, as well as the intensive margin, in terms of the actual
annuities sold by brokers. While the sales of variable annuities fell following the proposed rule
change, we do not find any evidence that investors with less wealth were disproportionately served
less by brokers following the DOL rule, as argued by the brokerage industry against the fiduciary
rule.4
      Lastly, we develop and estimate a structural model of variable annuity distribution to evaluate
the normative implications of the proposed DOL fiduciary rule. An advantage in our setting is
that we directly observe the alternative equilibrium we are interested in from the data. Thus, the
objective of the model is to help quantify the observed effects of the rule change rather than to solve
for a new equilibrium. In the model, investors access the annuity market through brokers such that
demand for variable annuities is jointly determined by the preferences of investors and brokers
similar to the framework in Robles-Garcia (2019). We use the model to recover the preferences of
investors and evaluate how the proposed rule impacted investor returns. On one hand, investors
should benefit from the fiduciary rule because it reduces conflicts of interest. On the other hand,
  4
   https://www.sifma.org/resources/news/state-fiduciary-rules-will-raise-costs-limit-access/;
https://www.sifma.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/Deloitte-White-Paper-on-the-DOL-Fiduciary-Rule-Au
gust-2017.pdf[accessed 7/30/2020]


                                                   3
some investors may be hurt by the rule if it raises the cost of providing financial advice, such
that some investors are no longer serviced by brokers. We find that the proposed rule change
increased the risk-adjusted returns of investors by up to 92 basis points (bps) per annum. Even
after accounting for the fact that some investors may have been forced to leave the annuity market
as a result of the rule, under conservative assumptions investor welfare still improved on net. While
some investors were forced out of the market as a result of the proposed rule, our estimates suggest
that the DOL rule increased investor surplus, on average, as long as the risk-adjusted returns of
those investors who were forced out of the market did not fall by more than 17 percentage points
per annum.
       Our paper contributes to the literature on the role of brokers and intermediaries in household
investment decisions. Consistent with this prior literature (e.g. Bergstresser et al. (2008); Chalmers
and Reuter (2012); Christoffersen et al. (2013); Anagol et al. (2017); Guiso et al. (2018); Egan
(2019); Robles-Garcia (2019)), we find evidence suggesting that brokers are incentivized to sell
high-expense products as high-expense products carry higher commissions on average. We con-
tribute to this literature by providing new evidence of similar conflicts of interest in a large ($2.2
trillion) and important market, where information asymmetries between market participants, bro-
kers and investors, loom large. The conflicts of interest in terms of the mean and standard deviation
of brokerage commissions in the variable annuity market are substantially larger than those that
have been studied in other settings. For example, whereas the median brokerage commission as-
sociated with mutual funds and retail bonds is roughly 2% (Christoffersen et al. (2013); Egan
(2019)), the median commission in the variable annuities market is almost 7%.5 One concern
is that these conflicts of interest not only decrease investor returns, but that, perhaps more im-
portantly, they also undermine trust in financial markets, which is critical to a well-functioning
financial system (Guiso et al. (2008); Gennaioli et al. (2015); Gurun et al. (2018)).
       Our paper also contributes more generally to the literature on household investments. We find
that there is substantial heterogeneity in annuity expenses, ranging from 0.25% to 4.20% per an-
num. Such price dispersion has been documented in other financial products, such as mutual funds
(Christoffersen and Musto (2002); Hortaçsu and Syverson (2004); Choi et al. (2010)), mortgages
(Woodward and Hall (2012); Agarwal et al. (2017); Bhutta et al. (2020)), life insurance (Brown
and Goolsbee (2002); Ge (2020)), and other retirement savings products (Duarte and Hastings
(2012)). Price dispersion highlights the role of household sophistication in financial markets which
provides insight into why brokers play a critical role in household investment decisions (Gennaioli
et al. (2015); Foerster et al. (2017)) and why financial service providers often compete on di-
mensions other than price such as advertising and brokerage commissions (Gurun et al. (2016);
Hastings et al. (2017); Roussanov et al. (2018)).6
   5
    Our work also relates to the growing literature on financial misconduct in the financial advice industry including:
Qureshi and Sokobin (2015); Egan et al. (2017); Dimmock et al. (2018); Charoenwong et al. (2019); Egan et al. (2019);
Gurun et al. (2019)
  6
    A growing literature documents that financial services providers use strategic obfuscation, which may contribute to
household's lack of financial sophistication (Carlin (2009); Carlin and Manso (2011); Célérier and Vallée (2017))



                                                          4
   Our paper also contributes to the ongoing policy debate and the literature on regulating con-
sumer financial products (Campbell (2006); Agarwal et al. (2009); Campbell et al. (2010, 2011);
Inderst and Ottaviani (2012a,b)). Specifically, we contribute new insight to this literature by eval-
uating the effects of an important regulatory tool, i.e. imposing a fiduciary duty on brokers. The
DOL proposal provides a unique opportunity to study the effect of such a policy attempt, which can
shed light on the effectiveness of subsequent and future policy efforts such as fiduciary standards
that have been proposed since 2018 by various states including New Jersey, Nevada, and Maryland,
and on Regulation Best Interest, which was adopted by the Securities and Exchange Commission in
September of 2019. Our empirical analyses document that the fiduciary rule was effective in steer-
ing investment into lower-expense products, and the results from our structural model indicate
that investors benefited on average from the proposed rule. These findings relate to other work
on fiduciary duty. Egan (2019) develops a broker-intermediated search model and finds that hold-
ing brokers to a fiduciary standard could increase investor risk-adjusted returns by up to 95-120
basis points (bps). Our paper also builds on the work by Bhattacharya et al. (2020) which stud-
ies how cross-state variation in common law fiduciary duty impacts sales of variable and indexed
annuities. The authors find that fiduciary duty increases risk-adjusted returns of annuity investors
without decreasing sales. In contrast to Bhattacharya et al. (2020), we find that following the
DOL's highly publicized fiduciary rule that applied to all states, sales of variable annuity products
declined sharply, with the decline concentrated in products with high expense ratios. Bhattacharya
et al. (2020) highlight how holding a broker to a fiduciary standard could increase the fixed costs
of providing advice, which will reduce the supply of financial advice; however, they do not find
strong evidence of the fixed cost channel in their state difference-in-differences setting. Also dis-
tinct from Bhattacharya et al. (2020), we document how brokerage commissions drive annuity
sales and distort the investment decisions of households due to conflicts of interest.
   Our paper also contributes to the literature on annuities. One strand of the literature tries to
understand forces that affect annuity demand. For example, Finkelstein and Poterba (2004) find
evidence of adverse selection in the UK market. Brown and Poterba (2006) find that high-income
and high-net-worth households are more likely to own variable annuities using survey data. Koijen
and Yogo (2018) develop and estimate an equilibrium model of the variable annuity market to
quantify the underlying frictions in the market. The authors estimate a Berry et al. (1995)-type
model to estimate investor demand for variable annuities and find that sales are sensitive to prod-
ucts' minimum return guarantee options and associated fees. Building on their framework, we
provide new insights by highlighting that broker commission rates are a first-order factor in deter-
mining variable annuity sales. Our paper also relates to the growing literature on the regulatory
implications surrounding insurers and their liabilities in the US (Koijen and Yogo (2016); Drexler
et al. (2017); Foley-Fisher et al. (2018); Sen (2019)).
   The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 offers the institutional background of variable annuity
products and the marketplace, as well as the DOL fiduciary rule. Section 3 describes the data.
Section 4 analyzes what factors drive variable annuity sales, with our focus on product expense


                                                  5
ratios and commission rates. Section 5 documents evidence of conflicts of interest in the variable
annuity market. Section 6 studies the effects of the DOL fiduciary rule. Section 7 develops and
estimates a structural model of variable annuity distribution. Section 8 concludes.


2        Institutional Details: Variable Annuities
In this section, we describe the institutional setting of the variable annuity market in the US. Section
2.1 provides an overview of what a variable annuity is, as well as the marketplace and distribution
channels of variable annuity products in the US. Section 2.2 describes the context and details
surrounding the proposal of the DOL fiduciary rule.


2.1       What are Variable Annuities?

Variable annuities are a common type of retirement savings products offered by life insurance
companies and purchased by individual retail investors. Variable annuity products, like other types
of annuities, consist of two phases. First, in the accumulation phase, the investor makes premium
payments to the insurance company into her variable annuity account after expenses are deducted.
Later, in the distribution phase, the investor receives payments from the insurance company at fixed
intervals until her death or for a specified period or a lump-sum payout.7


Product Structure Variable annuities offer features similar to mutual funds and traditional fixed
annuities. In the accumulation phase, variable annuity investors allocate the assets in their accounts
among a set of investment options known as subaccounts. Each subaccount usually holds shares
in a mutual fund or a fund of funds. Variable annuity products often offer multiple subaccounts
for the investor to choose from, including a combination of government/corporate bond and equity
funds spanning different industries with different investment objectives. Income and capital gains
from investments within the annuity account are tax-deferred.
        In the distribution phase, variable annuities provide investors with menus of different payout
plans. These options include life annuities with or without a refund at the annuitant's death, and
with or without a guaranteed payout period. Instead of life annuities, the investor can also choose
payouts for a specified period or a lump-sum payout. The payout can be a fixed periodic amount
or a varying amount based on the performance of the subaccounts the investor selects.
        Variable annuities can also offer different benefit options or riders for additional fees. These
options include those that guarantee a minimum return on the assets (often referred to as a roll-up
or step-up rate), while preserving the upside of the returns generated by the subaccounts selected
    7
    There are primarily two other types of annuity products: fixed annuities and fixed indexed annuities. Fixed annuities
grow at a predetermined fixed rate in the accumulation period and pay a pre-determined fixed rate in the distribution
phase. Fixed index annuities grow based on the performance of one or more benchmark indices, such as the S&P 500
and some pre-determined minimum rate. The payout in the distribution phase is determined by a combination of the
performance of the index and the minimum rate.




                                                           6
by the investor.8 These options all offer minimum returns on the assets but differ in their structures
during the distribution period.


Expenses      Variable annuity investors pay certain product- and subaccount-level expenses, which
are assessed as percentages of the investors' account value. For brevity, we often refer to these
expense ratios as expenses. There are two main types of product-level expenses. First, there is
the mortality expense (M&E), associated with the death benefits in variable annuities, as well as
various administrative and distribution charges. Another type of product-level expense is a sur-
render charge, which is assessed in the event of an early withdrawal of account assets during a
pre-specified "lock-up" period. The surrender charge is usually a percentage of the amount with-
drawn and can be up to 12% in the first year of the contract and declines yearly for a period of
up to 10 years, after which there is no longer a surrender charge for withdrawals. For example,
the surrender charge could be 12% in the first year, 10% in the second year, 8% in the third year,
and so on until 0% in the seventh year and onwards. Investors also pay additional fees for the
additional riders/benefit options mentioned above (e.g., GLWB). Subaccount-level charges are ex-
penses assessed by mutual funds (i.e. subaccounts). In our analysis, the expense ratio we use is the
sum of the product-level expenses (M&E, administrative, and distribution charges) and the average
subaccount expenses for each variable annuity product as all investors incur these expenses (unlike
optional charges/fees, such as surrender charges and benefit/rider fees).


Variable Annuity Investors and Market Size Annuities are common retirement products held
by households in the US, accounting for roughly 10% ($3.1 trillion) of retirement assets and 18%
of mutual fund assets as of 2018.9 According to Brown and Poterba (2006), variable annuity
investors tend to be wealthy, older, and more educated. Variable annuities make up the bulk of
annuity assets, with roughly $2.2 trillion held in variable annuities as of 2018, and the market has
grown steadily over the past fifteen years. Figures 1b and 1c display the variable annuity market
growth in terms of both assets and sales over the period 2005-2019. Over the past fifteen years,
variable annuity sales have averaged over $138 billion per year. The sheer size of the variable
annuities market makes it of first-order importance for both household finances and the financial
health of large insurance companies and other financial institutions in the US.


Distribution      Variable annuities are SEC-registered securities that are sold to households through
registered brokers. The broker may be a direct employee of the insurer issuing the variable annuity
(or its affiliates), or work for an unaffiliated broker-dealer.
   8
      Such options include Guaranteed Lifetime Withdrawal Benefits (GLWB), Guaranteed Minimum Income Bene-
fits (GMIB), Guaranteed Minimum Accumulation Benefits (GMAB), and Guaranteed Minimum Withdrawal Benefits
(GMWB). Among these benefit options, GLWBs are the most commonly offered. According to computations by Sen
(2019), these guarantees have similar sensitivities to interest rate and equity risk exposure. For more detailed informa-
tion on these guarantees, see Koijen and Yogo (2018) and Sen (2019).
    9
      Investment Company Institute Factbook 2019: https://www.icifactbook.org/ [accessed 3/17/2020]




                                                           7
      Insurance companies typically compensate brokers for selling variable annuities with commis-
sions. These commissions are paid directly by the variable annuity issuer (insurance company) to
the broker, rather than being paid by the end investor to the brokerage company. This key feature
of the data aids in identifying the effect of brokers' incentives on sales because, conditional on the
characteristics of the variable annuities, investors are indifferent towards the commission the in-
surance company pays to the broker. The commission represents the profit split between the broker
and the insurer.
      The commissions insurers pay to brokers consist of two parts. The first part is a one-time
commission, often referred to as an "upfront", that is usually a percentage of the initial premium
payments paid in by the investor. The second part is a recurring commission paid quarterly or
annually, which is referred to as a "trail." The trail is usually paid either as a percentage of the
total asset values, beginning in the second year of the contract. The upfront commission paid on
any given product can range up to 10% or more of the premium payments. In many cases, selling
agents and selling firms may also have the option to receive lower upfront commissions in exchange
for higher trail commissions, usually up to 1.25% annually.


2.2     DOL Fiduciary Rule

Conflicts of interest may arise as brokers receive commissions from insurers for selling annuities.
Generally, brokers are not required to act as fiduciaries when selling variable annuities and can dis-
tort investors' decisions to increase their commission earnings.10 In an investor alert, the Financial
Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) states that "the marketing efforts used by some variable
annuity sellers deserve scrutiny--especially when seniors are the targeted investors. Sales pitches
for these products might attempt to scare or confuse investors".11 In February 2015, then-President
Obama announced a proposal to mitigate conflict of interests for brokers, insurance agents, and
other advisers of retirement investors (we refer to them all as brokers hereafter). In essence, all ad-
visers who deal with retirement investors should meet the fiduciary standard of putting the client's
financial interest before their own interest. The regulation was formally issued by the US Depart-
ment of Labor in April 2016, requiring initial compliance by April 10, 2017. The proposed rule
faced significant opposition, both in Congress and by industry parties, which delayed enforcement
of the rule. After several rounds of amendments, public solicitations of opinions, and legal chal-
lenges, the rule took partial effect in June 2017.12 However, after further delays, the DOL indicated
there would be minimal enforcement until July 2019. In March 2018, the rule was vacated by the
US Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals. Although the rule was vacated by the Fifth Circuit Court ruling,
the legal status of fiduciary standards remained in limbo, as other regulators including the SEC
 10
     See e.g. https://www.wsj.com/articles/dually-registered-investment-advisers-blur-the-broker-fiduc
iary-line-1427384699 [accessed 7/30/2020]
  11
     https://www.finra.org/sites/default/files/InvestorDocument/p125846.pdf [accessed 1/27/2020]
  12
     See e.g. https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/employers-and-advisers/guidance/field-assistance-bulle
tins/2018-02; https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/08/your-money/now-your-financial-advisers-will-have-
to-put-you-first-sometimes.html; https://www.wsj.com/articles/deregulators-must-follow-the-law-so-r
egulators-will-too-1495494029 [accessed 7/30/2020]


                                                  8
and state governments have sought to implement their own versions of the fiduciary rule and in
some cases bring legal actions against firms in their own jurisdictions on supposed fiduciary rule
infractions.13
    The key requirements of the fiduciary duty in the proposed rule included that brokers "must
give prudent advice that is in the customer's best interest, avoid misleading statements, and re-
ceive no more than reasonable compensation" (DOL 2016). Receiving commission payments for
products sold is usually incompatible with fiduciary responsibility. However, the proposed rule al-
lowed brokers to receive commissions if the brokers and a financial institution, either the firms
that employ/retain them or the insurance company, satisfied a list of conditions as described in the
Best Interest Contract Exemption rule. These conditions included acknowledging fiduciary duty to
the investor, adhering to standards of impartial conduct, disclosing information about conflicts of
interest, as well as adopting and publicly disclosing policies and procedures that mitigate conflicts
of interest.
    While the brokerage and financial advisory industry was lobbying aggressively against DOL's
fiduciary rule, it was also preparing to comply with the rule. In a survey by Deloitte published
in March 2016, 78% of the surveyed brokerage and other intermediary firms had by then started
planning or implementing changes to adhere to the new rule.14 In another Deloitte survey pub-
lished in August 2017, brokerage firms had undergone different changes: 19% of respondents
limited or eliminated retirement rollover advice, which is a popular channel for selling annuities;
48% reduced the number of annuities and 43% reduced the number of annuity carriers (insurers)
available for investors to choose from, partly as a result of performing due diligence on the annuity
products.15
    In addition to these survey responses, insurers and brokerage firms also reported updating their
business practices in response to the DOL fiduciary rule starting in 2016. For example, in response
to the DOL fiduciary rule, Voya stated that it "modified our sales and compensation practice." A
number of insurers, such as AXA Group, AIG, and Ageon, also reported that changes in sales prac-
tices due to the rule contributed to a decline in variable annuity sales. In its 2017 annual report,
Ageon explicitly stated that their decline in annuity sales was caused by "lower market demand
following the implementation of the Department of Labor Fiduciary Rule, in addition to not follow-
ing competitors' pricing changes for some products." However, not all insurers reported decreased
sales from the DOL rule. Lincoln Financial Group reported that in response to the Department of
Labor Rule that it had "refreshed its core products and introduced new annuities.... As a result of
these actions, [total (variable and other types of annuities)] annuity sales increased 6% in 2017,
  13
     For example, in 2018 the Commonwealth of Massachusetts pursued enforcement action against a firm for allegedly
"[violating] its fiduciary duty by ignoring the policies it had put in place to meet the DOL regulation's standards for
impartial conduct," see: https://www.theregreview.org/2019/04/10/jacob-is-fiduciary-rule-dead/; https:
//www.investmentnews.com/dol-fiduciary-rule-might-be-dead-but-its-ghost-hovers-over-the-financial-
advice-industry-75637 [accessed 7/31/2020].
  14
     https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/us/Documents/regulatory/us-reg-dol-fiduciary-ru
le-industry-preparedness.pdf [accessed 1/27/2020]
  15
     https://www.sifma.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/Deloitte-White-Paper-on-the-DOL-Fiduciary-Rul
e-August-2017.pdf [accessed 1/27/2020]


                                                          9
compared to an 8% decrease for the industry."
    The data suggests that investors also responded to the rule proposal. We parse through the
universe of investor complaints from FINRA's BrokerCheck website to identify fiduciary-duty-related
complaints. Figure 2 displays the share of investor complaints where the broker allegedly violated
his/her fiduciary duty to the investor. The figure illustrates that the share of fiduciary-duty-related
complaints effectively doubled in the years following the DOL proposal in 2015 and issuance in
2016. These results are consistent with the notion that the DOL's fiduciary rule increased investors'
awareness of brokers' potential conflicts of interest.


3     Data

3.1   Data Sources

Variable Annuity Characteristics and Sales       We obtain quarterly sales data of variable annuities
from Morningstar Annuity Intelligence from 2005Q1 to 2019Q2. The total variable annuity sales
reported in our data for 2018 is $92.9 billion, which represents 93% of the total $100.2 billion
of sales in the universe of variable annuity products in the US in 2018. Morningstar Annuity
Intelligence also reports quarter-end assets of each product. The total assets held in variable annuity
contracts covered by Morningstar at the end of 2018 is $1.79 trillion, which represents 83% of the
total $2.16 trillion in assets in the universe of variable annuity products in the US.
    We determine the characteristics of each variable annuity using data from Morningstar Annu-
ity Intelligence and Morningstar Principia. Morningstar Principia data is available as a quarterly
CD-ROM series from 2005 to 2012. Morningstar Annuity Intelligence is a separate dataset that
provides information on variable annuity characteristics through mid-2019 (when we accessed the
data). Both datasets contain information including the insurance company underwriting the prod-
uct, expenses, sales, and asset size, as well as benefit options available (e.g. GLWB). For each policy,
the datasets also provide characteristics of the subaccounts towards which the variable annuities
policyholders can allocate their investments. Data on the subaccounts include names of the funds,
their investment objectives, expense ratios, and historical returns. We describe how we use the two
datasets to construct a time-series of product characteristics in Appendix B.
    We match the datasets on variable annuity characteristics and sales to construct a quarterly
annuity level panel dataset from 2005Q1-2019Q2. We use the full sample to document several
empirical facts regarding the distribution of variable annuities in Sections 4 and 5, and focus on
the period 2013Q1-2019Q2 when studying the fiduciary rule in Sections 6 and 7.


Variable Annuity Sales Commissions         We obtain information on sales commission rates for vari-
able annuity products from the prospectuses and corresponding amendments filed with the SEC.
Under the Securities Act of 1933 and the Investment Company Act of 1940, all insurance companies
offering variable annuities must register the variable annuity products and file the prospectus of the



                                                  10
products with the SEC. The prospectus contains basic descriptive information of the insurer under-
writing the product; the investment options available to policyholders; expenses and restrictions;
information on the subaccounts' returns. Prospectuses are filed with the SEC initially in the Form
N-4 and updated through post-effective amendment Form 485BPOS filings, commonly at annual
intervals. We access these filings through the SEC's EDGAR database. We match the filings by the
product name and insurance company to the products in the Morningstar variable annuity dataset.
    Insurance companies are required to disclose in the prospectuses and applicable amendment
filings the commission rates paid to the selling agents and firms for each variable annuity product.
In these filings, insurance companies disclose the maximum upfront commissions, as a percent-
age of premium payments, along with trail commissions, as a percentage of the annuity value,
if applicable. We then extract by hand the commission data disclosed for each matched product
each year. This gives us a panel dataset of commissions at the annuity product by quarter level.
To standardize across the different commission schedules, in our empirical analyses, we use the
maximum upfront commission, which is almost always associated with zero trail commissions in
compensation schedules.16
    One caveat is that insurers are required to disclose the maximum upfront commission rate, and
the variation in the maximum upfront commission rates disclosed by insurers could, theoretically,
not reflect the variation in the average commission rate insurers pay. There are several reasons why
we believe that these limitations do not significantly hinder interpretations of our findings. First,
the commission rates we find are consistent with industry knowledge of the levels of both upfront
and trail commissions that selling agents and firms receive. Second, there is substantial hetero-
geneity in the disclosed maximum upfront commission rates. Insurers offer different commission
schedules across variable annuity products at the same time. There is also variation in the reported
commission rate within a variable annuity over time. The heterogeneity across products of the same
insurance company and within products over time suggest that the disclosed commission rates re-
flect meaningful variation in the compensations paid to brokers for different products. Third, for
some annuities we observe the actual selling agreements between insurance companies and bro-
kers and can confirm that the disclosed maximum upfront commission rate matches the contractual
commission rate reported in the selling agreement. Finally, to the extent that the maximum rate
contains measurement error in our explanatory variable, it would bias our results towards zero
such that our results represent a conservative estimate of the impact brokerage commissions have
in distorting investments.
  16
     For example, one insurance company offered three main commission options for the selling agents and firms for
one of its variable annuity products: first, an upfront commission of 6.5% of the premium payments plus no trail
commissions; second, an upfront commission of 5% of the premium payments plus trail commissions of 0.25% on an
annual basis, which increases to 0.40% after surrender charges are no longer applicable to the premium; and third,
an upfront commission of 2% of the premium payments plus trail commissions of 0.75% on an annual basis. If the
variable annuity product is purchased by individuals above a certain age (usually 80 years of age or older), the insurance
company may pay a different, often reduced, commission schedule.




                                                           11
3.2    Summary Statistics

Our dataset contains 2,099 different variable annuity products offered by 93 insurance companies
from 2005Q1 to 2019Q2. Table 1 presents summary statistics of the product characteristics. The
total assets held in each product averages $2.4 billion. Quarterly sales average $91 million.
    Expense ratios, including both product-level expenses (M&E, administrative, and distribution
charges)17 and average subaccount expenses, have a mean of 2.24% of assets annually and range
from 0.25% to 4.20% in the sample (Figure 3a). The substantial dispersion in expense ratios
provides prima facie evidence of potential distortions and frictions in this market. An investor
would lower her annual expenses by roughly 50% (1pp) by moving from the 90th percentile to
the 10th percentile in terms of expenses. In net present value (NPV), this amounts to a 12.46
percentage point increase in NPV relative to the principal invested, assuming a 5% discount rate
and that the annuity is outstanding for 20 years.18 Given the size of the annuity market ($2.2
trillion), the dispersion in annual fees is economically meaningful.
    Table 1 and Figure 4a display the distribution of variable annuity commissions. The average
upfront commission is 6.09% of premium payments across all products. A key feature of the com-
mission rates is that there is substantial heterogeneity: the maximum disclosed upfront commis-
sions range from 0% (no commissions paid) to 16% of premium payments. As such, brokers have
strong monetary incentives to sell high-commission variable annuities over others. By moving from
the 10th to the 90th percentile, a broker would almost triple the commission earned on making a
sale (3% vs 8%).
    Table 1 also presents summary statistics on the subaccounts associated with each product. The
average variable annuity product has 66 subaccounts. The subaccounts for each variable annuity
also have varying performances: the average net-of-expenses CAPM alphas on the subaccounts for
each variable annuity product range from -1.52% to 1.23%. The average annual expense on each
subaccount is 0.97% of the assets allocated to the subaccount.
    Subaccounts also vary in their investment objectives. Table A1 reports the 20 most common
subaccount investment objectives by the percentage of variable annuity products offering at least
one subaccount with each objective. The objectives are identified according to the Morningstar
prospectus objective classifications. Almost all variable annuity products have growth equity (97%),
growth and income equity (95%), money market fund (91%), foreign stock (91%), and corporate
bond (86%) investment options available. Table A2 in the Appendix offers the frequency of differ-
ent types of benefit options.
  17
     Since investors do not necessarily incur surrender charges and rider/option fees are optional, we do not include
these fees in the total expense ratio.
  18
     In our sample, the median growth rate for annuities that are closed is -5% per annum. Assuming a constant hazard
rate of 5%, this implies the average account is open for 20 years.




                                                        12
4         What Drives Variable Annuity Sales?
This section presents our analysis on the determinants of variable annuity sales. We study how vari-
able annuity sales are driven by both the characteristics of the products themselves as well as the
incentives offered to the agents who sell these products. We also examine how these characteristics
and their influences on variable annuity sales vary across distribution channels. In this section we
focus on documenting several reduced form relationships between annuity sales and annuity char-
acteristics, while in Section 7 we estimate the causal structural parameters in a demand framework,
accounting for potential endogeneity concerns.


4.1        Annuity Sales

We begin by empirically documenting the drivers of variable annuity sales. We are particularly
interested in how investors and brokers trade off variable annuity expenses versus brokerage com-
missions.
         We start with several simple cuts of the data. Figure 3b displays a binned scatter plot of variable
annuity sales versus variable annuity expense ratios, controlling for commission rates. The corre-
sponding relationship is negative and significant, suggesting that demand for variable annuities is
decreasing in the expenses that investors pay. Figure 4b displays the relationship between variable
annuity sales and commission rates, controlling for product expense ratios. The corresponding re-
lationship is positive and significant, suggesting that broker incentives also affect variable annuity
sales. The results suggest that both broker and investor incentives play important roles in driving
sales.
         We systematically examine drivers of variable annuity sales in the following regression specifi-
cation:
                               ln(Salesjkt ) = fjkt + cjkt + Xjkt + µkt +               jkt .                          (1)

Observations are at the variable annuity product-by-quarter level.19 The dependent variable ln(Salesjkt )
is the log total sales of variable annuity j offered by insurance company k in quarter t. fjkt is the
average total expense ratio in percentage points corresponding to variable annuity j in quarter t.
The term cjkt is the maximum upfront commission rate paid to selling agents and is a percentage
of premiums paid. We control for an extensive set of other variable annuity characteristics in the
vector Xjkt (15 characteristics), which includes the availability of each type of riders and benefits
offered for the variable annuity product that quarter as listed in Table A2 in the Appendix, such as
the types of death benefits, benefit options available (e.g. GLWB), purchase payment credits; a long
(above median) lock-up period; the number of different subaccounts that are open for investment
in quarter t; the number of distinct investment objectives offered by the subaccounts, such as large-
cap growth stocks and high-yield debt; and the historical performance on the investment options
available, measured as the average net-of-expense CAPM alpha across subaccounts in the previous
    19
     As discussed in Section 4.3 some variable annuities offer different share classes. We define a variable annuity product
(j ) at the share-class level.


                                                            13
five years (minimum six months for new subaccounts). In our most stringent specification, we also
include insurer-by-quarter fixed effects (µkt ) to control for time-varying insurer brand effects and
insurer supply conditions.
   Table 2 presents the results of the regression estimates corresponding to equation (1). We find
evidence suggesting that investors are relatively price sensitive. In each specification, we estimate
a negative and statistically significant relationship between annuity expenses and sales, . The
results in column (4) indicate that a one percentage point decrease in expense ratios is associated
with a 15% increase in sales (for reference, the unconditional mean and standard deviation of
expenses across all variable annuities are 2.2% and 0.4% respectively). In column (5), where
we include insurer-year-quarter fixed effects, the coefficient on expenses, -0.14, is very similar in
magnitude as that in (4), although is marginally statistically insignificant at the 10% level. In all
other specifications, the relationship between sales and expenses is economically and statistically
significant.
   In all specifications, the coefficient on commissions,  , is positive and statistically and economi-
cally significant, suggesting that investors are more likely to purchase products for which the broker
earns a high commission from the insurance company. The results in column (5) indicate that a one
percentage point increase in brokerage commissions is associated with a 7.3% increase in variable
annuity sales. The positive relationship between commission rates and sales is robust to controlling
for variable annuity product characteristics and is positive both cross-sectionally as well as within
time periods and within insurance companies. These results suggest that broker incentives play a
critical role in driving the sale of variable annuities.
   Turning to other product characteristics, the results suggest that investors purchase more vari-
able annuities that have more subaccounts to invest in, have a wider range of investment options,
and higher net-of-expense alphas on the subaccounts. These results are intuitive. The results in
column (5) indicate that adding a new investment option/subaccount is associated with a 0.63%
increase in variable annuity sales. A one standard deviation increase in average subaccount alpha
(0.20%) is associated with a 20% (= 0.2 × 1.0) increase in variable annuity sales. We also find some
evidence that the sales of variable annuities with longer lock-up periods (longer than median) tend
to be higher. This may partially reflect the preferences of brokers who, as discussed in Section 2.1,
often earn a trail-commission for each year the annuity is outstanding.
   It is useful to compare how variable annuity sales respond to changes in broker commission
rates and expenses. Commissions are not explicitly paid by the investors, but are paid by insurance
companies directly to the selling agent and the agent's brokerage firm. Contract expenses, on the
other hand, are directly paid for by investors. Comparing how sales respond to expenses () vs
commissions ( ) helps us measure potential conflicts of interest in the market.
   We use the estimates from Table 2 to construct a quick back of the envelope estimate of how
investors and brokers trade off their financial interests in terms of expenses and commissions. One
distinction between commissions and expenses is that commissions are a one-time upfront payment
while expenses are charged annually. Thus, in order to make an apples-to-apples comparison, we


                                                    14
need to calculate the NPV of a one percentage point increase in annual expenses. Assuming that
a variable annuity is outstanding for 20 years, which is consistent with our sample, and a 5%
discount rate, the NPV of a one percentage point decrease in expenses is 12.46%, relative to the
amount invested. The results in column (4) indicate that a one percentage point decrease in the
NPV of future expenses is associated with a 1.20% (= 0.15/12.46) increase in sales. Conversely, a
one percentage point increase in broker commissions is associated with a 6.4% increase in variable
annuity sales. The results suggest that variable annuity sales are about five times more sensitive to
the financial interests of brokers' than those of investors.20
    As discussed in Section 2.1, variable annuities offer different benefit options or riders for addi-
tional expenses, such as a minimum guaranteed return/roll-up rate. Previous research from Koijen
and Yogo (2018) highlights the importance of these roll-up rates in driving sales. As an additional
robustness check, we also control for roll-up rates in column (6).21 We find a positive and statis-
tically significant relationship between roll-up rates and variable annuity sales. In this additional
specification, our inferences regarding how variable annuity sales are related to expenses and com-
missions remain unchanged.


4.2    Heterogeneity Across Distribution Channels

We further analyze how the relationship between selling agents' incentives and sales differs across
the distribution channels through which variable annuities are most commonly sold. While variable
annuities must be sold by a registered securities broker, some of the brokers who sell annuities are
direct employees of the insurer (captive brokers) while many others work independently from
the insurer (non-captive).22 These non-captive brokers can generally contract with any insurance
company and can sell variable annuities issued by multiple insurance companies.
    There are two main reasons why commissions and expenses may affect sales differently for
captive brokers relative to non-captive brokers. First, insurance companies distributing variable an-
nuities through non-captive brokerage firms leads to double marginalization: insurance companies
and brokerage firms that have market power in their respective markets will each apply their own
markup to the variable annuity products sold. Brokers will extract more commissions from insurers
and, ultimately, insurers will extract higher expenses from investors. By contrast, captive brokers
work for the insurance companies that underwrite the variable annuities and are vertically inte-
  20
     As a robustness check, we calculate the NPV of a one percentage point change in expenses under the assumption
that the variable annuity is outstanding for 10 years and discounting at a rate of 20%, which implies that the NPV of
a one percentage point decrease in expenses is 4.19%, relative to the amount invested. Under these set of assumptions
the results in column (4) indicate that a one percentage point decrease in the NPV of future expenses is associated with
a 3.58% (=0.15/4.19) increase in variable annuity sales. These results suggest that variable annuities are almost twice
as sensitive to brokers' financial interests relative to investors'.
  21
     Although we have time-varying data on the guarantee options (e.g. GLWB) offered by each product, our data on
roll-up rates are limited to a subsample. See Appendix B for details.
  22
     Non-captive brokers include (1) independent financial planners such as LPL Financial, M Financial Group, and
Princor Financial Services; (2) regional broker-dealers such as Edward Jones, Oppenheimer, and Raymond James, which
are large broker-dealer organizations that service many areas in the US, and (3) wire-houses such as Morgan Stanley,
UBS, and Wells Fargo Advisors, which are the largest national financial services firms.



                                                          15
grated, mitigating the problem of double marginalization. As such, products with higher expenses
should be sold more across non-captive brokers than across captive brokers. Second, to the extent
that selling a higher-commission or higher-expense product could create a reputational concern
and threat of complaints or lawsuits against both the selling agent and the insurance company,
the captive agent working exclusively for the insurance company may be more inclined to take the
reputational concern of the insurance company into consideration, and thus is less likely to sell
high-expense products.
   To test this hypothesis, we repeat our analysis of equation (1), but decompose the independent
variable, sales flow, into sales by non-captive brokers and sales by captive brokers separately. Ta-
ble 3 reports the results of this analysis. Columns (1)-(3) report the coefficient estimates on sales
by non-captive brokers and columns (4)-(6) for sales by captive brokers. The results suggest that
captive and non-captive brokers respond differently to commissions and expenses. Captive brokers
appear to be substantially more sensitive to expenses and less sensitive to commissions. The coef-
ficient estimate on sales sensitivities to expenses for captive brokers ( = -0.68) (column 6) is 3.6
times as large as for non-captive brokers ( = -0.19) (column 3). Similarly, the results suggest that
non-captive brokers are more sensitive to commissions ( = 0.14) than captive agents ( = 0.06),
although the differences are not statistically significant. Taken together, the analysis suggests that
captive brokers place a higher weight on their clients' incentives relative to non-captive brokers.


4.3   Share Classes Within Product Sets

The focus of our analysis so far has been to better understand how brokers and their client's in-
terests affect sales. One potential concern with our analysis is that our measures of expenses and
commissions are correlated with some unobserved product characteristics or that these measures
do not accurately capture the incentives of brokers and investors. We exploit an institutional fea-
ture where an insurer sells otherwise almost identical variable annuities with different expenses,
commissions, and lock-up periods. In general, different share classes of the same variable annuity
have the same underlying investment options, product features, benefits, and other characteristics.
This helps mitigate concerns that some unobserved product characteristics are driving our results.
   As an example, consider the Premier Retirement variable annuity offered for sale by Prudential.
In 2012, the Premier Retirement variable annuity was offered in L- and C-share classes. Both share
classes of the Premier Retirement product had investment options in the same 59 subaccounts,
ranging from large-cap growth funds to emerging markets' sovereign debt funds. Both share classes
had the same death benefit and living benefit options and other identical contract features. The
difference between the two shares lies in the expense structure: L-shares charged an annual M&E
risk charge of 1.55% and had a 4-year lock-up period, whereas the C-shares charged an annual
M&E risk charge of 1.60% and did not have any lock-up period. The L-share of the product had
sales of $3.18 billion in the fourth quarter of 2012, whereas the C-share of the product had sales of
$240 million in that same time period. The two share classes also have different commission rates:
the L-share, which had 93% of the total sales of the product, had an upfront commission rate of


                                                 16
5.5%, whereas the C-share, which had only 7% of the total sales, had an upfront commission rate
of 2%.
         We compare different share classes of the same product or similar products offered by the same
insurer to study the role expenses and commissions may have on variable annuity sales. In the
empirical analysis, we identify by name all the share classes of the same product set offered by
the same insurer in the same year and quarter. The share classes within a product-set differ in
expense structures and commissions. In total, we identify 293 product set-quarter groups where
each product set has at least two share classes both offered for sale in the same quarter. These 261
product set-quarter groups include 681 unique share class-quarter observations.
         To analyze what drives sales across share classes, we estimate an equation similar to our main
analysis (eq. 1) on the subset of share class-quarter sets for which there are multiple share classes
with different commission rates and expenses:

                        ln(Salesjpt ) = fjpt + cjpt + LongLockU pjpt + µpt +                jkt ,                  (2)

where j denotes the share class, p denotes the product set for which there are multiple share classes
and t denotes the year and quarter of the observation. Here, we include product set-quarter fixed
effects µpt which control for all variable annuity characteristics other than the share class specific
characteristics: expense (fjpt ), commission (cjpt ), and whether the lockup is longer than the median
(LongLockU pjpt ).
         Table 4 reports the coefficient estimates. Across share classes of the same products, we find
that the effect of commissions and expenses still persists in driving sales. Notably,  = 0.060,
which corresponds to a 13% increase in quarterly sales for a one standard deviation (2.13% in
this subsample) increase in commissions across share classes (column 2). Similarly, we find that
expenses are negatively correlated with sales. The results in columns (1) and (2) indicate that a
one standard deviation increase in expenses (0.33% in this subsample) is associated with a 47% (=
0.33 × 1.42) decrease in sales. Comparing our estimates of how brokers trade off expenses () versus
commissions ( ) suggests that brokers trade off a 1 percentage point decrease in commissions with
a 0.53 percentage point decrease in the NPV of future expenses.23 Overall, these results suggest
that our earlier inference that annuity sales depend on both the broker's and client's interests are
unlikely driven by omitted characteristics of the variable annuities.


5         Conflicts of Interest
Our results from Section 4 suggest that broker incentives play a critical role in determining which
variable annuities investors purchase. In this section, we explore the types of variable annuities
    23
    Assuming that a variable annuity is outstanding for 20 years and a 5% discount rate, the NPV of a one percentage
decrease in expenses is 12.46%. The results in column (2) indicate that a one percentage point decrease in the NPV of
future expenses is associated with a 11.40% (= 1.42/12.46) increase in variable annuity sales. The results suggest that
brokers behave as if they would trade off a 1 percentage point decrease in commissions with a 0.53% (= 6.0%/11.40%)
decrease in NPV of future expenses investors pay.


                                                         17
brokers are incentivized to sell, and the extent to which brokers' financial interests conflict with
their clients'. We first examine how annuity commissions vary with expenses and other product
characteristics. We find that brokers are incentivized to sell high-expense products, as well as prod-
ucts with fewer and worse-performing investment options. We then examine how high-expense
products, which offer higher commission incentives for brokers, relate to customer satisfaction, as
measured using variable annuity investor complaint data from FINRA.


5.1   Broker Commissions and Variable Annuity Characteristics

In Section 4, we find that brokers have strong incentives to sell certain variable annuities over
others and that brokers appear to respond to these incentives. In principle, these incentives do not
directly harm investors. However, broker commissions may impact the types of variable annuities
that a broker chooses to market to investors. One concern, which prompted the DOL fiduciary rule,
is that brokers may be incentivized to market inferior and expensive products to investors. This
creates conflicts of interest as the broker's interest in higher commissions is in direct conflict with
the investor's desire for better-quality products.
   We identify the types of variable annuities that brokers are incentivized to sell by examining
how broker commissions vary with product characteristics in the following linear regression:

                                cjkt = fjkt + Xjkt + t + k +        jkt .                           (3)

Observations are at the variable annuity product-by-quarter level, where we restrict the sample
to those variable annuities that are available for sale in a given quarter. The dependent variable
cjkt is the maximum upfront broker commission corresponding to annuity j offered by insurer k at
time t. We examine how commissions vary with variable annuity expenses fjkt and other variable
annuity characteristics in the vector Xjkt . We include the same set of annuity control variables cor-
responding to our earlier analysis (eq. 1), which includes the availability of different benefits/riders
and subaccount characteristics. The corresponding coefficients provide insight into which types of
variable annuities have high commissions, or in other words, which types of annuities brokers are
incentivized to sell. We also include year-quarter fixed effects (t ) and insurance company fixed
effects (k ) .
   Table 5 displays the estimates. In each column we find a positive and significant relationship
between commissions and expenses, suggesting that brokers are incentivized to sell high-expense
products. The results in column (4) indicate that a one percentage point increase in expenses is
associated with a 0.65 percentage point increase in commission rates. We also find some evidence
suggesting that commissions are negatively correlated with the availability and performance of
investment subaccounts. The results in column (4) indicate that a one standard deviation decrease
in the number of available subaccounts (41) is associated with a 0.32pp (= 41 × 0.0077) increase
in commissions. Similarly, a one percentage point decrease in average net-of-expense subaccount
alpha is associated with a 0.61pp increase in commissions (column 4). Overall, the results suggest


                                                     18
that brokers are incentivized to sell products with higher expenses and worse investment options.


5.2      Broker Misconduct and Product Expenses

In Section 5.1, we find evidence suggesting that brokers are incentivized to sell annuities with
higher expenses, as well as fewer and worse-performing investment options. While this evidence
suggests that brokers have incentives to sell products that are worse for investors, high product ex-
penses may still be positively correlated with some other unobserved variable annuity characteristic
that is desirable for investors. To help address this alternative explanation, we further examine the
relationship between variable annuity expenses and product quality by studying the relationship
between expenses and variable annuity-related investor complaints. If products with high expenses
are worse for investors, we would expect investors who end up buying high-expense products to
complain about them more often.
       We match our variable annuity sales data with complaints and broker misconduct records from
FINRA and test whether brokers who are more likely to sell high-expense products receive more
complaints and have higher rates of misconduct records. Because we do not have data on the spe-
cific products each broker sells and an independent broker may simultaneously work with multiple
insurers, we focus on captive brokerage firms that are affiliated with specific insurers, as they will
primarily sell products offered by the affiliated insurers. For each insurance company that sells
variable annuities in the Morningstar variable annuities dataset, we identify all its affiliated broker-
age firms registered with FINRA. For each brokerage firm, we compute the sales-weighted average
expense ratios on all variable annuities created by the brokerage firm's insurance arm.
       Using the FINRA data, we identify complaints associated with variable annuity sales as well as
records of misconduct at each brokerage firm. We compute the following measures of complaints
and misconduct for each brokerage firm that is affiliated with an insurance company: (1) the
number of variable annuity-related complaints filed against the brokerage firm each year, (2) the
total dollar amount of pecuniary damages/settlements paid to claimants against the brokerage
firm corresponding to variable annuity-related complaints each year, (3) among brokers affiliated
with the brokerage firm each year, the percentage of brokers with any prior misconduct-related
disclosures, and (4) the percentage who had any misconduct-related disclosure that given year.24
The measures of (1) and (2) are specific to broker conduct arising from variable annuity sales. With
(3) and (4), we identify misconduct related to all possible products and services, not just variable
annuities, assuming that brokers' overall conduct is correlated with their variable annuity sales. All
misconduct variables are rates scaled by the number of broker agents employed by the brokerage
firm in each year, per 100 brokers. As reported in the last row of Table 6, the average brokerage
firm in our sample, per 100 brokers employed each year, receives 0.19 complaints, pays out $3,696
in pecuniary damages/settlements, has 5.35 brokers with misconduct records, and has 0.38 brokers
who have a misconduct disclosure that year.
  24
    Egan et al. (2019) define broker misconduct as any regulatory, customer-related, criminal, or internal event that
resulted in discipline (i.e. termination, settlement, fine, etc.).


                                                        19
    To estimate the relationship between product expenses and complaints or misconduct, we esti-
mate the following equation:

                          M isconductit =  +  · Expensesit +  · Zit +       it ,                     (4)

Observations are at the brokerage firm-by-year level. M isconductit is the complaint or misconduct
variable of interest for brokerage firm i in year t. The independent variable of interest is Expensesit
which measures the sales-weighted average expense ratio of variable annuities sold by brokerage
firm i's affiliated insurer in year t. Zit is a set of brokerage-level covariates for brokerage firm i in
year t including the size of the brokerage firm, measured by the number of broker agents employed
by the brokerage in a given year and the total amount of variable annuity assets under management
by the insurance company for whom the brokerage firm sells variable annuity products.
    Table 6 presents the results. The coefficient estimates on Expenses are all positive and sta-
tistically significant, indicating that brokers affiliated with insurers selling high-expense variable
annuity products also have higher levels of complaints and misconduct. A one-standard-deviation
increase in the sales-weighted average expenses is associated with 0.10 (= 0.23 × 0.43, 53% relative
to the mean) more complaints, $2,532 (69%) more in pecuniary damages awarded to complainants
per 100 brokers per year, 0.71pp (13%) greater share of brokers with records of misconduct, and
0.10pp (26%) higher rate of misconduct incidents per year.
    The results in these two subsections are consistent with the interpretation that brokers are in-
centivized to sell inferior products. We find that products with high expenses--which tend to have
high commissions--are associated with a greater number of investor complaints and higher rates of
broker misconduct. The positive relationship between variable annuity product expenses and bro-
ker misconduct could be driven by two explanations. First, brokers that are more likely to engage
in misconduct may select themselves into selling high-expense products. Second, investors holding
high-expense variable annuity products may be more likely to realize that these products are not
desirable and, thus, file complaints against brokers. Both of these explanations are consistent with
the notion that high-expense products are likely to be less desirable for investors. Since brokers on
average have higher commission incentives to sell these products, as we document in the previous
sub-section, the results here support our argument that brokers face significant conflicts of interest.


6    Effects of the Department of Labor Fiduciary Rule
In this section, we analyze the impact of the proposal and partial implementation of the Department
of Labor (DOL) fiduciary rule on the variable annuities market. As described in Section 2.2, the
DOL fiduciary rule was proposed by then-President Obama in 2015, issued by the DOL in 2016, and
with enforcement originally planned to start in 2017. The proposed rule would hold all brokers to
a fiduciary standard when dealing with retirement investments. In this section, we document the
empirical impact of the proposed rule on annuity sales, the types of annuities sold, and the types
of annuities offered by insurers. We then assess the implications of the proposed rule on investor

                                                   20
surplus in Section 7. We find that the DOL fiduciary rule coincided with a meaningful (19%)
decrease in total variable annuity sales. The decline in sales was primarily driven by a decline
in the sales of high-expense variable annuities while low-expense annuity sales remained relatively
constant. In addition, we find that insurers decreased the total number of variable annuity products
open for sale, especially those with high expenses. Consistent with the anecdotal evidence from
insurer annual reports (Section 2.2), the empirical evidence suggests that the proposal of the DOL
fiduciary rule led to a decline in the sales and availability of high-expense variable annuities.


6.1      Variable Annuity Sales and Expenses

We first document how the proposal of the DOL fiduciary rule impacted the sales of variable annu-
ities. Figure 5a displays total variable annuity sales in the US over the period 2013-2019. We find
that there was a significant decrease in total sales of variable annuities around the proposal of the
fiduciary rule. Quarterly sales of all variable annuity products declined by 19% from $32 billion
in 2015Q1 to $26 billion in 2016Q1. The decline in variable annuity sales was partially offset by
an increase in fixed indexed annuity sales, which are typically considered less risky investments
than variable annuities and, on average, have lower commissions and higher risk-adjusted returns
(Bhattacharya et al. (2020));25 together, fixed index and variable annuity quarterly sales fell by 5%
YoY in 2016Q1 (Figure 5b). The decline in overall sales is consistent with the hypothesis that the
DOL fiduciary rule significantly affected brokers' decisions to sell variable annuities. Furthermore,
sales of variable annuities have not recovered to the pre-2016 levels even after the DOL rule was
struck down in court in 2018. This persistent impact of the fiduciary rule suggests that many in-
surers kept the changes to their business operations that they initially implemented to comply with
the DOL rule.26 This may be due to industry anticipation of subsequent fiduciary standards being
implemented by the SEC and other federal and state regulators as well as the threat of enforcement
action brought by state regulators for violations of the DOL fiduciary rule, as discussed in Section
2.2.27
    In Section 4, we find that sales respond negatively to variable annuity expenses, suggesting that
investors dislike high-expense products. Section 5.2 documents that high product expenses are
associated with more investor complaints and broker misconduct, suggesting that products with
   25
      For example, FINRA, the regulator, describes equity indexed annuities as having less risk than a variable annuity.
See https://www.finra.org/investors/alerts/equity-indexed-annuities-complex-choice [accessed on
07/09/2020]. As of 2016, the average commission paid on variable annuities was 6.36% vs. 5.50% for fixed indexed
annuities.
   26
      Todd Giesing, director of annuity research at the LIMRA SRI, notes that many of the changes insurers had to make
to accommodate the DOL rule have remained in place. "Even with the vacated rule, we've heard from many annuity
providers that they made changes that remain in place today due to the rule." Those changes include changes to business
processes and practices, and disclosure policies, he says. See https://www.morningstar.com/articles/930554/the-
uptick-in-annuities [accessed 01/23/2020]
   27
      For example, industry discussions suggest that even though the DOL fiduciary rule was vacated, brokers' "best
strategy is to always act in the best interests of [their] clients" and that firms who adopted policies to comply with the
DOL fiduciary rule must be careful not to violate their own policies: see https://www.investmentnews.com/dol-fid
uciary-rule-might-be-dead-but-its-ghost-hovers-over-the-financial-advice-industry-75637 [accessed
7/31/2020].


                                                           21
high expenses are worse for investors. Therefore, we hypothesize that the DOL rule should have a
larger effect on these more expensive products. Figure 6 separately plots the total sales of high- and
low-expense variable annuities (top/bottom quartile) over the period 2013-2019. The plot shows
that sales for high-expense products decreased drastically around the proposal of the DOL rule by
52% from 2015Q1 to 2016Q1. By contrast, sales for low-expense products fell by only 9% over the
same period. The difference in differences suggest that in response to the DOL rule, brokers curbed
their sales of high-expense variable annuities.
    We analyze how the relationship between variable annuity sales and expenses changed sur-
rounding the DOL rule in the following difference in differences regression specification:

             ln(Salesjkt ) = fjkt + DOL fjkt × DOLt + cjkt + Xjkt + µt + µk +                     jkt ,         (5)

Observations are at the variable annuity product by quarter level over the period 2013-2019. We
restrict the sample period to this window to measure the impact of the DOL rule. This regression
specification mirrors our earlier specification (eq. 1), with the addition of the interaction term
between expense ratio and post-DOL dummy, fjkt × DOLt . The variable DOLt is a dummy variable
indicating whether the year is after 2015.28 Thus, the interaction term fjkt × DOLt measures how
the expense sensitivity of variable annuity sales changed surrounding the proposal of the DOL rule.
    We present the estimates in columns (1)-(2) in Table 7. In each specification we estimate a
negative coefficient on the term fjkt , suggesting sales are negatively correlated with expenses prior
to the DOL rule. The coefficient on the interaction term fjkt × DOLt is negative and statistically
significant indicating that sales became more sensitive to expenses after the DOL rule. The results in
column (2) indicate that prior to the DOL proposal, a one percentage point increase in expenses is
associated with a 16% decrease in sales. After the rule proposal, a one percentage point increase in
expenses is associated with a 47% (=16%+31%) decrease in sales. This finding echoes the results
displayed in Figure 6: the sales of high-expense variable annuities fell more relative to low-expense
variable annuities after the proposal of the DOL rule.
    In columns (3)-(6) of Table 7 we also include the interaction term between commission rates
and the dummy DOL to measure how the sensitivity of sales with respect to commissions changed
surrounding the proposed rule. The results confirm our earlier finding that sales are positively
associated with commissions. We do not find that the commission sensitivity changed after the
proposed rule. This is intuitive as the proposed DOL rule would penalize brokers for selling high-
expense inferior investments, but not necessarily for selling high-commission products conditional
on product expenses and other characteristics. Since we control for the expenses and quality of
the variable annuities, we would not expect the sensitivity of sales with respect to commissions to
change surrounding the proposal.
    Overall, we find that the proposed rule led to a decline in total variable annuity sales. However,
the rule differentially impacted sales of annuities: while the sales of high-expense variable annu-
   28
      In Table A3 in the Appendix, we repeat the analyses excluding the period between the announcement and issuance
of the rule, 2015Q2-2016Q1. The results remain quantitatively and qualitatively similar.


                                                        22
ities fell after the proposed rule, the sales of low-expense variable annuities remained relatively
constant.


6.2     Insurers' Product Offerings: Expenses and Commissions

Insurers, in addition to brokers, also faced significant legal risks under the DOL fiduciary rule. The
Department of Labor states that to keep the commission-based compensation structure, insurance
companies must acknowledge fiduciary status and insulate brokers from incentives that violate the
Best Interest standard when no other financial institution (such as a brokerage firm) acknowledges
fiduciary status.29 To limit their legal risks, insurers can decrease their offerings of products whose
sales may violate the standard. It is plausible to assume that high-expense products are less likely
to serve investors' best interests, as sales are negatively correlated with expenses and high-expense
variable annuities are associated with more investor complaints. Thus, high-expense products can
pose higher legal risks to insurers and insurers might decrease their offerings of high-expense prod-
ucts. Insurers may also decrease the availability of high-expense products because brokers are less
inclined to sell them following the DOL proposal as suggested by the evidence in Section 6.1.
      Figure 7a tests this hypothesis by plotting the time-series equal-weighted average expenses of
products open for sale. The average expenses declined sharply from 2015Q1 to 2017Q1, consistent
with the idea that insurers are reducing the relative availability of high-expense products. The
average expenses from 2016 to 2019Q2 are 12bps lower than those from 2013 to 2015. The decline
in average expenses is mainly driven by the opening of new low-expense products: new products
launched in 2016 or later have an average expense ratio of 35bps lower than those launched in
2013-2015. Figure 7b plots the sales-weighted average expenses which also shows a sharp decline
in expenses around 2016, decreasing by 21bps from 2013-2015 to 2016-2019Q2.
      The equal-weighted figure reflects the behavior of insurers as they changed the suite of avail-
able products, while the sales-weighted figure reflects the behavior of both insurers and brokers.
Consequently, the sales-weighted decline in average expenses is larger than the equal-weighted de-
cline in average expenses because it reflects the change in broker behavior. As illustrated in Section
6.1, annuity sales became more sensitive to expenses following the DOL rule. Figure 7b also indi-
cates that the response of brokers to the DOL rule was immediate and sharp. In contrast, Figure
7a indicates that the response of insurers was immediate but more gradual as it potentially took
longer for insurers to update their product set.
      We can also visualize the change in the product space around the DOL fiduciary rule in a
heatmap by expenses and commissions. For each region in the product space along these two
dimensions, we compute the change in the average number of variable annuity products available
for sale and average total sales in each quarter for the time period before (2013-2015) and the
time period after (2016-2019Q2) the issuance of the DOL fiduciary rule. We measure both sales
volume and number of products available for sale as shares of the entire variable annuities market,
 29
   See https://s3.amazonaws.com/public-inspection.federalregister.gov/2016-07925.pdf?1459955724,
page 243. [Accessed 3/29/2020]


                                                   23
such that the changes in sales and product offerings reflect changes in the composition of the
marketplace.
   Figures 8a and 8b plot the changes in product offerings and sales, respectively. An increase
(decrease) in the number or sales of products in each region is denoted in red (blue). Figure 8a
shows that in terms of the number of products as a fraction of all products available, low-expense
products experienced an increase. In particular, low-expense-low-commission products saw the
largest increase, and high-expense-high-commission products, which potentially allow brokers to
benefit the most at investors' expense, experienced the largest decrease. Figure 8b shows a similar
pattern in sales: low-expense products gained, while high-expense products lost market share.
In particular, low-expense-low-commission products experienced the largest increase, and high-
expense-high-commission products experienced the largest decrease. These results suggest that
following the DOL fiduciary rule, the variable annuity market shifted away from higher-expense
inferior products and towards lower-expense products, in terms of both products offerings and
sales.


6.3      Composition of Variable Annuity Investors

One primary concern associated with the fiduciary rule is that holding brokers to a fiduciary stan-
dard would raise the fixed cost of providing financial advice which would reduce the amount of
financial advice. In particular, it may no longer be profitable for brokers to sell variable annuities
to investors with smaller accounts. Bhattacharya et al. (2020) develop a general theoretical model
illustrating how this fixed cost channel impacts the market for financial advice. While we do not
directly observe the wealth of individual variable annuity investors, we exploit variation in mini-
mum purchase thresholds across variable annuities to examine whether smaller investor accounts
were differentially impacted by the fiduciary rule.
   Variable annuities have different minimum purchase thresholds that specify the minimum amount
of premium payments that an investor must invest in the product. As such, the thresholds are a way
to differentiate investors by the amount of funds to invest, as investors with lower funds to invest
may not be able to purchase variable annuities with higher minimum purchase thresholds. Variable
annuities differ widely in their minimum purchase thresholds. The median minimum threshold on
purchases across all products is $10,000 and ranges from $0 (no minimum purchase) to $1 million.
Minimum purchase thresholds also differ significantly both across insurers and across products of-
fered by the same insurer: the identity of the insurance company explains only 23% of the variation
in minimum purchase thresholds.
   We extend our baseline sales regressions (eq. 1) to examine how the sales of variable annuities
changed surrounding the proposed rule change:

 ln(Salesjkt ) = fjkt + cjkt + M inAmtjkt + M inAmtjkt × DOLt + Xjkt + µt + µk +              jkt .   (6)

Observations are at the product-by-quarter level over the period 2013-2019. The variable M inAmtjkt


                                                 24
measures the minimum purchase threshold for product j issued by insurer k at time t. The coef-
ficient of interest is  which measures how the relationship between sales and minimum account
sizes changed surrounding the DOL rule proposal.
    Table 8 displays the corresponding estimates. We find some evidence that annuities with larger
minimum purchase thresholds have lower sales. The results in column (3) indicate that a 1% in-
crease in the minimum size threshold is associated with a 7% decrease in annuity sales. Importantly,
we do not find any evidence suggesting that the relationship between annuity sales and minimum
size thresholds changed surrounding the DOL rule proposal. The results suggest that the DOL rule
proposal did not disproportionately hurt smaller investors and force them out of the market.


7     Model of Variable Annuity Distribution
In Section 6 we document the positive implications of the DOL proposal: the proposal was asso-
ciated with a decrease in high-expense variable annuity sales and a decrease in the availability
of high-expense variable annuities. In this section we develop and estimate a model of variable
annuity distribution that allows us to assess the normative implications for investors. An advan-
tage in our setting is that we directly observe the alternative equilibrium we are interested in from
the data. The objective of the model is to develop a simple demand framework that allows us to
quantify the observed effects rather than solving for a new equilibrium.


7.1   Demand Framework

We model an investor's annuity investment decision as a discrete choice problem. Each investor
wishes to invest a fixed amount of money in an annuity, and, with the aid of a broker, purchases
one of the available annuities. Our framework is similar to the demand model used in Koijen
and Yogo (2018). The key feature of our demand framework is that investors access the annuity
market through brokers such that the total demand for variable annuities is jointly determined by
the preferences of brokers and investors.


Investors:   Investors value variable annuities based on their expenses and characteristics. The
indirect utility of investor i purchasing product j is given by

                                     uij = -fj + Xj  + j + ij .                                    (7)

Without any loss in generality, we normalize investors' preferences with respect to expenses fj
to -1 such that the other preference parameters are in terms of annual return. The term Xj is a
vector of variable annuity characteristics, such as the subaccount options and available riders, as ac-
counted for in our baseline empirical analysis in Section 4, and  reflects how investors value these
characteristics. The term j captures unobserved product characteristics/demand shocks associated



                                                  25
with product j. Lastly, the term ij is an investor-specific demand shock for product j , which in-
troduces investor-specific heterogeneity in the model such that variable annuities are horizontally
differentiated.


Brokers: Each investor i accesses the market for variable annuities through a broker b. Brokers
earn commissions cj for selling annuity j and incurs a broker-annuity-specific cost bj for selling
the variable annuity such that the profit associated with selling variable annuity j is

                                                   bij = cj - bij .

    Following Robles-Garcia (2019), we assume that brokers maximize the joint surplus of investors
and brokers. The broker's indirect utility bij of selling annuity j to investor i is then a weighted
function of the investor's utility and brokerage commissions:

                                        bij =  (bij ) + (1 -  )(uij ).

The term  captures the weighting brokers place on their own financial incentives (commissions)
versus the financial incentives/preferences of investors.
    Each broker selects annuity j from the set of available annuities J that maximizes the brokers'
indirect utility:
                                                       max bij .
                                                       j J

As is standard in the demand estimation literature, we assume that the broker- and investor-specific
unobserved component of the utility function bij = -bij + (1 -  )ij scaled by  is distributed
                                1
Type-1 Extreme Value (i.e.       bij    T 1EV ). Under this assumption, the market share of annuity j
has the standard multinomial logit form:

                                                           (1- )
                                       exp     (cj )   +      (-fj     + Xj  + j )
                             sj =                                                        .                         (8)
                                                                (1- )
                                       lJ    exp    (cl )   +      (-fl    + Xl  + l )

The above share equation is the heart of our estimation strategy as described below.


7.2    Estimation and Results

Our estimation strategy follows closely that of Berry (1994). Following eq. (8), we can write the
log market share of product j at time t as

                      (1 -  )                                                        (1 -  )
ln(sjt ) =    (cjt )+         (-fjt + Xjt  + jt ) - ln               exp    (clt ) +         (-flt + Xlt  + lt )     ,
                                                                                        
                                                                lJ




                                                            26
which we can estimate in a regression framework as

  ln(sjt ) = 1 cjt +          2 fjt + Xjt             +                              µt                       +     jt , (9)
                              (1- )          (1- )                               (1- )
                          -                    
                                                          ln         exp   
                                                                            (c )+  (-flt +Xlt  +lt )              (1- )
                                                                                                                        jt
                                                                lJ          lt                                      



where we define market shares at the year-quarter level. Using the estimated linear parameters 1 ,
2 , and , we can solve for the structural parameters of interest ,, and . We include time fixed
                                                                                           (1- )
effects µt to absorb the nonlinear term ln                     lJ   exp     (clt )   +        (-flt   + Xlt  + lt )     , which
allows us to estimate the model with a simple regression. It is also worth noting that, because
we include time fixed effects, we do not need to specify the outside good or need to observe an
investors' full consideration set J .
       A common challenge in the demand estimation literature is that expenses/prices are endoge-
nous in eq. (9). If an insurance company observes its demand shock jt prior to setting product
expense ratios, then expenses will be endogenous. For example, if an insurer experiences a positive
demand shock jt it may find it optimal to charge a higher expense on its annuities. Consequently,
one might expect that the endogeneity bias would cause our OLS estimate of 2 to be biased to-
wards zero, such that our OLS estimates would suggest that investors are less sensitive to expenses
than they actually are. For the same reason, one might also expect commissions to be endogenous.
If an insurer experiences a positive demand shock jt , it may find it optimal to offer a lower com-
mission. This would cause our OLS estimates of 1 to be biased downwards, such that our OLS
estimates would suggest that brokers are less sensitive to commissions than they actually are. In
general, the expenses and commissions associated with variable annuities appear relatively sticky
in the data and are infrequently updated, which helps mitigate the endogeneity concerns.30
       Nonetheless, we address the endogeneity of expenses and commissions using instrumental vari-
ables. We construct instruments in the spirit of Berry et al. (1995) based on the product character-
istics of other variable annuities available for sale at the time an annuity was launched. Consider
variable annuity j that was introduced by insurer k in the market at time  < t. We construct the
                                                             (1)     ¯                        ¯
                                                                                 ¯ -k ] where f
set of instruments corresponding to annuity j at time t as Z     = [f -k , c
                                                                           ¯-k , X   jkt       -k
is the average variable annuity expense charged by other insurers (other than k ) at time  and
¯-k and X
c          ¯ -k are defined analogously. Following Berry et al. (1995) we also construct a set of
instruments corresponding to the average characteristics of the other variable annuities introduced
                         (2)    ¯             ¯ -jk ], where f¯
by insurer k at time , Z     = [f-jk , c
                                 jkt   ¯-jk , X                -jk is the average variable annuity
expense charged by insurer k on other annuities (other than j ) at time  and c        ¯ -jk are
                                                                             ¯-jk and X
defined analogously.31 The rationale behind the instruments is as follows. First, these instruments
satisfy the relevancy for expenses and commissions because (i) insurers are likely to initially set
  30
     The one-year auto-correlation for expenses and commissions is 0.96 and 0.99 respectively.
  31
     While we observe the set of annuities available for sale prior to 2005, we do not observe their characteristics until
the start of our sample in 2005. For those variable annuities launched prior to 2005, we construct the instrument under
the assumption that the characteristics of those annuities available for sale prior to 2005 were the same as they were
at the start of our sample in 2005. Note that insurers infrequently update their product characteristics over time. For
example, the quarterly autocorrelation in commissions and autocorrelation in expenses are both over 0.99.



                                                               27
commissions and expenses based on the characteristics of other variable annuities available at time
 and (ii) insurers infrequently change annuity expenses/commissions over time. Second, the in-
struments satisfy the exogeneity condition provided that the characteristics of the other variable
annuities available when variable annuity j was launched at time  < t are uncorrelated with fu-
ture demand shocks jt . The fact that many of the product characteristics of the variable annuities
available for sale at time  were set years prior helps further alleviate concerns about the exogene-
ity of the instrument set Z. To this end, we drop observations in the year the variable annuity was
launched to ensure that t > . In our instrumental variables specifications, we include the set of
instruments Z (1) and Z (2) as well as the quadratic term for each instrument. In each specification,
the instruments yield F-statistics in excess of 90.
       We estimate our simple demand framework using our variable annuity dataset as described in
Section 3. For estimation purposes, we define the market for annuities as total variable and fixed
indexed annuity sales at the year-quarter level. We supplement our variable annuities dataset with
data on aggregate fixed indexed annuity sales from the Insurance Information Institute. To avoid
conflating issues with the DOL rule issuance and because our primary objective is to estimate the
utility parameters of the investor, we estimate the model over three periods: the full sample, prior
to 2016, and post 2016 (inclusive of 2016).
       We parameterize the investor's utility function corresponding to eq. (7). We control for the
same set of variable annuity characteristics Xjt as in our main analysis in Section 4 which includes
the types of benefits offered, subaccount characteristics, etc. We also include insurer-by-year fixed
effects to capture investor preferences for different insurers. As of 2016, there were 317 different
fixed index annuities open for sale.32 We treat these fixed index annuities as a homogeneous
product and normalize their utility equal to zero.
       We present our estimates in Table 9. The columns correspond to different samples and estima-
tion procedures. Columns (1)-(2) correspond to the full sample, columns (3)-(4) correspond to the
pre-2016 sample, and columns (5)-(6) correspond to the post-2016 sample. We estimate the model
using OLS in the odd columns (1, 3, and 5) and estimate the model using instrumental variables
in columns (2, 4, and 6), instrumenting for commissions and expenses. We report the estimates
corresponding to the reduced-form parameters (1 , 2 , ) in the top half of Table 9 and report the
                                       1
corresponding structural parameters (,   ) below. Consistent with our prior estimates, we find that
demand for variable annuities is increasing in brokerage commissions (1 > 0) and is decreasing
in expenses (2 < 0). As expected, we find that our OLS estimates of 1 and 2 understate how
responsive sales are to expenses and commissions. Using the instrumental variables, the estimate
of 1 becomes more positive and that of 2 becomes more negative. Also consistent with our pre-
vious results, we find that demand became more sensitive to expenses after the DOL rule proposal
such that the expense-sensitivity of investors effectively doubled after the proposal (column 4 vs.
column 6).
  32
    See: https://www.dolfiduciaryrule.com/portalresource/NAFAvDOL2016-08-10ECF33JtAppendix-Pt3B.PDF
[accessed 7/30/2020]




                                                  28
    In the bottom half of Table 9 we report the corresponding structural parameters. We estimate
that prior to 2016,  = 0.31 (column 4), which implies that brokers behave as if they are willing
to trade-off a one percentage point increase in commissions, relative to the amount invested, with
a 5.60 percentage point decrease in the NPV of the variable annuity.33 These results suggest that
sales are about six-times as sensitive to brokers' own incentives relative to investors'. Our estimates
suggest that after 2016, brokers increased the weight they put on investor incentives. The results
indicate that after 2016, brokers behaved as if they were willing to trade-off a one percentage point
increase in commissions with a 2.4 percentage point decrease in investor NPV.
    These estimates reinforce our earlier findings that (i) variable annuity sales respond to both
brokers' and investors' incentives, (ii) sales are more sensitive to brokers' financial incentives rela-
tive to their clients', and (iii) following the 2016 DOL rule brokers increased the weight they put on
investor incentives. The structural estimates also allow us to quantify how investor surplus changed
as a result of the DOL proposal, which we explore in the next section.


7.3    Changes in Investor Surplus around the Proposed DOL Rule Change

We use our parameter estimates to calculate how investor surplus changed surrounding the pro-
posed DOL rule change. We calculate utility as

                                          ^jt = -fjt + Xjt 
                                          u                ^+^j,2016Q1 .                                             (10)

Because the coefficient with respect to annual expenses is normalized to -1, we can interpret esti-
mated utility in terms of risk-adjusted annual returns. A couple of features of our estimated utility
merit further discussion. First, we use the utility parameter estimates ^ in the post-2016 period to
reflect the period when brokers place increased weight on investor incentives, but our results are
robust to using estimates from the other samples. Second, we do not include the investor-specific
demand shock, ijt , in our utility formulation. Instead, we treat the investor-specific demand shock
as an error term rather than utility as is often commonly done in the literature.34 Lastly, we need to
                                                                   
calculate the unobserved component of utility, jt =               1-    ln(sjt ) - ln s0t - (cjt - c0t )  . The term
jt measures the unobservable component of the utility of product j relative to the utility of the
outside good (fixed indexed annuities). Using data on fixed indexed annuity sales, we observe that
as of 2016Q1 there were 317 fixed indexed annuities outstanding that paid an average commission
of 5.5% and had average quarterly sales of $50m. We use this average sales and commissions data
to calculate the unobserved component of utility as of 2016, and assume that the unobserved com-
ponent of utility remains constant over time. By keeping the unobserved product quality constant
  33
     In the context of our framework, brokers are willing to trade off a one percentage point increase in commissions with
   
a 1-  
        percentage point increase in annual expenses. Assuming that a variable annuity is outstanding for 20 years and a
5% discount rate, the NPV of a one percentage decrease in expenses in rates is 12.46. Consequently, our estimates suggest
                                                                                                    
that brokers are willing to trade off a one percentage point increase in commissions with a (1-      )
                                                                                                        × 12.46 percentage
point decrease in investor NPV.
  34
     This is because (a) presumably investors make some idiosyncratic mistakes when choosing annuities and (b) the
variance of the investor-specific error term is not separately identified from the investor-broker-specific error term ij .


                                                           29
over time, our welfare analysis focuses on how the observable characteristics change in response to
the DOL rule and how these changes impact investor surplus.
   Figure 9 displays how the average annuity investor's risk-adjusted return has changed over
time. Because of its arbitrary level, we normalize the risk-adjusted return in 2012 to 1.00% in the
figure. The figure shows that after the regulation was announced in early 2015, there is a sharp
increase in risk-adjusted returns. The results indicate that in the three years following the rule
issuance (2016-2018), the types of variable annuities investors purchased offered a 92bp higher
risk-adjusted return relative to the annuities purchased over the prior three years (2013-2015). In-
vestors moving towards lower-expense products accounted for roughly one-quarter of the increase
in risk-adjusted returns. As referenced previously, Figure 7b shows how the average expense paid
by variable annuity investors fell by roughly 20bps following the DOL rule change. The remain-
der of the change in risk-adjusted returns comes from investor purchasing annuities with more
desirable investment options and observable characteristics from the investor's perspective. Our
estimates suggest that a large portion of the welfare gain also comes from investors switching from
variable annuities to fixed indexed annuities, which we find that consumers prefer relative to the
average variable annuity. Over the period 2015Q1 through 2019Q1, the market share of fixed
indexed annuities almost doubled from 27% to 47%.
   One thing omitted from our analysis is that total annuity sales (fixed-indexed and variable)
declined by 5% in the years following the DOL rule. Without taking a strong stance on where these
5% of annuity funds flow to, it is difficult to calculate the overall change in investor surplus. To
address this issue, we calculate the lower bound r which indicates how much lower the risk-
adjusted returns of those 5% of investors who no longer purchase annuities would need to be such
that investors are, on average, equally well off after the rule change. Given that the risk-adjusted
return of those 95% of investors who purchased annuities after the DOL rule increased by 92bp,
                        95%×0.92pp
this implies that r =      5%         17pp. These results suggest that the DOL rule change increased
investor surplus, as long as the risk-adjusted returns of those 5% of investors who did not purchase
annuities after the rule change did not fall by more than 16pp. Even just focusing on the changes
in expenses alone, our results suggest that the DOL rule change increased investor surplus as long
as the risk-adjusted returns of those 5% of investors who did not purchase annuities after the rule
                                            95%×0.20pp
change did not fall by more than 4pp (         5%      ).
   Overall, we find that the DOL rule had relatively large effects in terms of the composition of and
total amount of annuity sales. Given that enforcement of the DOL rule was delayed and the rule was
never fully implemented, our results may reflect a lower bound on how the market would respond
to a fiduciary standard. Regardless, consistent with anecdotal evidence from annual reports, our
results indicate that the DOL rule had a substantial and persistent impact on the behavior of brokers
and insurers in annuity markets.




                                                   30
8     Conclusion
We examine how households' investments in variable annuities are driven by both their own and
brokers' incentives, and how the DOL fiduciary rule proposal changed these dynamics. Our paper
has two main sets of results. First, we find that sales are higher for variable annuities with high
broker commission rates and lower for products with high expenses, after controlling for a wide
range of variable annuity product characteristics. Moreover, we find evidence of conflicts of in-
terest where brokers are incentivized to sell higher-expense products that are plausibly worse for
investors. We also find that high expenses are positively correlated with more complaints against
associated brokers and more frequent broker misconduct, suggesting that high-expense products
are indeed ex post less desirable to investors.
     Second, we find that the DOL fiduciary rule had a large impact on broker and insurer behavior.
Following the proposal, variable annuity sales declined by 19%. The decline in annuity sales was
primarily driven by a decline in high-expense variable annuity sales. Sales of high-expense annuities
fell by 43% more than low-expense annuities. Insurers also decreased the relative availability of
high-expense products. The DOL fiduciary rule was effective in shifting the incentives of brokers
and insurers and resulted in a 10% decline in average expenses paid by investors.
     In addition to documenting how the market for variable annuities changed following the pro-
posed fiduciary rule, we develop and estimate a structural model of variable annuity demand that
allows us to quantify how the rule change impacted investor surplus. In response to the rule, we
find that brokers more than doubled the weight they put on maximizing investor returns when sell-
ing annuities. We find that the rule change increased investors' risk-adjusted returns by up to 92
bps. Even after accounting for the decline in annuity sales and under conservative assumptions, our
results suggest that investors, on average, benefited from the fiduciary rule. These results suggest
that the proposed rule change helped mitigate conflicts of interest between brokers and investors.
Given that enforcement of the rule was limited and that the rule was ultimately vacated, our esti-
mates may understate the impacts of fiduciary duty and the long term effects of the fiduciary policy
remains a topic for future research. However, the DOL proposal provides a unique opportunity to
study the effect of such a policy attempt, which can shed light on the effectiveness of related poli-
cies proposed since 2018 by various states and the Securities and Exchange Commission in 2019,
as well as future policy efforts.


References
Agarwal, S., I. Ben-David, and V. Yao (2017). Systematic mistakes in the mortgage market and lack
    of financial sophistication. Journal of Financial Economics 123(1), 42­58.

Agarwal, S., J. C. Driscoll, X. Gabaix, and D. Laibson (2009). The age of reason: Financial decisions
    over the life cycle and implications for regulation. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2009(2),
    51­117.


                                                   31
Anagol, S., S. Cole, and S. Sarkar (2017). Understanding the advice of commissions-motivated
  agents: Evidence from the indian life insurance market. Review of Economics and Statistics 99(1),
  1­15.

Bergstresser, D., J. M. Chalmers, and P. Tufano (2008). Assessing the costs and benefits of brokers
  in the mutual fund industry. The Review of Financial Studies 22(10), 4129­4156.

Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes (1995). Automobile prices in market equilibrium. Economet-
  rica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 841­890.

Berry, S. T. (1994). Estimating discrete-choice models of product differentiation. The RAND Journal
  of Economics, 242­262.

Bhattacharya, V., G. Illanes, and M. Padi (2020). Fiduciary duty and the market for financial advice.
  (25861).

Bhutta, N., A. Fuster, and A. Hizmo (2020). Paying too much? price dispersion in the us mortgage
  market.

Brown, J. R. and A. Goolsbee (2002). Does the internet make markets more competitive? evidence
  from the life insurance industry. Journal of political economy 110(3), 481­507.

Brown, J. R. and J. M. Poterba (2006). Household ownership of variable annuities. Tax Policy and
  the Economy 20, 163­191.

Campbell, J. Y. (2006). Household finance. The journal of finance 61(4), 1553­1604.

Campbell, J. Y., H. E. Jackson, B. C. Madrian, and P. Tufano (2010). The regulation of consumer
  financial products: an introductory essay with four case studies.

Campbell, J. Y., H. E. Jackson, B. C. Madrian, and P. Tufano (2011). Consumer financial protection.
  Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(1), 91­114.

Carlin, B. I. (2009). Strategic price complexity in retail financial markets. Journal of financial
  Economics 91(3), 278­287.

Carlin, B. I. and G. Manso (2011). Obfuscation, learning, and the evolution of investor sophistica-
  tion. The Review of Financial Studies 24(3), 754­785.

Célérier, C. and B. Vallée (2017). Catering to investors through security design: Headline rate and
  complexity. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(3), 1469­1508.

Chalmers, J. and J. Reuter (2012). Is conflicted investment advice better than no advice? Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Charoenwong, B., A. Kwan, and T. Umar (2019). Does regulatory jurisdiction affect the quality of
  investment-adviser regulation? American Economic Review 109(10), 3681­3712.

                                                 32
Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, and B. C. Madrian (2010). Why does the law of one price fail? an experiment
  on index mutual funds. The Review of Financial Studies 23(4), 1405­1432.

Christoffersen, S. E., R. Evans, and D. K. Musto (2013). What do consumers' fund flows maximize?
  evidence from their brokers' incentives. The Journal of Finance 68(1), 201­235.

Christoffersen, S. E. and D. K. Musto (2002). Demand curves and the pricing of money manage-
  ment. Review of Financial Studies 15(5), 1499­524.

Dimmock, S. G., W. C. Gerken, and N. P. Graham (2018). Is fraud contagious? coworker influence
  on misconduct by financial advisors. The Journal of Finance 73(3), 1417­1450.

Drexler, A., T. Plestis, R. J. Rosen, et al. (2017). How much risk do variable annuity guarantees
  pose to life insurers. Chicago Fed Letter 384.

Duarte, F. and J. S. Hastings (2012). Fettered consumers and sophisticated firms: evidence from
  mexico's privatized social security market. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Re-
  search.

Egan, M. (2019). Brokers versus retail investors: Conflicting interests and dominated products.
  The Journal of Finance 74(3), 1217­1260.

Egan, M., G. Matvos, and A. Seru (2019). The market for financial adviser misconduct. Journal of
  Political Economy 127 (1), 233­295.

Egan, M. L., G. Matvos, and A. Seru (2017). When harry fired sally: The double standard in
  punishing misconduct. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Finkelstein, A. and J. Poterba (2004). Adverse selection in insurance markets: Policyholder evi-
  dence from the uk annuity market. Journal of Political Economy 112(1), 183­208.

Foerster, S., J. T. Linnainmaa, B. T. Melzer, and A. Previtero (2017). Retail financial advice: does
  one size fit all? The Journal of Finance 72(4), 1441­1482.

Foley-Fisher, N., B. Narajabad, and S. Verani (2018). Self-fulfilling runs: Evidence from the us life
  insurance industry. Available at SSRN 2674708.

Ge, S. (2020). How do financial constraints affect product pricing? evidence from weather and life
  insurance premiums.

Gennaioli, N., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (2015). Money doctors. The Journal of Finance 70(1),
  91­114.

Guiso, L., A. Pozzi, A. Tsoy, L. Gambacorta, and P. E. Mistrulli (2018). The cost of steering in
  financial markets: Evidence from the mortgage market. Available at SSRN 2951042.



                                                   33
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2008). Trusting the stock market. the Journal of Fi-
  nance 63(6), 2557­2600.

Gurun, U., N. Stoffman, and S. E. Yonker (2019). Unlocking clients. Kelley School of Business
  Research Paper (18-29).

Gurun, U. G., G. Matvos, and A. Seru (2016). Advertising expensive mortgages. The Journal of
  Finance 71(5), 2371­2416.

Gurun, U. G., N. Stoffman, and S. E. Yonker (2018). Trust busting: The effect of fraud on investor
  behavior. The Review of Financial Studies 31(4), 1341­1376.

Hastings, J., A. Hortaçsu, and C. Syverson (2017). Sales force and competition in financial product
  markets: the case of mexico's social security privatization. Econometrica 85(6), 1723­1761.

Hortaçsu, A. and C. Syverson (2004). Product differentiation, search costs, and competition in
  the mutual fund industry: A case study of S&P 500 index funds. The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 119(2), 403­456.

Inderst, R. and M. Ottaviani (2012a). Financial advice. Journal of Economic Literature 50(2),
  494­512.

Inderst, R. and M. Ottaviani (2012b). How (not) to pay for advice: A framework for consumer
  financial protection. Journal of Financial Economics 105(2), 393­411.

Koijen, R. and M. Yogo (2018). The fragility of market risk insurance.

Koijen, R. S. and M. Yogo (2016). Shadow insurance. Econometrica 84, 1265­1287.

Qureshi, H. and J. S. Sokobin (2015). Do investors have valuable information about brokers?
  FINRA Office of the Chief Economist Working Paper.

Robles-Garcia, C. (2019). Competition and incentives in mortgage markets: The role of brokers.

Roussanov, N., H. Ruan, and Y. Wei (2018). Marketing mutual funds. Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Sen, I. (2019). Regulatory limits to risk management. Working Paper.

Woodward, S. E. and R. E. Hall (2012). Diagnosing consumer confusion and sub-optimal shopping
  effort: Theory and mortgage-market evidence. American Economic Review 102(7), 3249­76.




                                                34
Figures and Tables

                                     Figure 1: Variable Annuity Assets
                                        (a) Distribution of Variable Assets




            (b) Total Variable Annuity Assets                            (c) Variable Annuity Sales




Note: Figure 1a displays the distribution of variable annuity assets. Observations are at the variable
annuity by quarter level over the period 2005-2019.
Figure 1b displays a scatter plot of total variable annuity assets over the period 2005-2019.
Figure 1c displays a scatter plot of quarterly variable annuity sales over the period 2005-2019.




                                                       35
                          Figure 2: Fiduciary-Duty-Related Complaints




Note: Figure 2 displays the share of broker customer complaints related to the broker allegedly
violating his/her fiduciary duty. The figure is constructed using data on the universe of investor
complaints in the United States from FINRA's BrokerCheck website.




                                               36
                            Figure 3: Variable Annuity Expense Ratios
                            (a) Distribution of Variable Annuity Expense Ratios




                                       (b) Sales vs. Expense Ratios




Note: Figure 3a displays the distribution of variable annuity expense ratios. Observations are at
the variable annuity by quarter level over the period 2005-2019.
Figure 3b displays a binned scatter plot of quarterly variable annuity sales versus the average
variable annuity expense ratios, controlling for commission rates. Observations are at the variable
annuity by quarter level over the period 2005-2019.




                                                   37
                            Figure 4: Variable Annuity Commissions
                            (a) Distribution of Variable Annuity Commissions




                                       (b) Sales vs. Commissions




Note: Figure 4a displays the distribution of variable annuity commissions. Observations are at the
variable annuity by quarter level over the period 2005-2019.
Figure 4b displays a binned scatter plot of quarterly variable annuity sales versus the associated
variable annuity commission, controlling for product expense ratios. Observations are at the vari-
able annuity by quarter level over the period 2005-2019.




                                                  38
                     Figure 5: Annuity Sales Around the DOL Fiduciary Rule
                                       (a) Variable Annuity Sales




                          (b) Variable Annuity and Fixed Indexed Annuity Sales




Note: Figure 5a displays the time series of quarterly sales of variable annuities around the DOL
fiduciary rule. Figure 5b displays the time series of quarterly sales of variable and fixed index
annuities around the DOL fiduciary rule.




                                                  39
           Figure 6: Sales around DOL Fiduciary Rule by High vs. Low Expense Ratios




Note: Figure 6 displays the time series of quarterly variable annuity sales around the DOL fiduciary
rule by expense ratios. High-expense variable annuities are defined as those with expense ratios
that are in the top quartile of all variable annuities offered as of 2013Q1. Low-expense variable
annuities are defined as those with expense ratios that are in the bottom quartile of all variable
annuities offered as of 2013Q1.




                                                40
                        Figure 7: Average Expense Ratios around DOL
                        (a) Equal-Weighted Average Expense Ratios around DOL




                        (b) Sales-Weighted Average Expense Ratios around DOL




Note: Figure 7a displays the time series of the equal-weighted average expense ratios of open
variable annuity products around the DOL fiduciary rule. Figure 7b displays the sales-weighted
average expense ratios.




                                                41
                   Figure 8: Product Market Composition Change around DOL
                               (a) Changes in Number of Products Offered




                               (b) Changes in Sales Volumes around DOL




Note: Figures 8a and 8b plot the changes in the number of products available for sale and the
market shares in the time period before (2013-2015) and after (2016-2019) the issuance of the
DOL fiduciary rule by commission rates and expense ratios. Number of products available for
sale is defined as the total number of variable annuity products available for sale in each of the
nine equally-spaced regions of the product space, where the expense ratio and commission rate
cutoffs for each region are based on the 2013-2015 (pre-DOL) product space distribution, so the
plot presents changes in each product space post-DOL relative to the pre-DOL levels of the same
product space. Changes are measured in percentages relative to the pre-DOL levels. Increases are
represented in red, decreases are represented in blue, and no change is represented in white.



                                                  42
       Figure 9: Changes in Investor Risk-Adjusted Returns Surrounding the DOL Proposal




Note: Figure 9 displays how average annuity investor surplus, measured in terms of risk-adjusted
returns, changed surrounding the Department of Labor fiduciary rule. We calculate the average
annuity investor surplus among those investors who purchased annuities.




                                              43
                                  Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                             N      Mean St.Dev.    Min      Max
                                            (1)      (2)   (3)      (4)      (5)

            Quarter Sales (Millions)       15,423    91.3   270 0.00015 4,011
            Policy Assets (Millions)       15,423    2,433 16,915   0   388,411
            Captive Sales (Millions)       15,423    29.2   188     0    4,011
            Non-Captive Sales (Millions)   15,423    49.3   161     0    3,005
            Expense Ratios                 15,423    2.24   0.43   0.25   4.20
            Num. Subaccounts               15,423    66.1   41.0    1     460
            Num. Objectives                15,423    12.8   6.81     1     34
            Average Alpha                  15,423   -0.094 0.20   -1.52   1.23
            Commissions                    15,423    6.09   2.33    0      16

Note: Table 1 displays the summary statistics corresponding to the variable annuity database. Ob-
servations are at the variable annuity by quarter level over the period 2005Q1-2019Q2. Expense
Ratios, Average Alpha, and Commissions are measured in percentage points. Expense Ratios in-
clude both product-level expenses (M&E, administrative, and distribution charges) and average
subaccount expenses. Commissions are upfront commission rates as discussed in Section 2.1. Aver-
age Alpha is the average net-of-expense CAPM alpha across subaccounts within a variable annuity
product in the previous five years.




                                               44
                                 Table 2: Variable Annuities Sales

   Dependent Variable                                      ln(Sales)
                                (1)       (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)

   Expense Ratios            -0.30***   -0.31*** -0.37***        -0.15*       -0.14      -0.21*
                              (0.094)    (0.096)    (0.10)      (0.087)     (0.092)      (0.12)
   Commissions               0.044**    0.044** 0.043**        0.064***    0.073***   0.061***
                              (0.019)    (0.019) (0.021)        (0.018)     (0.019)     (0.023)
   Num. Subaccounts                              0.0036***    0.0056***   0.0063***   0.0078***
                                                 (0.00098)    (0.00096)    (0.0012)    (0.0016)
   Num. Objectives                                0.013***    0.0079**      0.0056    0.016***
                                                  (0.0046)     (0.0038)    (0.0043)    (0.0051)
   Long Lock-Up                                    0.32***      0.33***     0.32***     0.34***
                                                   (0.100)      (0.089)     (0.096)      (0.13)
   Average Alpha                                   0.57**       0.94***     1.00***     0.59**
                                                    (0.23)       (0.18)      (0.24)      (0.29)
   Roll-Up Rate                                                                         0.22***
                                                                                        (0.050)

    Observations              16,683 16,683        15,423       15,423    14,967       6,232
    R-squared                  0.015      0.036     0.107        0.363     0.470       0.414
    Year-Quarter FEs                        X          X           X                     X
    Other Controls                                     X           X          X          X
    Insurer FEs                                                    X                     X
    Insurer-Year-Quarter FEs                                                  X
Note: Table 2 displays the results corresponding to a linear regression model (eq. 1). Observations
are at the variable annuity by quarter level. The dependent variable is log variable annuity sales.
The independent variables Expense Ratios, Commissions, Average Alpha, and Roll-Up Rate are
measured in percentage points. Other Controls include the availabilities of benefits or riders as
listed in Table A2 in the Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at the variable annuity level and
are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                45
                     Table 3: Variable Annuities Sales by Distribution Channel

     Dependent Variable            Non-Captive Broker Sales        Captive Broker Sales
                                   (1)     (2)        (3)         (4)      (5)       (6)

     Expense Ratios ()             -0.20    -0.22    -0.19  -1.19*** -1.29*** -0.68*
                                  (0.23) (0.25)     (0.21)   (0.39)    (0.39)  (0.38)
     Commissions ( )             0.076* 0.11**     0.14***    0.046   0.0034    0.059
                                 (0.045) (0.046) (0.044) (0.086) (0.093) (0.095)
     Num. Subaccounts                    0.011*** 0.0091***           -0.0074 0.018***
                                         (0.0027) (0.0024)           (0.0060) (0.0056)
     Num. Objectives                     0.036*** 0.018*              -0.0100 -0.0076
                                          (0.011) (0.0095)            (0.019) (0.014)
     Average Alpha                         1.02*   1.93***             2.22** 2.96***
                                           (0.57)   (0.47)             (0.93)  (0.78)
     Long Lock-Up                         0.56**   0.63***            1.51*** 0.87***
                                           (0.26)   (0.24)             (0.41)  (0.33)

      Observations                13,758 12,700        12,699      4,984   4,571       4,571
      R-squared                    0.027    0.130       0.378      0.052   0.150       0.547
      Year-Quarter FEs               X        X           X          X        X          X
      Other Controls                          X           X                   X          X
      Insurer FEs                                         X                              X
      Coefficient Tests (p-value)
         Captive - Broker = 0                                       0.03    0.02        0.23
          Captive -  Broker = 0                                     0.76    0.33        0.44
Note: Table 3 displays the results corresponding to a linear regression model (eq. 1). Observations
are at the variable annuity by quarter level. The dependent variable is log variable annuity sales
of non-captive brokers in columns (1)-(3) and log variable annuity sales of captive brokers in
column (4)-(6). The independent variables Expense Ratios and Commissions are measured in
percentage points. We test whether captive and non-captive broker sales have the same relationship
with expense ratios and commissions and report the corresponding p-values. When testing the
coefficients, we compare the columns with the same sets of controls (i.e. columns (1) vs (4), (2)
vs (5), and (3) vs (6)). Standard errors are clustered at the variable annuity level and are in
parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                46
                       Table 4: Variable Annuities Sales across Share Classes

                              Dependent Variable         ln(Sales)
                                                       (1)       (2)

                              Expense Ratios       -1.42*** -1.42***
                                                     (0.12)   (0.12)
                              Commissions          0.057*** 0.060***
                                                    (0.018) (0.018)
                              Long Lock-Up                     0.12
                                                             (0.085)

                             Observations            681         681
                             R-squared              0.751       0.752
Note: Table 4 displays the results corresponding to a linear regression model (eq. 1) across share
classes of the same product set. The dependent variable is the log quarterly sales of each share
class. Observations are at the share class by quarter level. A product set is defined as the set of all
share classes of the same product. The independent variables Expense Ratios and Commissions are
measured in percentage points. The variable Long Lock-Up is a dummy variable indicating that the
product has an above the median lock-up period. Standard errors are clustered at the product set
level and are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                  47
            Table 5: Broker Incentives: Commissions vs. Other Annuity Characteristics

                   Dependent Variable                   Commissions
                                           (1)        (2)     (3)        (4)

                   Expense Ratios   1.83*** 1.84*** 1.27***     0.65**
                                     (0.27) (0.27) (0.27)       (0.28)
                   Num. Subaccounts                  -0.0026 -0.0077***
                                                    (0.0028) (0.0022)
                   Num. Objectives                   -0.0086   -0.0026
                                                    (0.0094) (0.0079)
                   Long Lock-Up                      0.75*** 0.62***
                                                      (0.20)    (0.18)
                   Average Alpha                       -0.62    -0.61*
                                                      (0.49)    (0.37)
                   Constant         2.02***
                                     (0.63)

                    Observations          16,683 16,683 15,423           15,423
                    R-squared              0.116 0.119        0.194      0.497
                    Year-Quarter FEs                  X         X           X
                    Other Controls                              X           X
                    Insurer FEs                                             X
Note: Table 5 displays the results corresponding to a linear regression model (eq. 3). Observations
are at the variable annuity by quarter level. The dependent variable is the commission rate paid to
the broker and is measured in percentage points. The independent variables Expense Ratios and
Average Alpha are measured in percentage points. The variable Long Lock-Up is a dummy variable
indicating that the product has an above the median lock-up period. Other Controls include the
availabilities of benefits or riders. Standard errors are clustered at the variable annuity level and
are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                 48
                    Table 6: Broker Misconduct and VA Product Expense Ratios

      Dependent Variable Complaint Damages Granted Misconduct Misconduct per year
                           (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)

      Expense Ratios        0.23***      5,887.77***       1.64***         0.24***
                             (0.07)       (1,829.05)        (0.54)          (0.06)
      Firm Size             0.00**          0.63**          0.00*          0.00***
                             (0.00)         (0.31)          (0.00)          (0.00)
      Insurer AUM             0.05           2.41            -0.14           -0.03
                             (0.07)       (1,773.79)        (0.65)          (0.07)

       Observations            353              353            353             353
       R-squared               0.20            0.10            0.11           0.20
       Dep. Variable Mean      0.19            3696            5.35           0.38
Note: Tables 6 displays the results corresponding to a linear regression model (eq. 4). Obser-
vations are at the brokerage firm by year level. The independent variable Expense Ratios is the
sales-weighted average expense ratios of all products a brokerage firm sells in a given year. The
dependent variables are: the total number of variable annuity-related complaints against the firm
each year in column (1); the pecuniary damages granted to complainants each year in column
(2); the fraction of broker agents who have any prior misconduct disclosures in column (3); the
fraction of broker agents who have had a misconduct disclosure in the given year in column (4).
All dependent variables are divided by the number of broker agents the brokerage firm employs in
the given year, per 100 brokers. Firm Size is the number of broker agents employed by the insurer
in a given year. Insurer AUM is the log total variable annuity assets under management by the in-
surance company in a given year. Dep. Variable Mean reports the mean of each dependent variable
for comparison. Standard errors are clustered at the brokerage level and are in parentheses. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                               49
                   Table 7: Variable Annuities Sales around DOL Fiduciary Rule

  Dependent Variable                                    ln(Sales)
                            (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)       (6)        (7)

  Expense Ratios         -0.049   -0.16   -0.26*  -0.31**            -0.036      -0.13      -0.14
                         (0.15)  (0.13)   (0.15)   (0.13)            (0.15)     (0.13)     (0.14)
  Expense Ratios × DOL -0.39*** -0.31***                            -0.41**   -0.36***    -0.32**
                         (0.15)  (0.11)                              (0.17)     (0.12)     (0.13)
  Commissions          0.066** 0.098*** 0.076*** 0.099***           0.060**   0.086***   0.090***
                        (0.027) (0.025) (0.028) (0.025)             (0.027)    (0.024)    (0.025)
  Commissions × DOL                       -0.023 -0.0027              0.012     0.026      0.019
                                         (0.021) (0.019)            (0.023)    (0.020)    (0.022)

   Observations              5,835     5,834      5,835     5,834     5,835    5,834     5,834
   R-squared                 0.122     0.495      0.117     0.491     0.122    0.495     0.499
   Year-Quarter FEs            X         X          X         X         X        X         X
   Other Controls              X         X          X         X         X        X         X
   Insurer FEs                           X                    X                  X         X
Note: Table 7 displays the results corresponding to a linear regression model (eq. 5). Observations
are at the variable annuity by quarter level over the period 2013-2019. The dependent variable is
the log quarterly sales of each variable annuity. DOL is a dummy variable indicating that the year
is equal to or greater than 2016 and corresponds to the issuance of the DOL fiduciary rule. Other
Controls include Number of Subaccounts, Number of Investment Objectives, Average Alpha, Long
Lock-Up, and the availabilities of each benefit or rider. Other Controls in column (7) also include
the interaction terms of the availabilities of each benefit or rider with DOL. Standard errors are
clustered at the variable annuity level and are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                50
       Table 8: Variable Annuities Sales around DOL Rule by Minimum Purchase Threshold

                      Dependent Variable                  ln(Sales)
                                                   (1)      (2)       (3)

                      Expense Ratios        -0.31**         -0.16    -0.32**
                                             (0.15)        (0.16)     (0.13)
                      Commissions           0.052*        0.063**   0.087***
                                            (0.028)       (0.030)    (0.027)
                      ln(Min. Amount)        -0.071        -0.067     -0.065
                                            (0.049)       (0.054)    (0.040)
                      ln(Min. Amount) × DOL 0.043          0.026     0.0017
                                            (0.035)       (0.035)    (0.030)

                       Observations                 5,825 5,506       5,505
                       R-squared                    0.038 0.112       0.486
                       Year-Quarter FEs               X        X        X
                       Other Controls                          X        X
                       Insurer FEs                                      X
Note: Table 8 displays the results corresponding to a linear regression model (eq. 6). Observations
are at the variable annuity by quarter level over the period 2013-2019. The dependent variable
is log variable annuity sales. The independent variables Expense Ratios and Commissions are
measured in percentage points. The independent variable ln(Min. Amount) is the natural log of
the minimum amount of dollars required to invest in a variable annuity. DOL is a dummy variable
indicating that the year is equal to or greater than 2016 and corresponds to the issuance of the DOL
fiduciary rule. Other Controls include Number of Subaccounts, Number of Investment Objectives,
Average Alpha, Long Lock-Up, and the availabilities of each benefit or rider. Standard errors are
clustered at the variable annuity level and are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                51
                                   Table 9: Demand Estimates

    Dependent Variable                                     ln(Sales)
                                   (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)

    Reduced Form Parameters:
     Commissions (1 )        0.072*** 0.091*** 0.066*** 0.093*** 0.10***               0.082
                              (0.019) (0.027) (0.020) (0.029) (0.036)                 (0.052)
     Expense Ratios (2 )       -0.13   -0.22*   -0.056   -0.21*  -0.44**               -0.42*
                              (0.093) (0.12) (0.097) (0.12)       (0.19)               (0.25)

    Other Controls                  X         X          X        X        X         X
    Year-Quarter-Insurer FE         X         X          X        X        X         X
    IV                                        X                   X                  X
    F-Stat (IV)                            178.71              144.97              90.16
    Sample                         Full      Full    Pre 2016 Pre 2016 Post 2016 Post 2016
    Observations                 14,637    10,124     11,781    8,060    2,856     2,064
    R-squared                     0.474     0.502      0.477    0.510    0.494     0.506

    Structural Parameters:
                                  0.36       0.29      0.54      0.31       0.19       0.16
     1/                           0.20       0.31      0.12      0.30       0.54       0.50

Note: Table 9 displays the results corresponding to a linear regression model (eq. 9). Observations
are at the variable annuity by quarter level. The dependent variable is log variable annuity sales.
Columns (1)-(2) are estimated using the full sample, columns (3)-(4) are estimated using the pre-
2016 sample, and columns (5)-(6) are estimated using the post-2016 sample (including 2016).
We estimate the model using OLS in the odd columns (1, 3, and 5) and estimate the model using
instrumental variables in columns (2, 4, and 6), instrumenting for commissions and expense ratios.
We construct instruments in the spirit of Berry et al. (1995) based on the product characteristics
of other variable annuities available for sale at the time an annuity was launched as described in
Section 7.2. Other Controls include Number of Subaccounts, Number of Investment Objectives,
Average Alpha, Long Lock-Up, and the availabilities of each benefit or rider. Standard errors are
clustered at the variable annuity level and are in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                52
A   Additional Figures and Tables

                          Table A1: Subaccount Investment Objectives

                                                          Frequency

                                                    Growth       97%
                                       Growth and Income         95%
                                             Money Market        91%
                                              Foreign Stock      91%
                                       CorpBond - General        86%
                                    CorpBond - High Yield        86%
                              Money Market - Government          83%
                                                  Balanced       81%
                                               World Stock       78%
                               Government Bond - General         76%
                                           Small Company         73%
                                                    Income       70%
                                     Specialty - Real Estate     66%
                              Diversified Emerging Market        65%
                                           Asset Allocation      64%
                                        Aggressive Growth        59%
                                          Worldwide Bond         58%
                                             Equity Income       54%
                                                World Bond       53%
                                        Specialty - Utilities    51%
Note: Table A1 displays the top 20 most common investment objectives of subaccounts as defined
by Morningstar. Frequency denotes the percentage of all variable annuity contracts that have at
least one subaccount with the corresponding investment objective available for investment. Obser-
vations are at the variable annuity by quarter over the period 2005-2019.




                                               53
                         Table A2: Variable Annuity Benefits Availability

                         Benefit                                   Frequency

                         Return of Premium Death Benefit            85%
                         Highest Anniversity Value Death Benefit    49%
                         GLWB                                       31%
                         GMWB                                       27%
                         GMAB                                       21%
                         Purchase Payment Credit                    15%
                         Account Value Only Death Benefit           14%
                         GMIB                                       10%
                         Hybrid Income Guarantee                     7%

Note: Table A2 displays the benefit options available for purchase for each product. Frequency
denotes the percentage of all variable annuity contracts that have at least one rider with the given
benefit option available. Observations are at the variable annuity by quarter over the period 2005-
2019.




                                                54
   Table A3: Variable Annuities Sales around DOL Fiduciary Rule (excluding 2015Q1-2016Q1)

  Dependent Variable                                     ln(Sales)
                             (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)        (7)

  Expense Ratios        -0.035   -0.15    -0.29* -0.36***             -0.019      -0.11      -0.14
                        (0.16) (0.14)     (0.16)  (0.14)              (0.16)     (0.14)     (0.15)
  Expense Ratios × DOL -0.42** -0.35***                              -0.45**   -0.41***    -0.36**
                        (0.16) (0.12)                                 (0.19)     (0.14)     (0.17)
  Commissions          0.064** 0.093*** 0.078*** 0.095***            0.057**   0.077***   0.082***
                       (0.028) (0.026) (0.030) (0.027)               (0.028)    (0.026)    (0.026)
  Commissions × DOL                       -0.024 -0.0033               0.012     0.029      0.024
                                         (0.024) (0.023)             (0.026)    (0.024)    (0.027)

   Observations             4,562     4,561      4,562     4,561     4,562    4,561      4,561
   R-squared                0.129     0.492      0.124     0.488     0.129    0.492      0.499
   Year-Quarter FEs           X         X          X         X         X        X           X
   Other Controls             X         X          X         X                  X           X
   Insurer FEs                          X                    X                  X           X
Note: Table A3 displays the results corresponding to a linear regression model (eq. 5). Observa-
tions are at the variable annuity by quarter level over the period 2013-2019, excluding the period
between the announcement of the rule (February 2015) and the formal issuance of the rule (April
2016), 2015Q1-2016Q1. The dependent variable is the log quarterly sales of each variable annuity.
DOL is a dummy variable indicating that the year is equal to or greater than 2016 and corresponds
to the issuance of the DOL fiduciary rule. Other Controls include Number of Subaccounts, Number
of Investment Objectives, Average Alpha, Long Lock-Up, and the availabilities of each benefit or
rider. Other Controls in column (7) also include the interaction terms of the availabilities of each
benefit or rider with DOL. Standard errors are clustered at the variable annuity level and are in
parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                55
B     VA Dataset Construction
In this appendix section, we describe the construction process of merging the Morningstar Principia
and Annuity Intelligence datasets.


B.1     Dataset Overview

We use two datasets to extract information on variable annuity characteristics. The first one is
Morningstar Principia, in the format of historical CD-ROM series, for each quarter from 2005
to 2012. The second dataset is Morningstar Annuity Intelligence ("AnnuityIntel"), a web-based
database offering the latest information on variable annuity products, which we extracted between
October and November 2019. Both datasets contain information including the insurance company
underwriting the product, expenses, and fees, sales, and asset holdings, as well as benefit options
available (e.g. GLWB). For each policy, the datasets also provide characteristics of the subaccounts
towards which the variable annuity policyholders can allocate their investments. Data on the sub-
accounts include names of the funds, their investment objectives, and fees. Each observation in
the final dataset is a product-quarter observation, merged between the Principia dataset and the
AnnuityIntel dataset.


B.2     Merging Process

The merging process takes two steps. In the first step, we match variable annuities by name across
the two datasets. In the second step, we construct the panel of product characteristics and sales
information that we use in our analysis across the two datasets.


B.2.1    Matching Contracts by Name

We first match the variable annuities by name between Principia and AnnuityIntel. There are 2077
unique variable annuities in the Morningstar Principia dataset and 2356 in AnnuityIntel. Not all
products are offered continuously throughout the coverage periods of Principia and AnnuityIntel, as
there are products that are in Principia and discontinued before October 2019, when we extracted
the AnnuityIntel data. Likewise, some products in AnnuityIntel were opened for sale after 2013
and thus not in Principia. Furthermore, some products have different names between Principia and
AnnuityIntel, and some products also have had name changes within each respective dataset. To
address these issues, we matched the products by a hierarchical order of criteria as follows: (1)
contract name, (2) insurance company, (3) RMSE of total net assets, and (4) open dates. We are
able to match 1802 of the 2077 contracts (86.7%) in Principia with a corresponding contract in
AnnuityIntel, and 2,077 out of the 2,356 contracts (88.2%) in AnnuityIntel with a corresponding
contract in Principia.




                                                56
B.2.2   Constructing Panel of Product Characteristics

We then construct the characteristics and sales information of each product in each quarter as
follows. First, for characteristics for which the Principia dataset recorded a value for the product-
quarter, we took the Principia value as the value for that product-quarter. Then, we filled in quarters
outside the Principia coverage range with historical product characteristics as follows. For prod-
uct expenses, such as M&E fees and administrative fees, we manually collected information from
Annuity Intelligence on the historical levels of these fees and a history of all their changes, where
available. For subaccount expenses, we collect data on each individual subaccount from Annuity
Intelligence and match each subaccount to the variable annuity products the subaccount is an in-
vestment option for. Since the availability of a subaccount as an investment option for each variable
annuity product varies over time, we also collect data from Morningstar Direct on the time periods
over which each subaccount was offered as an investment option for each variable annuity product.
We then construct a panel of subaccount characteristics, including the number of subaccounts open
for investment and the expense ratios of each subaccount, and match it to the set of variable annu-
ity products in our dataset. Finally, we compute the total expense ratio as the sum of the product
expenses and average subaccount expenses for each variable annuity product. For sales data, we
used the AnnuityIntel data since AnnuityIntel provided a continuous time series of sales data for
all products from 2005 to 2019.
   AnnuityIntel provides time-varying data on the guarantee options (e.g. GLWB) offered by each
product. However, we only observe the most recent roll-up rates associated with the guarantee
options currently open (i.e. available for investors to choose). In column (6) of Table 2, where we
control for the roll-up rates, we assume that for the guarantee options that are currently open, the
roll-up rates have stayed the same. For the guarantee options that are closed, for which we do not
have data on roll-up rates for, the roll-up rates are set as missing.




                                                  57
