                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




HOW MUCH TO SAVE? DECISION COSTS AND RETIREMENT PLAN PARTICIPATION

                                          Jacob Goldin
                                       Tatiana Homonoff
                                      Richard W. Patterson
                                     William L. Skimmyhorn

                                       Working Paper 27575
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27575


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2020




All opinions expressed in this manuscript are those of the authors and do not represent the
opinions of the United States Military Academy, Department of Defense, the United States Army,
or the General Services Administration. For helpful comments, we thank John Beshears, James
Choi, Ngoc Dao, Gopi Goda, Sarah Kotb, Jonathan Morduch, Daniel Reck, Alex Rees-Jones, and
Will Tucker-Ray, as well as seminar and conference participants. We gratefully acknowledge the
implementation support from the White House's Social Behavioral Sciences Team and the
Defense Financing and Accounting Services. This RCT was registered in the American Economic
Association Registry for randomized control trials under trial number 4588. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27575.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jacob Goldin, Tatiana Homonoff, Richard W. Patterson, and William L. Skimmyhorn.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Much to Save? Decision Costs and Retirement Plan Participation
Jacob Goldin, Tatiana Homonoff, Richard W. Patterson, and William L. Skimmyhorn
NBER Working Paper No. 27575
July 2020
JEL No. D14,G41

                                           ABSTRACT

Deciding how much to save for retirement can be complicated. Drawing on a field experiment
conducted with the Department of Defense, we study whether such complexity depresses
participation in an employer-sponsored retirement saving plan. We find that simplifying one
dimension of the enrollment decision, by highlighting a potential rate at which non-participants
might contribute, increases participation in the plan. Similar communications that did not include
a highlighted rate yield smaller effects. The results highlight how reducing complexity on the
intensive margin of a decision (how much to contribute) can affect extensive margin behavior
(whether to contribute at all) in a setting of policy interest.

Jacob Goldin                                      Richard W. Patterson
Stanford Law School                               United States Military Academy
559 Nathan Abbott Way                             B107 Lincoln Hall
Stanford, CA 94305                                West Point, NY 10996
and NBER                                          richard.patterson@westpoint.edu
jsgoldin@law.stanford.edu
                                                  William L. Skimmyhorn
Tatiana Homonoff                                  Mason School of Business
New York University                               The College of William & Mary
Robert F. Wagner School of Public Service         101 Ukrop Way
295 Lafayette Street, 2nd Floor                   Williamsburg, VA 23187
New York, NY 10012                                bill.skimmyhorn@mason.wm.edu
and NBER
tatiana.homonoff@nyu.edu




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/4588
I. Introduction

Deciding how much to save for retirement is a complicated task. For the approximately
two-thirds of Americans whose employer offers a retirement savings plan like a 401(k) or
403(b), employees must decide not only whether to participate in the plan, but also how
much to save and in which plan fund to invest ­ decisions that are frequently complicated
by uncertainty over future expenses, the timing of retirement, and even the nature of one's
own risk or time preferences. Especially for employees who lack financial sophistication, the
effort needed to resolve these uncertainties is often significant.
   In this paper, we investigate whether the complexity of the retirement savings decision
depresses participation in retirement savings plans. One might not expect that uncertainty
over whether one's optimal contribution rate is, say, 3% versus 4% would cause one to con-
tribute 0% (i.e., to end up not participating). However, if enrolling in a plan requires deciding
how much to contribute, and if making that decision requires incurring costly mental effort
or other decision costs, individuals may choose not to participate altogether. Understanding
how such complexity shapes retirement saving decisions sheds light on existing barriers to
retirement saving as well as on the potential for low-cost interventions to advance the policy
goal of higher saving rates.
   To study whether decision complexity affects whether employees contribute to their
employer-sponsored retirement plans, we analyze the results of a field experiment conducted
by the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD). The experiment involved the roughly 300,000
active duty U.S. Army servicemembers who were not enrolled in the Thrift Savings Plan
(TSP), the defined contribution portion of the retirement plan the U.S. government offers
to its employees. This sample population is young, less educated (most have only a high
school degree), racially diverse, and is a group for whom low saving rates are a source of
significant policy concern (e.g., Maldon Jr et al. (2015); DOD (2019)). The DOD randomly
assigned a subset of these individuals to receive a one-time email that provided information
about how to enroll in the TSP and encouraged them to join. For some individuals, the

                                               2
email also attempted to reduce the complexity of the savings decision by highlighting a ran-
dom specific rate (i.e., 1%, 2%, ...8%) at which the individual could choose to contribute.
Highlighting a specific contribution rate might simplify the savings decision if it narrows the
range of contribution rates one must consider when deciding whether and how much to save.
A final group of individuals were randomly assigned to a control group that did not receive
any email. To study the effect of the intervention on behavior, we link experimental group
assignment to administrative data on TSP contributions during the subsequent two years.
   Our results provide some of the first causal evidence that the complexity of the retire-
ment savings decision contributes to non-participation in employer-sponsored savings plans.
In particular, our experimental design enables us to distinguish the effects of providing spe-
cific contribution rates from general encouragement to contribute. Relative to the control
group, the increase in participation among individuals who received an email that high-
lighted a specific contribution rate was significantly larger than the increase among those
who received the baseline email with no specific rate. In particular, the baseline treatment
increased participation by 0.4 percentage points whereas the specific rate treatment increased
participation by 0.7 percentage points in the quarter following the intervention, on a base
of 2.7 percentage points. The difference in the estimated effects between the two types of
emails suggests that at least part of the overall observed effect stems from highlighting a spe-
cific contribution rate rather than simply encouraging enrollment. In addition, the observed
differences in participation rates across the treatment and control groups largely persist over
the two-year window that we study, suggesting the experimental treatment did not simply
speed up the timing of enrollment, but rather encouraged new enrollees who would otherwise
not have participated (at least over the time horizon we observe). Although these effects
are modest in magnitude, it is important to note that the baseline participation rate in our
control group was quite low; by construction, our sample population had not enrolled in TSP
despite being eligible to do so for an average of six years. In percent terms: the baseline and
specific rate treatment groups led to participation increases of 15% and 26%, respectively.


                                               3
Finally, our estimates reflect an intent-to-treat ­ if only a small fraction of individuals actu-
ally read our communications (as prior literature suggests may be the case), our estimates
imply a large behavioral change among that group.
   We present two additional findings that are consistent with our interpretation that the
intervention increased TSP participation by reducing the complexity of the savings decision.
First, if highlighting a specific contribution rate induced certain individuals to enroll by
reducing the complexity of the savings decision (as we hypothesize), then the amount these
individuals contribute should be concentrated at the highlighted rate. Consistent with this
hypothesis, we find that individuals assigned to a specific rate treatment were not only more
likely to contribute, they were more likely to contribute at exactly the highlighted rate.
Second, although enrolling in the TSP requires individuals to actively select their desired
contribution rate, they need not actively select a fund allocation; rather, enrollees who do not
select a fund allocation are defaulted into a government securities investment fund. If those
individuals who enroll only after receiving a specific rate treatment were actively selecting a
non-default fund allocation, it might suggest that decision complexity was not the primary
barrier to their participation. However, we find that the effect of the specific rate treatments
on contributions is limited to this default fund, consistent with a "path of least resistance"
explanation for retirement savings decisions proposed in Choi et al. (2006).
   We make several contributions. First, our results demonstrate the potential of very
low-cost interventions to improve the performance of efforts designed to increase retirement
savings. The small wording changes we study ­ adding a sentence to an email that highlights
a specific contribution rate ­ entails minimal costs but yields large percentage increases
in retirement plan participation from a population that has consistently been resistant to
such efforts. To the extent that increased TSP participation by this population is welfare-
enhancing, as many policy-makers have expressed their belief to be, including such language
constitutes a practical and cost-effective method for increasing plan enrollment ­ one that
is easily implemented by plan administrators in both the public and private sectors.


                                               4
   Second, we contribute to a growing literature that investigates how the complexity of
retirement saving decisions shapes behavior. For example, Sethi-Iyengar, Huberman and
Jiang (2004) observe a negative correlation between the quantity of fund choices offered by
employer-sponsored retirement plans and plan participation by employees, consistent with
a model of "choice overload." In a similar spirit, Choi, Laibson and Madrian (2009) and
Beshears et al. (2013) find that providing employees with an expedited process for enrolling
in their employer's 401(k) plan at a single, employer-specified contribution rate increases
plan participation. Like the intervention we study, this "quick enrollment" process was
designed to reduce the complexity of the enrollment decision by collapsing a complicated,
multi-dimensional choice (e.g., how much to save, which investment plan to select) to a
binary one (whether or not to enroll at some prescribed rate). We build on these studies
in two main ways. First, our randomized design allows us to more confidently establish the
causal link between the interventions we study and the change in savings behavior. Second,
unlike Choi, Laibson and Madrian (2009) and Beshears et al. (2013), our study design allows
us to distinguish the effect of simplifying the enrollment decision by highlighting a specific
contribution rate from the effects of simplifying the enrollment process itself (i.e., replacing
the standard enrollment form) and/or reminding employees to enroll ­ mechanisms that
may exert an independent effect on plan participation. This distinction is important both
theoretically ­ e.g., for assessing the extent to which simplifying one component of a multi-
dimensional decision affects decision-makers' willingness to engage with the decision at all ­
as well as practically ­ e.g., for assessing the potential efficacy of alternative policies.
   Our analysis is particularly related to two recent studies. First, our study design is
closely related to Choi et al. (2017), who show that including contribution rate "anchors"
in written communications to current plan participants can draw participant contributions
toward the anchored rate. We build on that analysis by focusing on a different population
(non-participants as opposed to current plan members) and a different outcome (plan par-
ticipation versus contribution rate selection). These differences are important because plan


                                                5
participants and non-participants are likely to vary in significant ways from one another and
the role of decision costs may differ between them. Indeed, understanding the factors that
can help overcome barriers to savings plan participation is of particular policy interest, given
prior evidence of the role that habit formation plays in saving behavior (Loibl, Kraybill and
DeMay, 2011) and the fact that major public policy efforts worldwide focus on a "foot in
the door" approach to increasing savings (e.g., CFPB (2020), KiwiSaver Act of 2006).
    Blumenstock, Callen and Ghani (2018) also provide experimental evidence on the role
of complexity in savings decisions. Studying participation in an employee savings program
in Afghanistan, they find that providing financial counseling about various saving options
caused more employees to switch from their current contribution rate than did a simple
reminder about the availability of the savings plan. Our findings complement this study
in several ways. First, we provide additional support for the importance of decision costs
as an impediment to savings plan participation from a dramatically different societal and
institutional context. Second, like Choi et al. (2017), Blumenstock, Callen and Ghani (2018)
focus their analysis on changes in plan contributions ­ which may reflect either extensive-
or intensive-margin changes in participation; in contrast, for the reasons noted above, we
focus on decision costs as a barrier to plan participation.1 Finally, although the estimated
effect of the financial consultations is larger than the estimated effect of our intervention,
the consultations are also substantially more resource-intensive; our results highlight the
potential for resource-constrained employers or governmental agencies to reduce decision
costs through lighter-touch interventions as well.
    Outside of the retirement savings context, a number of papers have studied how providing
a suggested donation amount shapes charitable contributions. The question is analogous
to ours; highlighting a specific donation amount can reduce decision costs for the donor
by narrowing the range of options one must consider. Edwards and List (2014) find that
   1
     Indeed, the results reported in Blumenstock, Callen and Ghani (2018), Online Appendix Table A17,
suggest that the vast majority of the contribution changes induced by the financial consultation they study
were among current plan participants.



                                                    6
highlighting a specific charitable contribution amount increases the likelihood of making a
charitable donation, whereas Altmann et al. (2019) find no evidence along these lines. In
addition, Altmann et al. (2019) find that the magnitude of a charitable donation default
affects the likelihood and amount of donation. This related question ­ how the magnitude of
a highlighted rate affects contributions ­ has been studied in the retirement savings context
by Choi et al. (2017), Beshears et al. (2017), Choukhmane (2019), and in a companion piece
to the current paper, Goldin, Homonoff and Tucker-Ray (2017).2 In contrast, the present
results highlight how reducing complexity on the intensive margin of a decision (how much
to contribute) can affect extensive margin behavior (whether to contribute at all).
       This paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews the institutional background on
federal government retirement savings plans. Section III describes the experiment and our
sample. Section IV describes the data sources used in the empirical analysis. Section V
presents the results. Section VI concludes.


II. Institutional Background

All U.S. federal government employees ­ both civilian and military ­ are eligible to contribute
to the Thrift Savings Plan (TSP), the federal government's defined contribution plan. The
TSP is similar to a 401(k) plan that might be offered by a private employer. It allows par-
ticipants to save for retirement at tax-advantaged rates, under either a Roth or traditional
retirement savings plan design. Employees who enroll in the TSP select an integer contribu-
tion rate, which corresponds to the fraction of their pay that is directed to their TSP account
each pay period.3 After enrolling, the TSP establishes an account for new participants and
they subsequently select the investment fund(s) to which they would like to contribute; those
who do not select a fund are defaulted into the Government Securities Investment Fund (the
   2
     Specifically, Goldin, Homonoff and Tucker-Ray (2017) explore differences in the effect of highlighting
low versus high contribution rates on retirement savings during the first month after the intervention.
   3
     During our sample period, servicemembers enrolled in the TSP using a form that restricted contribution
amounts to percentages of pay. Beginning in January 2019, servicemembers enrolled with a new form that
permitted dollar or percentage of pay contributions.



                                                    7
"G" Fund) - a low risk, low return fund of short-term government securities.
      At the time of our intervention in 2016, 87 percent of civilian federal employees partici-
pated in the TSP, whereas only 43 percent of military servicemembers did so. The difference
in enrollment rates between civilian and military employees may be due in part to different
saving preferences between the two groups. However, there were also important differences
in how the TSP was administered to these two groups of federal employees at the time. First,
like many 401(k) plans offered by private employers, the TSP included an employer match for
participating civilian employees that was not available to military servicemembers. Second,
servicemembers were required to actively enroll in the plan in order to participate, whereas
civilian federal employees were automatically enrolled in the TSP unless they actively de-
clined to participate.4 Finally, during our sample period, servicemembers are eligible for a
more generous defined benefit pension than their federal civilian counterparts, with annual
benefit equal to at least 50% of the servicemember's three highest salary years. However,
most servicemembers never become eligible for these benefits; the pension uses "cliff-vesting"
at 20 years of service. Fewer than 20% of servicemembers reach this tenure (GAO, 2019),
with even lower rates among Army servicemembers (Maldon Jr et al., 2015).
      The low rate of retirement savings among military servicemembers makes this population
particularly relevant for studies of the type we conduct.5 Although our sample differs in
important ways from the overall population of individuals covered by employer-provided
retirement plans, we are not aware of factors that would limit the applicability of our findings
to other populations with similar characteristics.
      An important feature of our setting is the lack of an employer-match for TSP contribu-
tions during our sample period. On the one hand, this could limit the generalizability of
  4
      As of January 1, 2018, the military moved to a Blended Retirement System (with defined benefit and
defined contribution components) in which newly hired servicemembers were automatically enrolled in the
TSP and all servicemembers are eligible for a 3% match. Our sample period precedes this policy change.
    5
      Increasing savings among this population has been a stated goal and focus of Presidential and Con-
gressional commissions (Maldon Jr et al., 2015), the Department of Defense (DOD, 2019), as well as the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, the Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board, and military trade
groups.



                                                   8
our results to plans that do incorporate a match and which, as a result, may have higher
participation rates than our sample. On the other hand, the lack of a match offers two
advantages. First, there are significant ethical concerns with interventions that would likely
cause some employees to select low contribution rates that entail foregoing some or all of an
employer match. Second, matches could focus potential enrollees on the specific contribution
rate that maximizes the match, which might obscure precisely the effect we aim to study.



III. Sample and Research Design

Our sample includes the universe of active-duty servicemembers in the U.S. Army who
had not contributed to a TSP account in the six years prior to the intervention (January
2010 - January 2016). Members of the experimental sample were assigned to one of 10
experimental groups based on the eighth digit of their social security number (SSN).6 On
January 27, 2016, individuals assigned to one of the treatment groups received an email
from the Defense Financing and Accounting Services (DFAS) ­ the agency within DOD
that administers military payments. The email informed individuals that they were not
currently enrolled in the TSP and encouraged them to sign up (Appendix Figure A.1a).7
Since DFAS routinely emails notifications regarding servicemembers' pay, leave, and other
human resources information, this form of communication was not out of the ordinary.
       Individuals with an SSN ending in 90-99 received the email described above with no
additional information (our baseline treatment group). Individuals with an SSN ending in
10-89 (our specific rate treatments) received a version of the email that was identical to that
received by the baseline group but for the addition of one sentence: "Many servicemembers
   6
     The last four digits of SSNs are randomly assigned. However, a potential concern with this approach
to treatment assignment is that the treatment effect may be confounded if other experiments were assigned
in the same way (SBST, 2015). Assigning treatment status based on servicemembers' 8th SSN digit was
intended to alleviate this concern.
   7
     The baseline message included in these emails was created based on the results of a prior field experiment
involving this population, conducted in May of 2015. The returns mentioned in this message are based on
the rate of return of the C-Fund, the SP 500 index equivalent available to TSP participants. See SBST
(2015) and Benartzi et al. (2017) for details.



                                                      9
like you start by contributing at least X% of their basic pay into a Traditional or Roth TSP
account." Individuals within the specific rate group were presented with a contribution rate
corresponding to the second to last number in their SSN. For example, those with an SSN
ending in 10-19 were shown the lowest highlighted rate of 1 percent, while individuals with
an SSN ending in 80-89 were shown the highest highlighted rate of 8 percent (see Appendix
Figure A.1b for an example).8 Individuals with an SSN ending in 00-09 were assigned to the
control group and did not receive any additional communications from DFAS.


IV. Data

As described above, inclusion in our experimental population is based on lack of prior TSP
enrollment. Roughly 60 percent of all Army servicemembers had not enrolled in the TSP
prior to the start of our intervention, leaving a sample population of 291,552 non-enrolled
active-duty servicemembers. We link administrative data on our population from three
sources: payroll data, retirement account data, and Army personnel data.
       Our data on TSP participation comes from DFAS payroll data, supplemented with retire-
ment account data from the Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (FRTIB), which
administers the TSP. These data include monthly contributions to traditional and Roth
retirement accounts for the two years after the start of our intervention.9 The data also
include monthly compensation data such as base pay and hazardous duty incentive pay.10
Unfortunately, the data do not include information on the intermediate outcome of whether
servicemembers opened or otherwise engaged with the email communication. In addition,
the data do not include information about non-TSP forms of savings, although Skimmyhorn
(2016) finds that other retirement savings accounts are uncommon for military members.
   8
     Among contributing service members in our data, 34% contribute 8% or more of base pay to the TSP.
   9
     We limit our follow-up period to this time period so our results are not conflated with responses to
the legislative changes to the TSP enrollment process and match policies implemented at the start of 2018.
Contributions to traditional accounts that are made from combat pay are tax-exempt and not subject to
normal contribution limits.
  10
     Individuals make separate TSP contribution decisions for base pay and hazardous duty incentive pay.
We include contributions to special pay in total contributions but only use contributions to base pay in
calculating percent contributions.

                                                   10
       We complement this data set with retirement account data from the Federal Retirement
Thrift Investment Board (FRTIB), which administers the TSP. This data contains quarterly
account level records for the two years after our intervention. The data contains similar
information to that provided by DFAS, but differs on a few key dimensions. Rather than
TSP contribution rate selection, the FRTIB data includes information on the dollar amount
contributed to TSP each quarter. For this reason, and since the FRTIB data is reported
quarterly rather than monthly, we rely on the DFAS data for our estimates of TSP participa-
tion and contribution rate selection. However, unlike with the DFAS data, these data allow
us to calculate exact retirement savings balances. Additionally, the FRTIB data include in-
formation on fund allocations. TSP has several index funds from which to choose including:
government securities (G), fixed-income (F), common stock (C), small capitalization stock
(S), international stock (I), and lifecycle funds (L, a combination of the other five funds).11
       Finally, our administrative personnel data come from the Department of the Army. These
data are reported as of January 2016 and include demographic information (i.e., age, gen-
der, race, marital status, number of children), service and performance information (years
of service and rank), and measures of human capital (education level and Armed Forces
Qualification Test (AFQT) scores). This data set also includes information on whether a
servicemember left the Army during our study period. It is common for the Army to expe-
rience high turnover rates ­ roughly 29 percent of our sample has left the Army by the end
of our two-year follow-up period. For long-run outcomes we exclude individuals who have
left the Army prior to the period being analyzed.12
       Table 1 provides summary statistics of the demographic characteristics of our study
sample. The majority of our sample are enlisted servicemembers (84 percent) with an average
age of 27 years old at the start of our intervention. These individuals have been in the military
  11
     The G-Fund is a Government Bonds Fund. The F-Fund is a fixed income fund and includes an index of
corporate bonds. The C-fund is an index fund managed to replicate the S&P 500 Index. The S-Fund is a
small cap fund managed to match the Dow Jones U.S. Completion Total Stock Market Index. The I-Fund is
an International Fund designed to match the MSCI EAFE international Index. The L-Fund includes several
TSP lifecycle fund options.
  12
     Analyses in Section V demonstrate that our results are not sensitive to this restriction.


                                                 11
for an average of six years, suggesting that they had several opportunities to enroll in TSP
prior to our intervention. The majority are male (87 percent) and just over half are married
with an average of one child. A majority (57 percent) of the sample population is white,
21 percent are black, 15 percent are Hispanic, and 7 percent identify as another race or
ethnicity. Most individuals in our sample have a high-school diploma or GED (69 percent),
but only 18 percent have completed a bachelors degree or above.13 The average individual
earns $3,000 per month ($36,000 per year) in base pay, plus additional compensation in
forms such as housing and meal allowances.14
       This table also explores whether the treatment assignment mechanism generated groups
that are balanced across our demographic characteristics. Column 4 presents results of an
F-test for equality across our three main experimental groups ­ those receiving no email,
those receiving the baseline email, and those receiving any one of the specific rate emails.
The results are consistent with random treatment group assignment.



V. Results

In our primary analysis, we look separately at the effect of receiving the baseline email and the
effect of receiving an email that highlighted a specific rate on retirement savings outcomes.
In most of our analyses of TSP participation and percent contributions, we collapse monthly
data to the quarter level keeping the maximum contribution rate in the three-month period.15
Our main econometric model is:


                     Yit = 0 + 1 Baselinei + 2 Specif ic Ratei + 3 Xi + it                              (1)

where Yit is a savings outcome for individual i at follow-up period t, and Xi is a vector of
individual-level baseline characteristics including age, sex, race, marital status, education,
  13
     The remaining 13 percent of the sample have completed some college.
  14
     See www.goarmy.com/benefits/total-compensation
  15
     Since very few individuals change their contribution rate selection within the quarter, our results are
substantively unchanged if instead we use their first contribution rate selection.

                                                    12
AFQT score, years of service, and enlisted status. Baselinei is an indicator for being as-
signed to receive the baseline email and Specif ic Ratei is an indicator for receiving one of
the eight email communications that highlighted a specific contribution rate (i.e., 1%, 2%,
..., 8%). Therefore, 1 and 2 compare the savings behavior of individuals who received
either the baseline email or specific rate emails, respectively, to individuals who received no
experimental communications from DFAS.


 Effects of Treatment on TSP Participation

We begin by estimating the effects of the intervention on savings behavior at the end of
the first quarter post-intervention. The first two columns of Table 2 present estimates for
the effect of the two communication types (baseline and specific rate) on the likelihood
of participating in TSP, with and without demographic controls. Column 1 shows that
the baseline email led to a statistically significant increase of 0.42 percentage points in the
participation rate. Although this treatment effect is modest when evaluated as a share of the
overall sample, if readership rates for the communications are low in this sample population
­ as prior studies have suggested ­ it may nonetheless represent a substantial change in
behavior among the sub-population of servicemembers who read the email.16 Additionally,
the participation rate among the control group is quite low ­ only 2.7 percent of control group
members enrolled in TSP in the first quarter of our intervention. Therefore, the baseline
email led to a 15 percent increase in the likelihood of participating in TSP.
    The second row of column 1 shows the effect of receiving an email that also highlighted
a specific rate. That treatment increased the probability of contribution by 0.71 percentage
points (26%). The specific rate effect is nearly twice as large as the baseline effect and
the difference is statistically significant at the 1% level. Column 2 includes the individual
controls described above and shows that the treatment effects are unchanged, consistent with
  16
     For example, Castleman, Patterson and Skimmyhorn (2019) find that fewer than 6% of active-duty
enlisted Army servicemembers opened an email sent from DOD regarding participation in an interest rate
protection program. Similarly, Castleman et al. (2019) find that 2-3 percent of servicemembers who received
communications about transferring their GI-Bill benefits clicked on an email link.


                                                    13
our randomized design.17
       Columns 3 and 4 present results of the effect of the communications on the average con-
tribution rate (i.e., the fraction of basic pay income an individual contributes to the TSP
accounts), again, both with and without demographic controls. Since the overall participa-
tion rates in this population are quite low since non-participation in TSP was a requirement
to be included in the study, the average contribution rate is also low. Among control group
members, the average contribution rate was 0.23 percent. However, as with our extensive
margin results, we find that the baseline email and the specific rate emails led to significant
increases in the average contribution rate. Specifically, Column 3 shows that the baseline
email led to an increase of 0.032 percentage points while the specific rate email led to an
increase of 0.051 percentage points. Although the specific rate treatment effect is more than
50 percent larger than the effect of the baseline email alone, this difference is not statistically
significant (p=0.15). Again, the inclusion of individual level controls has little effect on the
point estimates.18
       We next investigate heterogeneity in the effect of the specific rate treatments relative to
the baseline treatment on savings behavior along a range of demographic and professional
characteristics. With respect to both plan participation (Appendix Table A.2) and average
contribution rate (Appendix Table A.3). We observe larger effects for women than for men,
for officers than for enlisted servicemembers, and for older compared to younger individuals.
However, these differences are either marginally or not statistically significant, depending on
the specification.
  17
      A possible factor contributing to the effect of the various treatments on savings is that the rate of return
calculation example included in the treatments was derived from an annuity calculation using the TSP C-
Fund. If this information caused individuals to update their beliefs about the likely return from saving,
it could have been that updating, rather than other aspects of the treatment, that caused the increase in
saving. However, because both the baseline and specific rate treatments included the same rate of return
example, we would not expect this channel to confound the comparison between the specific rate and baseline
treatments. Nonetheless, we note the possibility that the observed effect of the specific rate treatments could
reflect an interaction between decision costs and beliefs about likely rates of return.
   18
      Appendix Table A.1 repeats these analyses, separately estimating the effects of each of the eight specific
rate treatment groups. We find that each specific rate treatment leads to a statistically significant increase
in both TSP participation and average contribution rates. Additionally, for each of the specific rates, we
estimate treatment effects larger in magnitude than those of the baseline treatment for both outcomes.


                                                       14
       One concern with light-touch informational interventions like the one considered in this
study is that any short-term positive behavioral effects may not persist over time. For
example, if our communications solely serve as a reminder to individuals who intended
to enroll, they may speed up the timing of enrollment, but will not increase the long-term
participation rate. Alternatively, if the marginal participant who enrolls in TSP only because
she received our communication turns out to prefer non-participation, we may see a reversal
of the treatment effect over time if these enrollees subsequently un-enroll from the program.
       Figure 1 plots the estimated effects of the treatment emails on TSP enrollment by quarter
during the two years following the intervention, using the regression specification in equation
(1).19 Relative to the control group, the specific rate treatment increases the probability
that individuals contribute to the TSP by between 0.61 and 0.77 percentage points in each
quarter. The effects of the baseline treatment, relative to the control group, range between
0.36 percentage points and 0.52 percentage points, and are statistically significantly different
(at the 10% level) from the control mean in all but the last quarter considered. Relative
to the baseline group, assignment to the specific rate group increases the probability that
an individual contributes by between 0.16 and 0.30 percentage points; this difference is
statistically significant in the first quarter after treatment and remains marginally significant
during the first year. Even after the first year, the magnitude of the effect largely persists
but there is a reduction in precision due to decreasing sample size as sample members leave
the Army and to increasing participation rates among control and treatment groups.
       Overall, the results of the analysis in Figure 1 suggests that the immediate effects of the
intervention observed in Table 2 largely persist throughout the two-year follow-up period
and that the intervention does not merely serve to speed up enrollments, at least not within
the two-year window we study.20 Nonetheless, it may be the case that treatment group
  19
    Coefficient estimates corresponding to Figure 1 are contained in Appendix Table A.4.
  20
    Appendix Table A.5 complements this analysis by exploring the overall effects of the baseline and specific
rate treatments over the two-year time frame on whether individuals ever contribute to their TSP account,
the average percent of base pay contributed, and the total savings. We find significant positive effects of
the specific rate email on all three measures. The baseline email led to smaller, but statistically significant
increases in the average contribution rate and the total savings (though not the participation rate), though


                                                      15
members are more likely to un-enroll shortly after enrolling ­ for example, if the persistence
we estimate incorporates delayed treatment effects on initial enrollments in later quarters
of the intervention that are offset by un-enrollments of the early participators. Table 3
investigates this question by comparing the likelihood of stopping contributions in the full
sample and among those who enroll in the TSP. We find no evidence that those in either the
baseline or specific rate groups stop contributing to the TSP at a higher rate than those in
the control; in fact, the point estimates suggest the opposite.
   As described in Section IV, our long-run outcomes exclude individuals who have left the
Army by the quarter considered. However, it is possible that the intervention affects the
likelihood that a servicemember chooses to remain in the Army. Table 4 directly investigates
this question by estimating the effect of treatment communications on retention in the Army
and finds a precisely estimated null effect.21


Decision Costs and Participation

In the results above, we find that both baseline and specific rate treatments increase TSP en-
rollment but that the specific rate treatments are more effective than the baseline treatment.
One explanation for this finding is that the specific rate treatments reduce decision costs:
if some individuals who would prefer to save for retirement are uncertain of their optimal
contribution rate, then highlighting a specific rate could induce them to participate by sim-
plifying their savings decision, such as by reducing the number of contribution rate options
they consider. This section explores whether such decision costs play a role in explaining
the decision to enroll in the TSP.
   We begin by investigating whether the specific rate treatments had an effect on contri-
bution rate choice relative to the baseline email treatment. For example, if decision costs
associated with the selection of a contribution rate prevent individuals from enrolling, re-
we cannot statistically distinguish between the effects of the two communications.
   21
      Additionally, Appendix Table A.6 repeats the analyses in Appendix Table A.4 with a constant sample
of servicemembers who remained in the Army for all two years and shows that, if anything, the treatment
effects are slightly larger for this sample.


                                                  16
ducing those costs would not only increase the share of individuals contributing at positive
rates, but would specifically increase the share who contribute at exactly the highlighted
rate. To explore this possibility, Figure 2 presents the share of treatment group members
who select a given contribution rate, based on the treatment they received. For example,
the first set of three bars show (respectively) the share of individuals contributing 1% among
those who received the baseline email, the specific rate email that highlighted 1%, and the
specific rate emails that highlighted rates other than 1%. For each contribution rate p in the
figure, we find that receiving a specific rate treatment of exactly p% increases the likelihood
of contributing exactly p% relative to the baseline treatment.2223
    In addition to choosing a contribution rate, TSP enrollees can subsequently select a fund
allocation. Unlike the contribution rate, which must be actively selected in order to complete
enrollment, employees may successfully enroll in TSP without making a fund selection. Those
who do not actively select a fund are defaulted into the G-Fund, whereas others can select
from one of five funds or lifecycle funds, which are combinations of the primary funds.24
Table 5 investigates the effects of the two treatment message types on fund allocation. We
find no significant effects of the baseline treatment on fund selection. In contrast, we find a
marginally significant effect of receiving an email highlighting a specific rate on the likelihood
of enrolling in the default fund, but no significant changes in enrolling in a different fund.
    Taken together, these results suggest that individuals who are induced to enroll in TSP
in response to the specific rate email are more likely to make passive decisions about their
  22
     Appendix Table A.7 provides a complementary analysis estimating the effect of each specific rate treat-
ment on the likelihood of contributing exactly p% relative to the baseline treatment. Estimates along the
diagonal reveal that increases in the likelihood of contributing exactly p% among those receiving a specific
rate treatment of exactly p% are larger in magnitude than the off-diagonal effects and statistically significant
for six of the eight specific rate treatments. Given the magnitude of the baseline group mean, these estimates
are quite large in percent terms, but small in absolute terms.
  23
     All treatments, including the baseline, included an example describing a rate of return calculation based
on an investment of $25 per month. Individuals may have interpreted this example as a recommendation or
perceived it as an intensive-margin cue. However, our data suggests that this is not the case; $25 translates
into a 1% contribution rate for approximately 95% of our sample, yet we do not observe a disproportionate
spike in contributions at 1% among the baseline treatment group relative to the control (see Figure 2).
  24
     The default fund for uniformed servicemembers remained the G-Fund throughout our study period,
though it changed to a life cycle (L) fund in January 2018. This differs from the default fund for civilian
participants in the TSP, where the default fund changed from the G-fund to an L-fund in September 2015.


                                                      17
enrollment choices ­ they are more likely to select exactly the highlighted rate and are more
likely to contribute to the default fund. These results are consistent with a model in which
decision costs associated with selecting a contribution rate depress TSP participation.
       Up to this point our focus has been on identifying the effect of highlighting a specific
contribution rate on an individual's extensive margin decision of whether or not to enroll
in the TSP. However, it is also possible that this intervention affected the intensive margin
decisions of how much an individual chooses to contribute, even among individuals who would
have enrolled in the TSP under the baseline treatment. Our experimental design does not
permit us to separately identify the extensive and intensive margin effects of the treatments,
but does yield some suggestive evidence. For example, if the specific rate treatment generated
substantial intensive margin effects, we might observe an (absolute) reduction in the share
of individuals selecting positive rates other than the one that was highlighted.25 However,
Figure 2 does not offer any systematic support for this possibility; the share of individuals
contributing each rate appears nearly identical under the baseline treatment and under
treatments that highlight a different contribution rate.
       To more formally summarize the differences in behavior stemming from which specific
rate (if any) the individual received, Column 1 of Table 6 considers the stacked regression:


                     p
                    yi = p + 0 Specif icRatep              p          p
                                            i + 1 OtherRatei + 2 Xi + i                                 (2)

                             p
where p ranges from 1 to 8, yi indicates that individual i selected contribution rate p,
Specif icRatep
             i indicates that i was assigned to the treatment group that highlighted spe-

cific rate p, and OtherRatep
                           i indicates that i was assigned to a specific rate treatment that

highlighted a contribution rate other than p. For this analysis, we exclude individuals who
did not receive any email. Note that each individual appears in the regression eight times
  25
    In particular, suppose every individual who contributes in the baseline treatment would also contribute
in the specified rate treatment. Suppose as well that we observe more individuals contributing at rate q > 0
under the baseline treatment than under specific rate treatment p = q . This would imply that highlighting
rate p caused some individuals to switch from q to p ­ i.e., a positive intensive margin effect.



                                                    18
(one for each value of p); hence, we cluster the reported standard errors at the individual
level. The estimated value of 0 is positive and statistically significant, which suggests that
receiving a specific contribution rate increases the likelihood that an individual chooses to
contribute exactly that rate. In particular, the estimated effect is 0.1 percentage points, a
44% increase relative to the average share of individuals who enroll at rates between 1% and
8% under the baseline. The coefficient on 1 is close to zero and not statistically significant.
Overall, these results of provide no evidence that highlighting a specific rate reduces the
share of individuals who select positive rates other than the one that was highlighted.
    Thus far we have motivated our analysis and interpreted our results in terms of decision
costs. However, an alternative explanation for our finding that the specific rate treatment
increases TSP enrollment is a model in which receiving the specific rate treatment causes
individuals to update their belief about which contribution rate is optimal for them. For ex-
ample, the specific rate treatments might cause individuals to change their behavior because
they interpret the intervention as advice from their employer or as information about the
decisions of their peers (Beshears et al., 2015; Lieber and Skimmyhorn, 2018). That is, an
individual may choose not to participate under the baseline treatment because she believes
her optimal contribution rate is zero, but updates her belief to some positive contribution
rate upon receiving the specific rate treatment. However, if updated beliefs were the main
mechanism by which the highlighted rates increased TSP enrollment, one would generally
expect the observed increase in contribution rates to be incremental (i.e., between zero and
the targeted rate), rather than at the targeted rate itself.26
    Column 2 of Table 6 investigates this possibility by decomposing the OtherRatep
                                                                                  i variable

in equation (2) into two indicators: LowerSpecif icRatep
                                                       i , which indicates the highlighted

rate assigned to i is less than p, and HigherSpecif icRatep
                                                          i , which indicates the highlighted
  26
     A limitation of this interpretation is that if the marginal enrollees had extremely weak priors about their
optimal contribution rates, or if they treated the highlighted rate as an extremely informative signal, one
would also expect to observe the increase in positive contribution rates concentrated at the highlighted rate.
However, this possibility does not rule out decision costs; it could be that decision costs explain the weakness
of individuals' initial priors.



                                                      19
rate assigned to i is greater than p. Although there is a statistically significant increase at
contribution rates below the specific rate one receives ­ consistent with incremental belief-
updating driving some of the effect ­ the increase in the distribution of positive contribution
rates is primarily concentrated at the specific rate itself ­ consistent with decision costs
playing some role.
    As an additional test of the belief-updating model as an explanation for our results,
we next compare the share of individuals participating in the plan (at any contribution
rate) among those who received the 1% versus baseline treatments. Although the baseline
treatment did not highlight a particular contribution rate, it did endorse participation in
the plan (i.e., contributing at some positive rate). Because the minimum contribution rate
available to servicemembers was 1%, this theory would predict that individuals receiving the
baseline treatment would revise upwards their beliefs about the optimal rate by at least as
much as those receiving the 1% treatment. However, Appendix Table A.1 shows that plan
participation was higher among the latter group than among the former, in contrast to what
a belief-updating model would suggest.27
    Another possibility is that the specific rate treatments increase participation by intro-
ducing new contribution rates into employees' perceived choice set ­ for example, prior to
receiving the communication, individuals may not have considered the possibility of partici-
pating at very low contribution rates, like 1 or 2%. Evidence consistent with this explanation
is that the lowest specific rate treatments are associated with the largest point estimates (Ap-
pendix Table A.1) (although the difference in estimated effects between the different specific
rate treatments is only marginally significant). To assess whether this mechanism is driv-
ing our results, Appendix Table A.8 replicates Table 2 excluding the lowest specific rates
treatments (1 and 2%). Even excluding the lower specific rate treatments, we still find that
  27
     To the extent that recipients interpret the baseline treatment as containing an (unspecified) positive
contribution rate recommendation, this finding also provides some evidence against a pure anchoring expla-
nation of our results, since the anchoring force of the baseline treatment would be at least as strong as the
pull of the 1% treatment. On the other hand, it is also possible that the strength of the baseline treatment
as an anchor is diminished by the absence of a specific highlighted rate.



                                                     20
receiving a specific rate treatment had a larger effect on participation than the baseline
treatment, consistent with decision costs playing a role.
   Finally, it could be that the information about other servicemembers' decisions contained
in the specific rate treatments affected servicemembers' behavior by creating or reinforcing a
descriptive social norm in favor of TSP participation. Although we cannot rule this mecha-
nism out, recent research suggests that peer effects tend not to be effective (and may in fact
backfire) at increasing the savings rate among low-saving populations like the one we study
(Beshears et al., 2015; Lieber and Skimmyhorn, 2018; Dur et al., 2019). In addition, the fact
that the marginal enrollees from the specific rate treatments choose passively with respect
to their fund allocation (Table 5) is consistent with a model of decision costs operating as
a barrier to enrollment but would not be implied by a model driven by social norms (since
the letters do not describe the funds chosen by other servicemembers).



VI. Conclusion

We evaluate a randomized intervention to encourage retirement plan participation among a
population whose lack of savings is a subject of significant policy concern: active-duty ser-
vicemembers. We find positive and persistent effects of communications encouraging retire-
ment savings on plan participation, with larger effects from communications that highlight
a specific contribution rate. On the one hand, these effects were modest in magnitude, and
unlikely to be a complete solution to the problem of under-saving among this population. On
the other hand, the financial cost of the communication, and in particular the incremental
cost of highlighting a specific rate, were close to zero. Moreover, the presence of any effect
is striking given that the average servicemember in our sample has had 6 years to enroll and
most have received prior communications urging enrollment (Benartzi et al., 2017).
   Like many choices, retirement saving decisions can be complicated across multiple di-
mensions. Our results suggest that reducing complexity along one of these dimensions ­ e.g.,



                                             21
which rate to contribute to a retirement saving plan ­ can affect how individuals behave
with respect to related decisions ­ e.g., whether to enroll in the plan at all. For example,
at the time of our intervention, new TSP enrollees who did not select an investment fund
were defaulted into the G-Fund. Our results suggest that by reducing the complexity of this
dimension of the retirement savings decision (the choice of fund), this aspect of the plan's
design may have increased participation.
       An important limitation of our analysis is that we lack data on the share of servicemem-
bers who opened or read the treatment communications. This information would allow us to
better interpret the magnitude of our estimated treatment effect by identifying the share of
readers who changed their behavior in response to the intervention. Drawing on readership
estimates from prior studies with similar populations, our best guess is that our observed
intent-to-treat effect represents a substantial change in behavior among those servicemem-
bers who read the communication. For example, assuming that 5.6% of servicemembers read
the treatment communications (as in Castleman, Patterson and Skimmyhorn (2019)), our
results suggest that among this population, the baseline and specific rate treatments led to
participation increases of 7 and 13 percentage points, respectively.
       Although we find that highlighting a specific contribution rate can raise TSP enrollment,
our results do not directly address the question of which rate should be highlighted to
maximize welfare. In particular, two types of challenges make addressing this question
quite difficult in our setting. First, we lack reliable welfare information about the saving
preferences of our sample members. For those whose enrollment decisions hinge on whether
they receive a highlighted contribution rate, their revealed preferences are inconclusive with
respect to which contribution rates will best further their welfare.28 A second challenge for
drawing welfare conclusions from our experimental data is that we do not observe non-TSP
  28
    This is true under the assumption that individuals' normative preferences about how much to save do
not themselves depend upon whether a highlighted rate is included in the email they receive. An interesting
feature of our setting is that the researcher does observe contribution rate decisions by individuals assigned
to the baseline group that are uncontaminated by any specific highlighted rate; however, if those affected by
the highlighted rate have a different distribution of contribution rate preferences than this group, additional
data or assumptions are needed to extrapolate from the latter to the former (see Goldin and Reck (2020)).


                                                      22
savings or debt. Thus, we cannot rule out the possibility that some of the additional savings
associated with enrolling in the TSP are offset by reducing savings through other vehicles or
even new debt, although Beshears et al. (2019) provide evidence that shifting towards costly
forms of debt (e.g., credit cards) is unlikely.
    Although our results do not directly yield the optimal contribution rate to highlight
in communications, they do shed light on some related issues. For example, a potential
concern with highlighting a specific contribution rate is that it could distort intensive margin
contribution decisions by "pulling" them towards the highlighted rate. In this scenario, the
specific rate treatments might improve welfare for those it induces to enroll in the TSP,
but reduce welfare for those who would have enrolled even under the baseline treatment,
but whose contribution rate is distorted from what they would have (otherwise) optimally
selected.29 However, our results provide no evidence that highlighting a specific rate affects
the choices of those who would have participated under the baseline treatment.
    We have focused on the effect of complexity on decision-making in the retirement savings
context, but similar phenomena may apply in other areas as well. With respect to charitable
contributions, for example, Edwards and List (2014) suggests that decision costs associated
with determining how much to donate affects whether individuals choose to make any dona-
tion at all. It is easy to imagine a similar story in health insurance markets. Prior research
has documented that the complexity of purchasing health insurance results in sub-optimal
consumer choices (Abaluck and Gruber, 2011; Kling et al., 2012; Bhargava, Loewenstein and
Sydnor, 2017); our results suggest this complexity might also reduce the rate at which con-
sumers enroll in health insurance coverage at all. More broadly, one could imagine intensive
margin complexity plays an important role in decisions ranging from choices about whether
to attend college, switch jobs, or move homes.




  29
     For example, Goda et al. (2019) find that improving the default fund allocation increases the likelihood
of choosing the default contribution rate rather than the rate that maximizes the employer match.


                                                     23
References

Abaluck, Jason, and Jonathan Gruber. 2011. "Choice Inconsistencies Among the El-
  derly: Evidence from Plan Choice in the Medicare Part D Program." American Economic
  Review, 101(4): 1180­1210.

Altmann, Steffen, Armin Falk, Paul Heidhues, Rajshri Jayaraman, and Marrit
  Teirlinck. 2019. "Defaults and donations: Evidence from a field experiment." Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 101(5): 808­826.

Benartzi, Shlomo, John Beshears, Katherine L. Milkman, Cass Sunstein,
  Richard H Thaler, Maya Shankar, William Tucker, William J. Congdon, and
  Steven Galing. 2017. "Should Governments Invest More in Nudging?" Psychological
  Science, Forthcoming.

Beshears, John, James J Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C Madrian. 2013.
  "Simplification and Saving." Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 95: 130­
  145.

Beshears, John, James J Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C Madrian, and Kather-
  ine L Milkman. 2015. "The effect of providing peer information on retirement savings
  decisions." The Journal of finance, 70(3): 1161­1201.

Beshears, John, James J Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C Madrian, and
  William L Skimmyhorn. 2019. "Borrowing to Save? The Impact of Automatic En-
  rollment on Debt." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 25876.

Beshears, John, Shlomo Benartzi, Richard Mason, and Katherine L Milkman.
  2017. "How Do Consumers Respond When Default Options Push the Envelope?" Working
  Paper.




                                            24
Bhargava, Saurabh, George Loewenstein, and Justin Sydnor. 2017. "Choose to Lose:
  Health Plan Choices from a Menu with Dominated Options." The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 132(3): 1319­1372.

Blumenstock, Joshua, Michael Callen, and Tarek Ghani. 2018. "Why Do Defaults
  Affect Behavior? Experimental Evidence from Afghanistan." American Economic Review,
  108(10): 2868­2901.

Castleman, Benjamin, Francis Murphy, Richard Patterson, and William Skim-
  myhorn. 2019. "Active Choice Framing and Intergenerational Education Benefits: Evi-
  dence from the Field."

Castleman, Benjamin L, Richard Patterson, and William Skimmyhorn. 2019.
  "Benefits left on the table: Evidence from the Servicemembers' Civil Relief Act." Eco-
  nomics of Education Review.

CFPB. 2020. "Financial Habits and Norms." Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.

Choi, James, David Laibson, Bridgette C Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2006.
  "Saving for Retirement on the Path of Least Resistance." , ed. Slemrod J McCaffrey EJ,
  304­351. In: Behavioral Public Finance: Toward a New Agenda, New York: Russell Sage
  Foundation.

Choi, James J, David Laibson, and Brigitte C Madrian. 2009. "Reducing the Com-
  plexity Costs of 401 (k) Participation through Quick Enrollment." In Developments in the
  Economics of Aging. 57­82. University of Chicago Press.

Choi, James J, Emily Haisley, Jennifer Kurkoski, and Cade Massey. 2017. "Small
  Cues Change Savings Choices." Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 142: 378­
  395.

Choukhmane, Taha. 2019. "Default Options and Retirement Saving Dynamics."


                                           25
DOD. 2019. "Financial Readiness Common Military Training Requirements." Department
  of Defense.

Dur, Robert AJ, Dimitry Fleming, Marten van Garderen, and Max van Lent.
  2019. "A Social Norm Nudge to Save More: A Field Experiment at a Retail Bank." Tin-
  bergen Institute Discussion Paper.

Edwards, James T, and John A List. 2014. "Toward an Understanding of Why Sug-
  gestions Work in Charitable Fundraising: Theory and Evidence from a Natural Field
  Experiment." Journal of Public Economics, 114: 1­13.

GAO. 2019. "Military Pensions: Servicemembers need better information to support retire-
  ment savings decisions." Government Accountability Office GAO-19-631.

Goda, Gopi Shah, Matthew R Levy, Colleen Flaherty Manchester, Aaron So-
  journer, and Joshua Tasoff. 2019. "Do Defaults have Spillover Effects? The Effect
  of the Default Asset on Retirement Plan Contributions." National Bureau of Economic
  Research Retirement Research Center Working Paper NB 18-12.

Goldin, Jacob, and Daniel Reck. 2020. "Revealed-Preference Analysis with Framing
  Effects." Journal of Political Economy, 128(7).

Goldin, Jacob, Tatiana Homonoff, and William Tucker-Ray. 2017. "Retirement Con-
  tribution Rate Nudges and Plan Participation: Evidence from a Field Experiment." Amer-
  ican Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 107(5): 456­61.

Kling, Jeffrey R, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, Lee C Vermeulen, and
  Marian V Wrobel. 2012. "Comparison Friction: Experimental Evidence from Medicare
  Drug Plans." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(1): 199­235.

Lieber, Ethan MJ, and William Skimmyhorn. 2018. "Peer effects in financial decision-
  making." Journal of Public Economics, 163: 37­59.


                                            26
Loibl, Cäzilia, David S Kraybill, and Sara Wackler DeMay. 2011. "Accounting for
  the role of habit in regular saving." Journal of Economic Psychology, 32(4): 581­592.

Maldon Jr, Alphonso, Larry L Pressler, Stephen E Buyer, Dov S Zakheim,
  Michael R Higgins, Peter W Chiarelli, Edmund P Giambastiani, JR Kerrey,
  and Christopher P Carney. 2015. "Report of the Military Compensation and Retire-
  ment Modernization Commission." Military Compensation and Retirement Modernization
  Commission.

SBST. 2015. "Annual Report." Social and Behavioral Sciences Team.

Sethi-Iyengar, Sheena, Gur Huberman, and Wei Jiang. 2004. "How much choice is
  too much? Contributions to 401 (k) retirement plans." Pension design and structure: New
  lessons from behavioral finance, 83: 84­87.

Skimmyhorn, William L. 2016. "Comparing military and civilian household finances:
  Descriptive evidence from recent surveys." Journal of Consumer Affairs, 50(2): 471­483.




                                                27
Tables and Figures


                                Figure 1: Treatment Effects by Time




Notes: Figure presents treatment effects for the likelihood of contributing to the TSP in the given quarter
following the intervention for the baseline treatment (Panel A), the specific rate treatment (Panel B), and
the difference between the baseline and specific rate treatments (Panel C). Units are in percentage points
(0-100). Bars represent the 95% confidence intervals.




                                                    28
                                              Figure 2: Contribution Rate Choices by Treatment




                              1.0       0.8
                  Fraction Contributing
                     0.4      0.6
                              0.2




                                               1%    2%     3%      4%         5%       6%      7%     8%
                                                             Contributions of Exactly P%

                                                           Baseline              Specific Rate of P%
                                                           Other Rate            95% CI


Note: Each set of three bars presents the fraction of servicemembers contributing exactly P% in the first
quarter following the intervention among three groups of servicemembers: those assigned to the baseline
group (white), the specific rate group that highlighted P% (light blue), and the specific rate groups that
highlighted a rate other than P% (dark blue). Units are in percentage points (0-100). Bars represent the
95% confidence interval.




                                                                        29
                    Table 1: Summary Statistics and Randomization Checks

                                        No Email Baseline Specific Rate P-value
              Female                      0.133     0.131        0.132         0.074
                                         (0.340)   (0.338)      (0.338)
              Age                         27.48      27.40       27.43         0.785
                                          (7.70)    (7.64)       (7.66)
              Black                       0.208      0.209       0.211         0.114
                                         (0.406)   (0.407)      (0.408)
              Hispanic                    0.145      0.149       0.146         0.181
                                         (0.352)   (0.356)      (0.353)
              Other Race/Ethnicity        0.074     0.071        0.071         0.256
                                         (0.261)   (0.257)      (0.257)
              Married                     0.516      0.517       0.518         0.688
                                         (0.500)   (0.500)      (0.500)
              Divorced                    0.040     0.043        0.041         0.315
                                         (0.196)   (0.202)      (0.198)
              Number of Children          1.000      0.990       0.993         0.206
                                         (1.176)   (1.181)      (1.181)
              Some College                0.128      0.128       0.130         0.638
                                         (0.334)   (0.334)      (0.336)
              Bachelors Degree+           0.184     0.181        0.181         0.593
                                         (0.388)   (0.385)      (0.385)
              AFQT Score                  57.80     57.76        57.91         0.215
                                         (18.91)   (18.79)      (18.87)
              Years of Service             6.26       6.21        6.23         0.419
                                          (6.52)    (6.43)       (6.46)
              Enlisted                    0.858     0.858        0.858         0.533
                                         (0.349)   (0.350)      (0.349)
              Monthly Base Pay            2,993     2,984        2,989         0.217
                                         (1,568)   (1,560)      (1,564)
              N                          29,084     29,142      233,311
Table reports sample means by experimental group. P-Values presented in column 4 are associated
with an F-test for equality across all 10 experimental groups: Control, Baseline, and each Specific
Rate group of 1 through 8 percent.




                                                30
                         Table 2: Treatment Effects on TSP Contributions

                                               Ever Contribute       Contribution Rate
                                                (1)       (2)          (3)       (4)
         Baseline                            0.417       0.417       0.032      0.033
                                             (0.139)     (0.139)     (0.017)    (0.017)
         Specific Rate                       0.714       0.714       0.051     0.052
                                             (0.102)     (0.102)     (0.012)   (0.012)
          N                                   291,537 291,537         287,458 287,458
          Specific Rate vs. Baseline P-value    0.006      0.006       0.145      0.148
          Control Group Mean                    2.706      2.706       0.225      0.225
          Control Variables                       N          Y           N          Y
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors in parentheses. "Ever contribute"
is an indicator for enrolling in TSP in the first quarter following the intervention with units in
percentage points (0-100). "Contribution rate" is the maximum TSP contribution rate selected
in the first quarter following the intervention, with non-participants receiving a value of zero.
Control variables include age, sex, race, marital status, education, AFQT score, years of service,
and enlisted status.




                      Table 3: Treatment Effect on Stopping Contributions

                                                  Full Sample         Conditional on
                                                                       Contributing
                                                 (1)        (2)        (3)      (4)
           Baseline                             -0.145     -0.145     -1.107    -0.971
                                               (0.142)    (0.141)    (0.851)   (0.844)
           Specific Rate                        -0.121     -0.120    -1.195     -1.025
                                               (0.108)    (0.107)    (0.648)   (0.642)
           N                                    207,701 207,701       33,193 33,193
           Specific Rate vs. Baseline P-value    0.818     0.807      0.889    0.931
           Control Group Mean                    2.197     2.197      14.121 14.121
           Control Variables                       N         Y          N        Y
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Outcome is
an indicator for having enrolled and subsequently unenrolled in the TSP during the two years
following the intervention. Units are in percentage points (0-100). Columns 1 and 2 include the
full experimental sample; columns 3 and 4 restrict the sample to those who ever enrolled in the
TSP during the two years following the intervention. Analysis excludes all servicemembers who
left the Army within two years of intervention. Control variables include age, sex, race, marital
status, education, AFQT score, years of service, and enlisted status.



                                               31
                      Table 4: Effects of Treatments on Retention in Army

                                      Two Months          6 Months   12 Months    18 Months      24 Months
 Baseline                                 -0.101            -0.072      0.004           0.205       0.223
                                         (0.137)           (0.172)     (0.191)         (0.196)     (0.196)
 Specific Rate                            0.008             0.069       0.048           0.187       0.208
                                         (0.102)           (0.129)     (0.144)         (0.148)     (0.148)
 N                                       291,537           291,537     291,537         291,537    291,537
 Specific Rate vs. Baseline P-value       0.296             0.277       0.758           0.901      0.917
 Control Group Mean                       96.899           92.250      83.795          76.960     71.036

* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Outcome is an
indicator for having remaining in the Army through the start of the given quarter following the
intervention. Units are in percentage points (0-100). All regressions include controls for age, sex,
race, marital status, education, AFQT score, years of service, and enlisted status.




                          Table 5: Treatment Effects on Fund Allocation

                                       G-Fund       F-Fund        C-Fund     S-Fund          I-Fund       L-Fund
                                      Gov Bond      Bonds         Stocks    Small Cap     International   Lifecycle
 Baseline                                0.265           -0.015    -0.029     -0.057          -0.039          -0.095
                                        (0.354)         (0.080)   (0.157)    (0.143)         (0.125)         (0.226)
 Specific Rate                          0.499            0.014     -0.066     -0.022          -0.032          -0.139
                                        (0.265)         (0.060)   (0.118)    (0.108)         (0.094)         (0.170)
 N                                      207,701     207,701       207,701    207,701         207,701      207,701
 Specific Rate vs. Baseline P-value      0.380       0.626         0.748      0.738           0.937        0.791
 Control Group Mean                      16.193      0.658         2.657      2.173           1.636        5.716

* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Outcome variables
are indicators for contributing to the given fund within the two years following the intervention
with units in percentage points. Analysis includes all sample members who remained in the Army
throughout the two years following the intervention. Fund options include: G-Fund (government
bonds), F-Fund (fixed income including an index of corporate bonds), C-fund (managed to replicate
the S&P 500), S-Fund (managed to replicate the Dow Jones U.S. Completion Total Stock Market
Index), I-Fund (managed to replicate MSCI EAFE international Index), and L-Fund (includes
several TSP lifecycle fund options). The G-Fund is the default for those who do not select a specific
fund. All regressions include controls for age, sex, race, marital status, education, AFQT score,
years of service, and enlisted status.



                                                   32
                    Table 6: Treatment Effect on Contribution Rate Choices

                                                         (1)       (2)
                           Specific Rate of P          0.105     0.105
                                                       (0.016)   (0.016)
                           Other Rate Group             0.009
                                                       (0.011)
                           Higher Specific Rate                  0.027
                                                                 (0.012)
                           Lower Specific Rate                    -0.009
                                                                 (0.011)
                             N                       262,453 262,453
                             Baseline Group Mean      0.239      0.239
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Cluster-robust standard errors in parentheses. 2,099,624
specific rate by individual observations are clustered at the individual level (N=262,453). Results
presented for the stacked regression in which the outcome is an indicator for contributing exactly
P% at the end of the first quarter following the intervention. "Specific Rate of P" is an indicator
for assignment to the specific rate treatment group that highlighted a rate of P%; "Other Rate
Group" is an indicator for assignment to a specific rate treatment group that highlighted a rate
other than P%; "Higher Specific Rate" is an indicator for assignment to a specific rate treatment
group that highlighted a rate higher than P%; "Lower Specific Rate" is an indicator for assignment
to a specific rate treatment group that highlighted a rate lower than P%. Units are in percentage
points (0-100). Analysis excludes servicemembers assigned to the control group and those who
have left the Army by the end of the first quarter. All regressions include controls for age, sex,
race, marital status, education, AFQT score, years of service, and enlisted status.




                                                  33
A      Appendix


                  Table A.1: Effect on TSP Contributions by Treatment Group

                                              Ever Contribute      Contribution Rate
                                               (1)       (2)         (3)       (4)
              Baseline                       0.417      0.417      0.032      0.033
                                             (0.139)    (0.139)    (0.017)    (0.017)
              1% Group                       0.932      0.952      0.062      0.064
                                             (0.145)    (0.145)    (0.018)    (0.017)
              2% Group                       0.897      0.887      0.046      0.046
                                             (0.144)    (0.143)    (0.017)    (0.017)
              3% Group                       0.773      0.782      0.057      0.058
                                             (0.143)    (0.142)    (0.017)    (0.017)
              4% Group                       0.682      0.676      0.058      0.057
                                             (0.142)    (0.142)    (0.018)    (0.017)
              5% Group                       0.618      0.616      0.045      0.045
                                             (0.142)    (0.141)    (0.017)    (0.017)
              6% Group                       0.602      0.587      0.047      0.046
                                             (0.142)    (0.141)    (0.017)    (0.017)
              7% Group                       0.605      0.606      0.057      0.058
                                             (0.142)    (0.141)    (0.017)    (0.017)
              8% Group                       0.599      0.604      0.037      0.038
                                             (0.142)    (0.141)    (0.016)    (0.016)
               N                              291,537 291,537 287,458 287,458
               Joint Specific Rate P-value     0.122     0.089      0.867       0.829
               Control Group Mean              2.706     2.706      0.225       0.225
               Control Variables                 N         Y          N           Y
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors in parentheses. "Ever contribute"
is an indicator for enrolling in TSP in the first quarter following the intervention with units in
percentage points. "Contribution rate" is the maximum TSP contribution rate selected in the first
quarter following the intervention, with non-participants receiving a value of zero. Control variables
include age, sex, race, marital status, education, AFQT score, years of service, and enlisted status.




                                                 34
                                           Table A.2: Heterogeneous Treatment Effects - Participation

                                                   (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)       (8) )
              Specific Rate                     0.3015     0.3407     0.6412      0.1607    0.2802     0.2205     0.3351      0.6044
                                                (0.1703)   (0.1597)   (0.2924)   (0.1624)   (0.1387)   (0.1129)   (0.1542)   (0.3813)
              Specific Rate*High Experience      -0.0155                                                                      -0.1696
                                                (0.2151)                                                                     (0.3447)
              Specific Rate*High Salary                     -0.0929                                                           -0.3277
                                                           (0.2162)                                                          (0.3298)
              Specific Rate*Enlisted                                   -0.4114                                                -0.4205
                                                                      (0.3195)                                               (0.3325)
              Specific Rate*High Age                                              0.2774                                     0.6345
                                                                                 (0.2149)                                    (0.3277)
              Specific Rate*Non-White                                                        0.0367                           0.0061
                                                                                            (0.2206)                         (0.2240)




35
              Specific Rate*Female                                                                      0.5644                0.5490
                                                                                                       (0.3640)              (0.3686)
              Specific Rate*Has Children                                                                           -0.0952    -0.2069
                                                                                                                  (0.2125)   (0.2671)
               N                                 262,453 262,453 262,453 262,453 262,453 262,453 262,453 262,453
               Baseline Group Mean                3.123      3.123      3.123      3.123     3.123      3.123     3.123      3.123
     * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors in parentheses. In all columns, the outcome indicates enrolling in TSP
     during the first quarter following the intervention; units are percentage points (0-100). All columns include controls for age, sex, race,
     marital status, education, AFQT score, years of service, and enlisted status. High experience indicates above-median experience (3 years
     or more). High salary indicates above-median salary ($4,004 per month or more). High age indicates above-median age (25 years or older).
                                         Table A.3: Heterogeneous Treatment Effects - Contribution Rate

                                                   (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
               Specific Rate                      0.0152     0.0119    0.0958      0.0005     0.0221     0.0132     0.0188     0.0911
                                                 (0.0215)   (0.0191)   (0.0469)   (0.0201)   (0.0171)   (0.0137)   (0.0196)   (0.0576)
               Specific Rate*High Experience      0.0070                                                                       -0.0242
                                                 (0.0257)                                                                     (0.0428)
               Specific Rate*High Salary                     0.0133                                                            -0.0165
                                                            (0.0260)                                                          (0.0434)
               Specific Rate*Enlisted                                  -0.0905                                                -0.0880
                                                                       (0.0492)                                               (0.0480)
               Specific Rate*High Age                                              0.0380                                     0.0608
                                                                                  (0.0257)                                    (0.0366)
               Specific Rate*Non-White                                                        -0.0078                          -0.0053
                                                                                             (0.0263)                         (0.0255)




36
               Specific Rate*Female                                                                      0.0416                0.0408
                                                                                                        (0.0415)              (0.0420)
               Specific Rate*Has Children                                                                           -0.0005    -0.0220
                                                                                                                   (0.0248)   (0.0307)
               N                                   258,774 258,774 258,774 258,774 258,774 258,774 258,774 258,774
               Baseline Group Mean                  0.258      0.258    0.258      0.258       0.258      0.258      0.258     0.258
     * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors in parentheses. In all columns, the outcome is the maximum TSP
     contribution rate selected in the first quarter following the intervention, with non-participants receiving a value of zero. All columns
     include controls for age, sex, race, marital status, education, AFQT score, years of service, and enlisted status. High experience indicates
     above-median experience (3 years or more). High salary indicates above-median salary ($4,004 per month or more). High age indicates
     above-median age (25 years or older).
                 Table A.4: Quarterly Effects of Treatments on TSP Contributions

                                      3 Months    6 Months      12 Months   18 Months    24 Months
 Baseline                              0.417       0.517         0.418       0.479         0.360
                                       (0.139)     (0.178)       (0.229)     (0.285)      (0.327)
 Specific Rate                         0.714       0.771         0.718       0.635        0.608
                                       (0.102)     (0.131)       (0.170)     (0.212)      (0.245)
 N                                     291,537        277,840    251,584     230,762      211,069
 Specific Rate vs. Baseline P-value     0.006          0.065      0.085        0.468       0.314
 Control Group Mean                     2.706          4.435      7.014       10.522      13.242

* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Outcome is an
indicator for having enrolled in the TSP during the given quarter following the intervention. Units
are in percentage points (0-100). Analysis excludes all servicemembers who left the Army before
the start of the given quarter. All regressions include controls for age, sex, race, marital status,
education, AFQT score, years of service, and enlisted status.




                                                 37
         Table A.5: Long-Run Cumulative Effects of Treatments on TSP Contributions

                                      Ever Contribute     Contribution Rate              Savings
                                       (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)          (5)             (6)
 Baseline                              0.208     0.237     0.040     0.043      41.461        42.673
                                      (0.358)   (0.350)    (0.020)   (0.020)    (24.324)      (23.835)
 Specific Rate                        0.501     0.544     0.054      0.057     51.432        54.172
                                      (0.268)   (0.263)   (0.015)    (0.015)   (17.907)      (17.543)
 N                                    207,701   207,701   207,225    207,225    207,701       207,701
 Specific Rate vs. Baseline P-value    0.276     0.243     0.381      0.362      0.591         0.527
 Control Group Mean                    15.767    15.767    0.578      0.578      573.6         573.6
 Control Variables                       N         Y         N          Y          N             Y

* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors in parentheses. "Ever contribute"
is an indicator for ever having enrolled in TSP during the two years following the intervention
with units in percentage points. "Contribution rate" is the average monthly TSP contribution
rate across the two-year intervention, with non-participants receiving a value of zero. "Savings" is
the total TSP contributions in dollars during the two years following the intervention. Analysis
excludes all servicemembers who left the Army before the end of the two-year intervention. Control
variables include age, sex, race, marital status, education, AFQT score, years of service, and
enlisted status.




                                                38
         Table A.6: Long-Run Effects of Treatments on Contributions, Constant Sample

                                      3 Months    6 Months      12 Months   18 Months    24 Months
 Baseline                              0.584       0.614         0.462        0.507        0.378
                                       (0.184)     (0.226)       (0.267)     (0.309)      (0.331)
 Specific Rate                         0.857       0.876         0.779       0.697        0.661
                                       (0.134)     (0.167)       (0.198)     (0.231)      (0.248)
 N                                     207,701        207,701    207,701     207,701      207,701
 Specific Rate vs. Baseline P-value     0.058          0.132      0.117        0.417       0.256
 Control Group Mean                     3.397          5.391      7.932       11.262      13.362

* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Outcome is an
indicator for having enrolled in the TSP in the given quarter following the intervention. Units
are in percentage points (0-100). Analysis excludes all servicemembers who left the Army before
the start of the given quarter. All regressions include controls for age, sex, race, marital status,
education, AFQT score, years of service, and enlisted status.




                                                 39
                Table A.7: Contribution Rate Choices: Baseline vs. Specific Rate

 Contribution Levels         1%         2%         3%        4%         5%        6%         7%            8%
 1% Rate Group            0.119       0.119       -0.026    -0.009     0.112     0.004      0.008      0.014
                          (0.043)     (0.049)    (0.041)   (0.032)    (0.072)   (0.030)    (0.025)    (0.023)
 2% Rate Group              0.034    0.242        0.033     0.042     0.145      -0.005     -0.018     0.006
                           (0.040)   (0.053)     (0.043)   (0.035)    (0.072)   (0.029)    (0.023)    (0.023)
 3% Rate Group              0.039      -0.016     0.046     0.023      0.022     0.016      -0.018     0.040
                           (0.040)    (0.044)    (0.044)   (0.034)    (0.069)   (0.031)    (0.023)    (0.025)
 4% Rate Group              -0.000     -0.055     -0.010    0.048      0.068     0.007      -0.003     0.041
                           (0.038)    (0.043)    (0.042)   (0.035)    (0.071)   (0.030)    (0.024)    (0.025)
 5% Rate Group              0.011      -0.057     0.015     0.028     0.145      0.004      0.004      0.018
                           (0.039)    (0.043)    (0.043)   (0.034)    (0.072)   (0.030)    (0.025)    (0.024)
 6% Rate Group              0.003      -0.000     -0.000    -0.000     -0.017   0.072       0.021      -0.007
                           (0.038)    (0.045)    (0.042)   (0.033)    (0.068)   (0.034)    (0.026)    (0.022)
 7% Rate Group              -0.024     0.007      -0.044    -0.041     0.029     -0.038    0.083       0.007
                           (0.037)    (0.045)    (0.040)   (0.031)    (0.070)   (0.028)    (0.030)    (0.023)
 8% Rate Group              -0.020     0.022      -0.026    0.011      -0.007    -0.003     -0.003    0.083
                           (0.037)    (0.046)    (0.041)   (0.033)    (0.069)   (0.030)    (0.025)    (0.028)
 N                         262,453    262,453   262,453    262,453    262,453   262,453    262,453    262,453
 Baseline Group Mean        0.213      0.295     0.257      0.158      0.697     0.130      0.089      0.072

* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Outcome is an
indicator for contributing exactly P% in the first quarter following the intervention. Units are in
percentage points (0-100). Analysis excludes control group members; estimated treatment effects
are relative to the baseline group. All regressions include controls for age, sex, race, marital status,
education, AFQT score, years of service, and enlisted status.




                                                  40
     Table A.8: Treatment Effects on TSP Contributions, Omitting 1 and 2 Percent Groups

                                                 Ever Contribute      Contribution Rate
                                                  (1)       (2)         (3)       (4)
           Baseline                             0.417      0.417      0.032      0.033
                                                (0.139)    (0.139)    (0.017)    (0.017)
           Specific Rate                        0.647      0.646      0.050     0.051
                                                (0.104)    (0.104)    (0.012)   (0.012)
            N                                     233,006 233,006 229,738 229,738
            Specific Rate vs. Baseline P-value     0.037      0.038     0.173      0.182
            Control Group Mean                     2.706      2.706     0.225      0.225
            Control Variables                        N          Y         N          Y
* p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Analyses omit 1 and 2 percent specific rate treatment groups.
Robust standard errors in parentheses. "Ever contribute" is an indicator for enrolling in TSP in the
first quarter following the intervention with units in percentage points (0-100). "Contribution rate"
is the maximum TSP contribution rate selected in the first quarter following the intervention, with
non-participants receiving a value of zero. Control variables include age, sex, race, marital status,
education, AFQT score, years of service, and enlisted status.




                                                 41
Figure A.1: Sample Messages
        (a) Baseline




      (b) Specific Rate




             42
