                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              EXPERIENCED SEGREGATION

                                       Susan Athey
                                     Billy A. Ferguson
                                     Matthew Gentzkow
                                      Tobias Schmidt

                                     Working Paper 27572
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27572


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2020




We thank Jonathan Dingel, Jessie Handbury, and numerous seminar participants for helpful
inputs and suggestions. We also thank our many dedicated research assistants for their
contributions to this project. We acknowledge funding from the Stanford Institute for Economic
Policy Research (SIEPR). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Susan Athey, Billy A. Ferguson, Matthew Gentzkow, and Tobias Schmidt. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Experienced Segregation
Susan Athey, Billy A. Ferguson, Matthew Gentzkow, and Tobias Schmidt
NBER Working Paper No. 27572
July 2020
JEL No. J15,R0

                                          ABSTRACT

We introduce a novel measure of segregation, experienced isolation, that captures individuals'
exposure to diverse others in the places they visit over the course of their days. Using Global
Positioning System (GPS) data collected from smartphones, we measure experienced isolation by
race. We find that the isolation individuals experience is substantially lower than standard
residential isolation measures would suggest, but that experienced and residential isolation are
highly correlated across cities. Experienced isolation is lower relative to residential isolation in
denser, wealthier, more educated cities with high levels of public transit use, and is also
negatively correlated with income mobility.

Susan Athey                                      Matthew Gentzkow
Graduate School of Business                      Department of Economics
Stanford University                              Stanford University
655 Knight Way                                   579 Jane Stanford Way
Stanford, CA 94305                               Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER                                         and NBER
athey@stanford.edu                               gentzkow@stanford.edu

Billy A. Ferguson                                Tobias Schmidt
Graduate School of Business                      Weserstrasse 174
Stanford University                              12045 Berlin
655 Knight Way                                   Germany
Stanford, CA 94305                               tobyschmidt@web.de
billyf@stanford.edu
1        Introduction
Social outcomes are profoundly shaped by the extent to which groups are segregated from one
another (Cutler and Glaeser 1997; Chetty and Hendren 2018a, 2018b; Chetty et al. 2016). As
a result, large literatures have developed in economics, sociology, and related fields seeking to
measure the extent of segregation across space and time.
       Most of this empirical work focuses on segregation in where people live. A leading measure
is the isolation index, which captures the share of individuals' neighbors who come from their
own group.1 If we view the object of interest as the exposure of one group to another (Massey
and Denton 1988; Cutler et al. 1999; Echenique and Fryer 2007), residential measures have
obvious limitations. Individuals living in highly segregated neighborhoods may be exposed to
diverse others where they work, shop, and socialize, while those living in apparently mixed
neighborhoods may have little contact with their neighbors and commute to highly segregated
places. A corollary is that standard residential segregation measures are highly sensitive to the
way in which neighborhood boundaries are defined (Cowgill and Cowgill 1951; Massey and
Denton 1988).
       In this paper we introduce a novel measure of segregation which addresses these limitations,
and estimate it using Global Positioning System (GPS) data. This experienced isolation has the
same form as the isolation index, but rather than assuming individuals are exposed uniformly to
those in their neighborhood of residence, it averages exposure over the places individuals actu-
ally visit over the course of their days. This measure does not depend on arbitrary neighborhood
boundaries, and it takes explicit account of the diversity experienced away from home. It can
capture individual-level heterogeneity within neighborhoods (Echenique and Fryer 2007), and
it can be disaggregated across times of day, locations, and activities, thus giving a richer picture
of the forces that increase or decrease segregation.
       Our main data are GPS signals from a sample of US smartphone users covering approxi-
mately 5% of the US population in the first four months of 2017. The data are obtained from a
company that aggregates anonymous pings from a range of smartphone apps. We observe each
device's home location as well as the location of every ping by the device recorded in the data.
We map these locations to a grid of geographic units approximately 500 feet square, known as
geohash7s. The sample of individuals is not random but is reasonably close to representative

1
    See, for example, Cutler and Glaeser (1997), Cutler et al. (1999), Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011), and Davis et al.
    (2019).

                                                          2
along a number of dimensions, and has sufficient coverage that we can correct for deviations
from representativeness using sample weights. We use the movement patterns we observe to
compute experienced racial isolation.
       Because we do not observe an individual's race directly, we define the two types whose
segregation we study to be individuals with homes in majority white geohash7s and individuals
with homes in majority non-white geohash7s. We refer to these two groups as WDs (White
home geohash7 Devices) and NWDs (Non-White home geohash7 Devices) for simplicity. The
median share white of majority white and non-white home geohash7s are 0.89 and 0.22, re-
spectively. We discuss below the implications of using these geographic definitions in place
of individual race, and we show robustness to an alternative strategy that imputes race at the
individual level.
       We present four main results: First, peoples' actual experiences as captured by our measure
are substantially less segregated than traditional residential isolation would suggest. The aver-
age experienced isolation across all Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) is 0.46, compared
to average residential isolation of 0.61.2 This implies that the share of WD's exposures to other
WDs is 46 percentage points greater than the share of NWD's exposures to WDs.
       Second, experienced and residential isolation across MSAs are highly correlated. The over-
all correlation of the two measures among the 366 MSAs in our sample is 0.86. Among the
50 most populous MSAs, Milwaukee, WI; Detroit, MI; and Cleveland, OH rank in the top 5 in
both residential and experienced isolation. Portland, OR; Seattle, WA; and Raleigh, NC rank in
the bottom 5 for both measures.
       Third, the variation in experienced relative to residential isolation is systematic. Experi-
enced isolation is relatively lower in MSAs with higher population density and public transit
use, consistent with the view that urban areas facilitate diverse interactions (Jacobs 1961). Ex-
periences are also less isolated in MSAs with higher income and education and lower unem-
ployment, possibly reflecting a role for social capital in reducing segregation (Putnam 2000).
Finally, relative experienced isolation is negatively correlated with Chetty et al.'s (2014) mea-
sure of income mobility, consistent with both diverse interactions increasing mobility and with
areas that facilitate opportunity also promoting diverse interactions.
       Fourth, decompositions across time and space reveal the extent to which different activities
increase or decrease segregation. Experienced isolation is lowest during the day and highest in

2
    Residential isolation based on our geographic definition of WD and NWD is larger than the standard measure of
    residential isolation based on individual race. We discuss the reasons for this difference below.

                                                         3
the morning and evening. Experienced isolation in home neighborhoods is higher than residen-
tial measures would suggest, whereas experienced isolation outside of home neighborhoods is
much lower. Isolation is lowest at entertainment, retail, and eating establishments, while time
at locations like churches and schools is somewhat more isolated.
       These findings have several broader implications. They suggest that standard measures
overstate the overall extent of segregation in the United States, and they highlight important
forces such as commercial activity that reduce it. They suggest that residential measures may
nevertheless be a good proxy when the main goal is to assess relative levels of segregation across
cities. Finally, they suggest a more nuanced view of where the negative effects of segregation
are likely to be largest. For example, local public goods such as schools or police services
that are explicitly tied to residential boundaries are more likely to be provided in segregated
environments. Any negative effects of segregation are likely higher for children and those who
do not work, and others whose exposure is more tied to their local neighborhoods. Policies
which affect the spatial distribution of commercial or leisure activities, or the transportation
cost of accessing these activities, may be as or more effective than policies explicitly targeting
housing.
       We emphasize three main limitations of our analysis. First, we have no direct information
about the individuals whose devices we see in our data, and so we define individual types based
on the demographic composition of home geohash7s rather than based on individual race. This
means we are targeting a slightly different concept than much of the prior literature on segre-
gation. We discuss alternative approaches including imputing race at the individual level in the
Online Appendix. Second, our sample is not fully representative, and the geolocation informa-
tion we get about any given device is sparse. Third, while we can observe when devices occupy
the same geographic space, we can not directly observe actual interaction between individuals.
Under our construction, a restaurant-goer is just as exposed to the waiter or the cook in the
kitchen as she is to the person sitting across the table. White (1983) highlights this subtlety by
distinguishing geographic segregation (the concept we measure) and sociological segregation
(based on actual interactions). Sunstein (2002), among others, argues that geographic segrega-
tion is of interest on its own.3
       This paper builds on a large literature on measuring urban segregation. Important early work
3
    Sunstein (2002) writes that integrated physical spaces increase "the set of chance encounters with diverse others"
    and foster environments where "exposure is shared." He argues that overhearing conversations while at a restau-
    rant, a bus stop, or just walking down the street all contribute to individuals' understanding of diverse others and
    open up opportunities for interaction.

                                                            4
on both the definition and measurement of segregation includes Duncan and Duncan (1955),
Taeuber and Taeuber (1965), White (1983), Massey and Denton (1988), and Massey and Denton
(1993). Cutler et al. (1999) provide a comprehensive analysis of segregation in US cities over
the century from 1890 to 1990. Card et al. (2008) study the dynamics of neighborhood tipping.4
Our work is also related to a growing literature using GPS or similar location data to study social
interactions.5



2     Data

2.1     Geography
We follow the literature in characterizing segregation at the level of MSAs and in using census
tracts to approximate neighborhoods within MSAs.6 The finest geographic unit in our analysis
is the geohash7, which as mentioned above is a unit of a grid roughly 500 feet square.7 We use
census blocks to impute geohash7 demographics. Appendix Figures A1, A2, and A3 illustrate
the relative sizes of geohash7s, census blocks, and census tracts, focusing on an urban census
tract and a rural census tract respectively in Birmingham, AL.
    We obtain information about the location of establishments and features of interest from two
sources: InfoUSA and OpenStreetMaps (OSM). The 2015 InfoUSA US Businesses mailing list
contains the names, addresses, industries, and latitude / longitude for 15.6 million businesses
in the United States. We take from the full list all establishments that belong to the broad cat-
egories of "restaurants and bars," "civil, social and religious organizations," "accommodation,"
"sports and recreation," "entertainment," and "retail,"8 2,368,216 places all in all. We match
each establishment to the geohash7s that contain its latitude / longitude. From OSM, we extract
4
  Park and Kwan (2018) define a notion of "multi-contextual segregation" that is closely related to our work in
  considering segregation over the varying geographic and temporal contexts of peoples' daily lives.
5
  Glaeser et al. (2018) anticipate the value of such data. Blattman et al. (2018) track police patrols in Bogot`   a,
  Colombia using GPS to estimate how increased state presence affects violent and property crime. Chen and
  Rohla (2018) and Chen et al. (2019) use GPS data to measure the effects of political polarization on the length of
  Thanksgiving dinners and to measure racial differences in waiting times at polling places respectively. Davis et
  al. (2019) use data from Yelp to measure the segregation of restaurants in New York City, finding that restaurants
  are less segregated than residential neighborhoods. Caetano and Maheshri (2019) use data provided by the app
  Foursquare to quantify segregation by gender and by age in public places, and Phillips et al. (2019) use geotagged
  tweets to build an index capturing the extent to which residents in each neighborhood of a city travel to all other
  neighborhoods in equal proportions.
6
  We omit Micropolitan Statistical Areas.
7
  The geohash geocoding scheme divides the globe into grids of increasing fineness. Geohash1s divide the globe
  into 32 cells of equal size. Geohash2s divide each of these cells into 32 smaller cells, and so on.
8
  See Appendix Section A1 for our manual classification of NAICS code into these categories.

                                                         5
polygon data for outdoor spaces like parks, playgrounds, sports fields and gardens, and educa-
tional institutions like schools, kindergartens, universities and colleges (See Appendix Section
2.1 for details). We associate each OSM feature with all geohash7s that intersect the feature's
polygon. Appendix Figure A4 depicts geohash7s associated with civil, social, and religious
organizations, education, outdoor spaces and restaurants and bars in downtown Birmingham,
AL.
    Many geohash7s are labelled with multiple features. We assume pings in a device's home
geohash7 (defined below) are at home regardless of what other features are present. We assign
all pings in non-home geohash7s that contain transportation features to transportation. All other
pings are allocated uniformly across features present in the geohash7.


2.2    GPS Device Movements
Our GPS data are provided by a company that collects anonymous location data from mobile
applications on users' smartphones. The sample is an unbalanced panel of GPS "pings" from
more than 17 million devices spanning January to April 2017.9 Pings are logged whenever an
application on a device requests location information. In some cases this will be the result of
a device actively using an application, such as for navigation or weather information, while in
other cases applications may request the information even while running in the background.
Pings thus occur at irregular intervals. For each ping, we observe a timestamp, a device iden-
tifier, and the geohash7 in which the ping occurs. The data also contain the geohash7 of each
device's home, inferred probabilistically from the device's nighttime and early-morning pings.


2.3    Demographics
We impute geohash7 demographics from the 2010 census. We match each home geohash7 to
the census tract that contains its centroid. This yields a matching tract for 99.53 percent of
devices in our sample. We match each home geohash7 to all census blocks that overlap its area.
This yields a match to at least one census block with non-zero population for 98.12 percent of
devices. We assign demographics to each home geohash7 by taking an area-weighted average
of the demographics of the overlapping blocks.10 We define "white" population based on the
9
 We use "GPS" as a shorthand for a variety of means used by smartphones to determine their physical location.
 These include cell phone towers, the identity of nearby WiFi networks as well as the US GPS and the Russian
 GLONASS systems of satellites.
10
   We show robustness to alternative methods of demographic imputation in Appendix A2.2.

                                                     6
census designation "White Alone (Non-Hispanic)," and we group all other census race groups
in the category "non-white."
       We use data on MSA characteristics from the 2010 American Community Survey (ACS)
and the 2010 decennial census. These variables include the MSA's median age, education
level, unemployment rate, median income, population density, and share of residents using
public transit to get to work.11 We also use economic mobility measures from Chetty et al.
(2020) indicating the share of individuals born to parents at the 25th percentile of the income
distribution who make it to the top quintile for white and black populations. We compute MSA-
level mobility measures by averaging across counties weighting by white and black county
populations respectively.


2.4        Summary Statistics
We observe 17,730,615 devices with home locations identified in 7,292,623 distinct geohash7s.
We match these home geohash7s to 72,785 census tracts and 6,186,564 census blocks. This
matching procedure succeeds for 17,397,580 devices, the final sample used throughout the rest
of the paper.
       To assess the representativeness of the sample, we compare the average census tract demo-
graphics of devices in our sample to averages in the US population. We find that our sample
is representative in terms of gender, age, and unemployment rate. We find that it slightly over-
samples more educated and wealthy areas, with average median income across census tracts
in our sample about a thousand dollars more than the U.S. mean, and census tract poverty rate
about a percentage point lower. We address this imbalance by weighting as shown in equation
4. Details of this comparison and summaries of the average activity levels of devices in our
sample are shown in Appendix Tables A2 and A3 respectively.
       While our WD and NWD designations are not equivalent to individual race, they are highly
correlated with it. The median share white in a device's home geohash7 is 0.22 for NWDs and
0.89 for WDs. We plot the histogram of this share for both groups in Appendix Figure A7.




11
     See Appendix Table A4 for a complete description and sources for census, ACS, and mobility variables.

                                                         7
3     Measure

3.1     Definition
Consider a population of individuals indexed by i and a set of MSAs or other geographic areas
of interest indexed by a. We collect each individual who is a member of one of two groups
which we denote W and N W . In our analysis below, W will be individuals from majority white
geohash7s (WDs) and N W will be individuals from majority non-white geohash7s (NWDs).
Each individual has a set of exposures to other individuals in area a. We let ei  [0, 1] denote
the share of individual i's exposures that are to members of group W .12
     A general form of the isolation index for area a captures the difference between the average
value of ei among individuals in the two groups (cf. Gentzkow and Shapiro 2011):

                                           1               1
                                   Ia =            ei -              ei .                                         (1)
                                          |Wa | iW      |N Wa | iN W
                                                        a                    a



Here Wa and N Wa are the sets of individuals making up the two groups in area a and |·| denotes
the size of these sets. This measure ranges from zero--no isolation, with average ei equal for
the two groups--to one--perfect isolation, with ei = 0 for all i  N W and ei = 1 for all
i  W.
     The standard version of this measure is residential isolation, which is equivalent to equation
(1) under the assumption that each individual is exposed uniformly to others in her neigh-
borhood of residence (Massey and Denton 1988; Cowgill and Cowgill 1951; Jahn 1950). In
practice neighborhoods are typically defined to be census tracts. Letting c (i) denote i's census
tract of residence, and letting rc denote the share of the residents of tract c who are in group W ,
residential isolation is given by:13

                                          1                  1
                               RIa =              rc(i) -              rc(i) .                                    (2)
                                         |Wa | iW         |N Wa | iN W
                                                    a                            a



12
   In our empirical analysis, we focus on the case where the groups W and N W partition the population, so that
   1 - ei is individual i's exposure to members of group N W . Our measure is also well-defined in the case where
   some individuals in the population are neither in W nor N W . In this case, isolation where ei is the share exposed
   to W may be different from isolation had we defined ei as the share exposed to N W .
13
   This form of the isolation index is equivalent to Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011). Much of the literature using the
   isolation index studies simply the exposures of a group, without taking their difference. (White 1986, Iceland
   et al. 2002, Echenique and Fryer 2007). Massey and Denton (1988) provides a survey of other measures meant
   to encapsulate various qualitative aspects of segregation, and motivates our decision to capture segregation by
   measuring exposure.

                                                            8
Because this measure does not rely on any information other than the racial composition of each
neighborhood, it can easily be computed using aggregate census data.
    The new measure we introduce, experienced isolation, instead assumes that ei is given by
the composition of the individuals actually present in the locations that i visits over time. We
index time by t  [0, 1] and consider a finite set of locations within area a indexed by l. We
think of a location l as a specific place such as a restaurant, workplace, or park that is much
smaller than a neighborhood. In our application, locations will be geohash7s. Letting l (i, t)
denote i's location at time t, and letting s (l, t) denote the share of individuals in location l at
time t who are from group W , experienced isolation is defined to be:

                                       1                                                1
                        1                                              1
           EIa =                            s (l (i, t) , t) dt -                            s (l (i, t) , t) dt.       (3)
                       |Wa | iW       t=0                           |N Wa | iN W       t=0
                                  a                                                a



3.2    Estimation
Estimating experienced isolation EIa would be straightforward if we observed continuous lo-
cation data for all individuals. While our GPS dataset is rich, it still falls well short of this ideal.
There are two key limitations: (1) we observe locations only when a device pings rather than
continuously; (2) we only observe a sample of individuals not the full population. We make
several simplifying assumptions in order to address these limitations.
    To address (1), we first assume that the times when an individual i visits a location l are
not systematically selected to be times when s (l, t) is unusually high or low. That is, letting sl
denote the overall expectation of s (l, t) over t  [0, 1], we have E [s (l, t) |l (i, t) = l] = sl for
                                                                                        1
all i. Provided this assumption holds, the expectation of the term                     t=0
                                                                                             s (l (i, t) , t) dt is equal to
Si =     l qil sl   where qil is the expected share of i's time that is spent in location l. We further
assume that the times at which we observe pings are a random sample from [0, 1] so we can
estimate qil and sl by the shares of i's pings that occur in location l and the share of all pings in
location l that come from W 's respectively.
    Both of these are strong assumptions. The first would be violated, for example, if type W
individuals tend to visit a particular park or restaurant in the morning while type N W individu-
als tend to visit it in the evening. The second would be violated if our data oversample periods
in which the relative share of type W individuals is unusually high or low. In Appendix Section
A2.3 we present robustness to an alternative specification allowing non-random weighting of
pings across time.


                                                             9
   To address (2), we re-weight home locations in our sample to match the distribution of
population in the 2010 census. Because our data are relatively sparse at the geohash7 level, we
re-weight by census tract. We define the weight for individual i to be

                                                     Nc(i)
                                               i =                                           (4)
                                                     ~c(i)
                                                     N

                                                 ~c is the number of devices in our sample with
where Nc is the census population of tract c and N
home locations in tract c.
   Combining these assumptions, we form an estimator of Si as follows. First, we form a
leave-out estimate of sl :
                                                    -i
                                                 j Pl  W     j
                                       ^-
                                       s  i
                                         l =                     ,                           (5)
                                                        -i
                                                     j Pl    j

where Pl-i is the set of pings associated with individuals other than i who visit location l and
we abuse notation by letting j denote the weight of the individual associated with ping j . We
omit visits by i from this measure to avoid a severe small-sample bias that can arise when some
locations have a small number of observed visits (Cortese et al. 1976; Carrington and Troske
1997; Gentzkow et al. 2019). Second, we estimate S i by

                                         ^i = 1
                                         S            s^-i ,
                                             |Pi | j P l(j )
                                                        i



where Pi is the set of pings associated with i and l (j ) is the location of ping j .
   Finally, we estimate experienced isolation by

                              ^ a=    1         ^i - 1             ^i .
                             EI               i S                i S
                                     |Wa | iW       |N Wa | iN W

   We estimate residential isolation as


                          ^a =    1                    1
                         RI                 ^c(i) -
                                          i r                    i r
                                                                   ^c(i)                     (6)
                                 |Wa | iW           |N Wa | iN W
                                           a                         a


where r
      ^c is the share of devices in our sample with home census tract c that are WDs. This
differs from the residential isolation measure typically reported in the literature because the
types we consider are WDs and NWDs rather than white and black individuals and because we
infer r
      ^c from our device data rather than census data.


                                                 10
3.3        Discussion
Our measure of experienced isolation considers an individual to be exposed to another if they
are in the same location at the same time. This is what allows us to write equation 3 replacing
the ei of equation 1 with the average of s (l, t) across space and time. The set of people that
contribute to an individual's exposure is, as discussed in the introduction, quite different from
the set of people with whom an individual actually interacts. To the extent that we view actual
interactions as the true object of interest, our measure can be seen as an approximation which
significantly improves on residential measures but may still over- or understate isolation to the
extent that interactions within different geohash7s are relatively more or less segregated.
       In our empirical analysis, we define the types W and N W to be WDs and NWDs--devices
from majority white and non-white home geohash7s--rather than white and non-white individ-
uals. This is a departure from prior literature on residential segregation, where the assumption
of uniform exposure within neighborhoods makes it possible to compute segregation based on
individual race (using aggregate race shares measured in census data).
       Therefore, the target of our estimation is subtly different than the standard target. To gain
some intuition for the difference, note that individual geohash7s are perfectly segregated be-
tween WDs and NWDs by construction, whereas they are less than perfectly segregated by
individual race. As noted in Section 2.4, the median WD lives in a home geohash7 which is 89
percent rather than 100 percent white, and the median NWD lives in a home geohash7 which
is 78 percent rather than 100 percent non-white. We show below that this leads residential iso-
lation between WDs and NWDs to be higher than between individual whites and non-whites.
While the true level of segregation under our definition may be different, we expect the qualita-
tive patterns we emphasize--e.g., the comparison of residential to experienced segregation--to
be robust across alternative definitions.
       As support for this, we report in Appendix Section A3 results using an alternative strategy
where we impute race stochastically at the individual device level based on the composition
of a home geohash7. This has the advantage of bringing our target concept closer to that in
the prior literature. It has the disadvantage of introducing measurement error in the measure
of a device's type that could create a downward bias in experienced segregation estimates.14
While this alternative does change the level of segregation as expected, we confirm that our

14
     The random imputation strategy is equivalent to assuming that movement patterns are independent of individual
     race conditional on home geohash7. In simulations, we find that this tends to lead to a downward bias in estimates
     of experienced segregation.

                                                           11
main qualitative conclusions are indeed robust.



4     Main Results
Figure 1 shows estimated experienced and residential isolation for all MSAs in our sample.15
Two key facts are immediately apparent from these maps. First, experienced isolation is lower
than residential isolation in large sections of the country. Second, the two measures are cor-
related across space, with both tending to be higher in the South, the Rust Belt, and in major
cities, and tending to be lower in the upper Midwest and Northwest.
     Figure 2 compares the two measures more directly, plotting experienced isolation against
residential isolation. Experienced isolation is lower than residential isolation where residential
isolation is high and higher than residential isolation where residential isolation is low. MSAs
in the former category, however, account for the vast majority of the country's population, in-
cluding all 15 of the most populous MSAs, with 87.9 percent of people living in MSAs where
experienced isolation is less than residential isolation. The population-weighted average experi-
enced isolation across all MSAs is 0.46, compared to average residential isolation of 0.61. The
10th and 90th percentiles of experienced isolation are 0.37 and 0.53, compared to 0.34 and 0.78
for residential isolation. This figure also confirms that experienced and residential isolation are
highly correlated across MSAs, with a Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.864 and a Spearman
rank correlation coefficient of 0.84. Among the 20 most populous MSAs, the ratio of experi-
enced isolation to residential isolation is lowest (  0.6) in San Francisco-Oakland-Fremont,
CA and Los Angeles, CA and highest (  0.8) in Atlanta, GA, and Riverside, CA.
     To describe the factors that correlate with lower experienced segregation, we regress ex-
perienced isolation on observed MSA characteristics controlling for fifteen equal-sized bins
of residential isolation. We focus on population-weighted univariate relationships, including a
single observed characteristic in each case.16 We emphasize that these are purely descriptive
correlations and need not imply anything about the causes or effects of segregation.
     Figure 3 shows the results. Each panel plots residuals of experienced isolation against resid-
uals of a given MSA characteristic after partialing out the residential isolation controls. Expe-
rienced isolation is relatively lower in MSAs with higher population density and more public
15
   Appendix Figure A8 presents a map with the difference between experienced and residential isolation for each
   MSA. Appendix Tables A5-A7 report both experienced and residential isolation for each MSA.
16
   Appendix Table A8 shows similar results in regressions that are unweighted but subset to the top 50, 100, and
   200 most populous MSAs.

                                                      12
transit use. This is consistent with the fact that in dense areas residents from different neighbor-
hoods are less separated by physical space, and may reflect the role of urban amenities such as
parks and public facilities in facilitating diverse interactions (Jacobs 1961). Experiences are also
relatively less isolated in MSAs with higher income, more education, and lower unemployment.
This could reflect a number of forces including the role of social capital in reducing segrega-
tion (Putnam 2000). Experienced isolation is relatively lower where populations are younger,
possibly reflecting the importance of schools and workplaces in reducing segregation. Finally,
relative experienced isolation is negatively correlated with Chetty et al.'s (2014) measures of in-
come mobility for both blacks and whites, consistent with both diverse interactions increasing
mobility and with areas that facilitate opportunity also promoting diverse interactions.



5        Decomposing Experienced Isolation

5.1        By Time
We first ask how experienced isolation varies over hours of the day. To do this, we restrict both
exposures and the set of devices to all those that occur in a specific hour according to the MSA's
local time zone. Exposures are only estimated in geohash7s that are visited by devices that ping
within that hour. For example, experienced isolation for 10 a.m. restricts our sample to pings
that occur between 10 a.m. and 11 a.m. local time. After restricting the set of pings and devices,
the estimation of experienced isolation is identical to our baseline measure.
       Figure 4 plots experienced isolation over the course of the day, scaled relative to the level
of residential isolation. The figure highlights the 10 most populous MSAs. The results are
intuitive: Experienced isolation is lowest in the middle of the day as people move around and
highest late at night as people withdraw into their homes. The ratio mostly differs in level
between MSAs and almost all MSAs share the same time profile.


5.2        By Location
We next decompose experienced isolation by location. Much like restricting to pings within
an hour, we restrict to pings that occur within a set of geohash7s of a particular type.17 These
results are shown in Figure 5. The leftmost point in the plot shows the average of our baseline

17
     If an individual never visits a geohash7 of the type in question they are dropped from the sample.

                                                           13
measure of experienced isolation across MSAs, which includes all locations in our sample. The
error bars in the plot indicate ±1 standard deviation of the measure across MSAs.
       The next two points in the figure show experienced isolation for locations within vs. outside
of home census tracts. The results show that experienced isolation within home tracts (0.63
on average across MSAs) is higher than overall experienced isolation (0.46 on average), and
actually higher than residential isolation (0.61 on average).18 As discussed above, this result
is not mechanical: experienced isolation within the home tract could differ from residential
isolation in either direction, both because within-tract exposure is not uniform and because it
includes visitors who live outside the home tract. In contrast, experienced isolation outside of
home tracts is much lower, with an average of 0.21 across MSAs. Thus, time spent away from
home is the key force reducing segregation relative to what the standard residential measure
would suggest.
       Figure 5 summarizes the differences in experienced isolation for specific categories of fea-
tures.19 The baseline category contains all features, as well as time spent at home. Average
experienced isolation in outdoor spaces like parks, gardens, sports fields and playgrounds is
only 50.3 percent of mean baseline isolation, and commercial establishments like restaurants
and bars and retail stores have experienced isolation that is only 43.5 and 47.8 percent of base-
line isolation respectively. Isolation is among its lowest in places of entertainment like theaters
(24.3 percent of baseline) and accommodations like hotels (24.6 percent of baseline). Appendix
Table A9 shows summary statistics for experienced isolation across a wider set of feature types.


5.3       By Race
Finally, we can decompose the differences in exposure that underlie the isolation index between
WDs and NWDs. Experienced isolation is the difference between these groups in average
exposure E [s (l, t)]. We ask how the experienced exposure relative to residential exposure
differs by group. The results, which we present in Appendix Figures A10 and A11, show that the
difference between experienced and residential exposure is relatively small for WDs and much
larger for NWDs. It also shows that NWDs' experienced exposure varies much more across
MSAs and across different feature types. This suggests that factors which reduce segregation
away from home may have a particularly large impact on the experiences of non-whites.


18
     Appendix Figure A9 depicts experienced isolation within and outside home tracts.
19
     Appendix Figure A12 depicts ping activity across features by WD/NWD designation.

                                                       14
6    Robustness
The Online Appendix reports a number of additional specifications probing the robustness of
our main result. We provide detail on these specifications in Online Appendix A2 and show
the results in Online Appendix Table A10. They show that our main qualitative conclusions are
robust to: (i) excluding pings that are likely to occur while devices are commuting or traveling;
(ii) using alternative sources of demographic data; (iii) excluding devices with home locations
outside the MSA; (iv) dropping the top 5 percent of devices in terms of number of pings per
day; (v) excluding pings occurring between midnight and 6 a.m.; (vi) using only the first ping
emitted by a device in a given hour (so as to avoid over-weighting hours with frequent pings).
The final result in this table shows that we would over-estimate experienced segregation if we
used a naive estimator rather than the leave-out correction in equation (5).



7    Conclusion
The extent to which members of different groups are able to see, meet, and interact with one an-
other can profoundly shape economic and social outcomes. Standard isolation indices capture
such patterns under the assumption that people are uniformly exposed to others in their neigh-
borhoods of residence. Our measure of experienced isolation relaxes this assumption, making
it possible to leverage novel location data to describe the exposures people actually experience
as they move around over the course of their days.
    We find that the isolation people actually experience is substantially lower than residential
measures would suggest. People spend substantial time away from their home neighborhoods,
and when they do they are much more likely to encounter diverse others than they would at
home. Commercial places like restaurants and retail shops are a particularly strong force pulling
against segregation, while local amenities such as churches and schools tend to remain more
segregated. One implication is that public goods that are tied to residential boundaries should
be a particular focus of efforts to combat segregation. They also suggest that the negative effects
of segregation are likely higher for those like children and the elderly whose exposure is more
tied to their local neighborhoods.
    While experienced and residential segregation are highly correlated across cities, the gap
between them varies systematically, with relatively less experienced isolation in cities that are
denser, wealthier, and more educated, that have greater use of public transport, and where in-


                                                15
come mobility is higher. These correlations do not allow us to draw any direct conclusions
about either the causes or consequences of segregation, but they point toward factors that will
be especially fruitful for subsequent research to investigate.




                                                16
References
Blattman, C., D. P. Green, D. Ortega and S. Tobon. 2019."Place Based Interventions at Scale:
     The Direct and Spillover Effects of Policing and City Services on Crime." Working Paper.
Caetano, G. and V. Maheshri. 2019. "Gender Segregation within Neighborhoods." Regional
     Science and Urban Economics 77:253-263.
Card, D., A. Mas and J. Rothstein. 2008. "Tipping and the Dynamics of Segregation." The
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(1):177-218.
Carrington, William J., Kenneth R. Troske. 1997. "On Measuring Segregation in Samples with
     Small Units." Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 15(4):402-409.
Chen, K.M., K. Haggag, D. Pope and R. Rohla. 2019. "Racial Disparities in Voting Wait Times:
     Evidence from Smartphone Data." NBER Working Paper No. 26487.
Chen, K. M. and R. Rohla. 2018. "The Effect of Partisanship and Political Advertising on Close
     Family Ties." Science 360(6392):1020-1024.
Chetty, R., N. Hendren, P. Kline, E. Saez. 2014. "Where is the land of Opportunity? The
     Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States." The Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 129(4):1553-1623.
Chetty, R. and N. Hendren, 2018a. "The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Mo-
     bility I: Childhood Exposure Effects." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133(3):1107-
     1162.
Chetty, R. and N. Hendren, 2018b. "The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Mobil-
     ity II: County-Level Estimates." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133(3):1163-1228.
Chetty, R., N. Hendren and L. F. Katz. 2016. "The Effects of Exposure to Better Neighborhoods
     on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment." The American
     Economic Review 106 (4):855­902.
Chetty, R., N. Hendren, M. R. Jones and S. R. Porter. 2020. "Race and Economic Opportunity in
     the United States: An Intergenerational Perspective." The Quarterly Journal of Economics
     135(2):711-783.
Cortese, C. F., R. F. Falk and J. K. Cohen. 1976. "Further Considerations on the Methodological
     Analysis of Segregation Indices." American Sociological Review 41(4):630­37.
Cowgill, D. O. and M. S. Cowgill. 1951. "An Index of Segregation Based on Block Statistics."
     American Sociological Review 16:825-31.
Cutler, D. M. and E. L. Glaeser. 1997. "Are Ghettos Good or Bad?" The Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 112(3):827­72.
Cutler, D. M., E. L. Glaeser and J. L. Vigdor. 1999. "The Rise and Decline of the American
     Ghetto." The Journal of Political Economy 107(3):455­506.
Davis, D. R., J. I. Dingel, J. Monras and E. Morales. 2019. "How Segregated Is Urban Con-


                                              17
     sumption?" Journal of Political Economy 127(4).
Diamond, R., T. McQuade and F. Qian. 2019. "The Effects of Rent Control Expansion on
     Tenants, Landlords, and Inequality: Evidence from San Francisco." American Economic
     Review 109(9):3365-94.
Duncan, O. D. and B. Duncan. 1955. "A Methodological Analysis of Segregation Indexes."
     American Sociological Review 20(2):210­17.
Echenique, F. and R. G. Fryer. 2007. "A Measure of Segregation Based on Social Interactions."
     The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(2):441­85.
Gentzkow, M. and J. M. Shapiro. 2011."Ideological Segregation Online and Offline." The
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(4):1799­1839.
Gentzkow, M., J. M. Shapiro, and M. Taddy. 2019."Measuring Group Differences in High-
     Dimensional Dhoices: Method and Application to Congressional Speech." Econometrica
     87(4):1307-1340.
Glaeser, E. L., S.D. Kominers, M. Luca and N. Naik. 2018. "Big Data And Big Citites:
     The Promises and Limitations of Improved Measures of Urban Life." Economic Inquery
     56:114-137.
Humes, K. R., N. A. Jones and R. R. Ramirez. 2011."Overview of Race and Hispanic Origin:
     2010." 2010 Census Briefs.
Iceland, J., D. H. Weinberg and E. Steinmetz. 2002."Racial and Ethnic Residential Segregation
     in the United States: 1980-2000." Census 2000 Special Reports.
Jacobs, Jane. 1961. The Death and Life of Great American Cities. New York : Vintage Books.
Jahn, J. A. 1950. "The Measurement of Ecological Segregation: Derivation of an Index Based
     on the Criterion of Reproducibility." American Sociological Review 15:101-104.
Massey, D. S. and N. A. Denton. 1988. "The Dimensions of Residential Segregation." Social
     Forces. A Scientific Medium of Social Study and Interpretation 67(2):281­315.
Massey, D. S. and N. A. Denton. 1993. American Apartheid: Segregation and the Making of
     the Underclass. Harvard University Press.
Park, Y.M. and M. Kwan. 2018. "Beyond Residential Segregation: A Spatiotemporal Approach
     to Examining Multi­Contextual Segregation." Computers, Environment and Urban Sys-
     tems 71:C.
Phillips, N.E., B.L. Levy, R.J. Sampson, M.L. Small and R.Q. Wang. 2019. "The Social In-
     tegration of American Cities: Network Measures of Connectedness Based on Everyday
     Mobility across Neighborhoods." Social Methods & Research.
Putnam, R.D. 2000. Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community. New
     York: Simon & Schuster.
Sunstein, C. R. 2002. Republic.com. Princeton University Press.



                                             18
US Census Bureau.         2017.     "TIGER/Line Shapefiles, Technical Documentation."
    https://www2.census.gov/geo/pdfs/maps-data/data/tiger/tgrshp2017.
Taeuber, K. E. and A.F. Taeuber. 1965. Negroes in Cities: Residential Segregation and Neigh-
    borhood Change. Chicago. Aldine Pub. Co.
White, M. J. 1983. "The Measurement of Spatial Segregation. "American Journal of Sociology
    88(5):1008-1018.
White, M. J. 1986. "Segregation and Diversity Measures in Population Distribution." Popula-
    tion Index 52 (2):198­221.




                                            19
Experienced isolation




Residential isolation




                  Isolation
                              0.0        0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8



Figure 1: Experienced and Residential Isolation by MSA




                                    20
    Experienced isolation
                                                                                                                            Milwaukee, WI
                            0.6                                                                    Birmingham, AL
                                                                                                                    Detroit, MI
                                                                                              Phoenix, AZ
                                                                                   Atlanta, GA     Chicago, IL Philadelphia, PA
                                                                                                                         New York, NY
                                                                        Riverside, CA            Houston, TX Miami, FL
                                                                                      Dallas, TX
                                                                                                                    Los Angeles, CA
                                                                                                 Boston, MA Washington, DC

                            0.4                                                                        San Francisco, CA
                                                                                Seattle, WA




                            0.2




                            0.0
                                  0.00             0.25                  0.50                                 0.75
                                                                                                              Residential isolation



                                         Figure 2: Experienced vs. Residential Isolation
Notes: Plot shows experienced and residential isolation for each MSA. The size of each point is propor-
tional to the MSA's population. The labeled points designate the 15 most populous MSAs. We plot the
45 degree line and a local polynomial fit.




                                                               21
                                                   log(Population density)                              Public transit use                                      Median income (thousands)
         Experienced Isolation (Residual)
                                             0.2                                                  0.2                                                     0.2

                                             0.1                                                  0.1                                                     0.1

                                             0.0                                      q           0.0                                            q        0.0                        q

                                            -0.1                                                 -0.1                                                    -0.1

                                                         -0.012                                                                    -0.1236                                                   -0.0017
                                            -0.2                                                 -0.2                                                    -0.2
                                                        (0.0026)                                                                   (0.0295)                                                  (0.0005)
                                                   -4            -2               0          2           -0.1         0.0          0.1                          -10   -5         0       5          10



                                                   Share with Bachelor's                                Unemployment rate                                       Median age
                                             0.2                                                  0.2                                                     0.2

                                             0.1                                                  0.1                                                     0.1

                                             0.0                        q                         0.0             q                                       0.0                q

                                            -0.1                                                 -0.1                                                    -0.1

                                                                                  -0.2491                                           1.7255                                               -0.0015
                                            -0.2                                                 -0.2                                                    -0.2
                                                                                  (0.0428)                                         (0.2842)                                              (0.0007)
                                                    -0.1          0.0             0.1               -0.02 -0.01   0.00      0.01    0.02        0.03            -10          0                 10



                                                   Black income mobility                                White income mobility
                                             0.2                                                  0.2

                                             0.1                                                  0.1

                                             0.0             q                                    0.0                               q

                                            -0.1                                                 -0.1

                                                                              -0.146                                               -0.2302
                                            -0.2                                                 -0.2
                                                                              (0.105)                                              (0.0449)
                                                           0.0              0.1           0.2       -0.15 -0.10 -0.05 0.00     0.05      0.10     0.15




                                               Figure 3: Residual Experienced Isolation and MSA Characteristics
Notes: On the y-axis, we plot the residual from a population weighted regression of experienced isolation
on fifteen equal sized bins of residential isolation at the MSA level. The x-axis in each plot refers to the
specified MSA characteristic. Each point refers to an MSA and is shaded and sized relative to total
population. In the white box in the lower left corner, we show the coefficient and standard error from the
population weighted regression of experienced isolation on the residential isolation bin fixed effects and
the specified covariate. The blue line shows the population weighted linear fit. The share with bachelor's
variable includes the percent of people in an MSA that have at least a bachelor's degree. The black and
white income measures average Chetty et al.'s (2020) county estimates (pooled by race) of the share of
individuals born in the 25th percentile of the income distribution who make it to the top quintile. Public
transit use is the share of the working population that uses public transport to get to work.




                                                                                                                  22
           Ratio   1.0




                   0.8




                   0.6



                   12 am            6 am                    12 pm                 6 pm


                                    Atlanta   Dallas           Miami          Washington
                                    Boston    Houston          New York       Other
                                    Chicago   Los Angeles      Philadelphia




                   Figure 4: Experienced Isolation Relative to Baseline by Time of Day
Notes: We plot the ratio of experienced to residential isolation in each hour of the day, highlighting the
10 most populous MSAs. Note that isolation can only be calculated for the devices active in a given hour,
so the sample does change for each hour specification.




                                                      23
    Experienced isolation


                                                            q

                            0.6

                                       q


                            0.4

                                                                                      q
                                                                                               q   q
                                                                                                       q
                            0.2                                       q                                    q

                                                                                                               q

                                                                                                                   q   q




                                                                                                                     n
                                      e




                                                        ct


                                                                     ct




                                                                                                           tio ial


                                                                                                                     n


                                                                                                                    .)


                                                                                                                     il


                                                                                                                    rs


                                                                                                                    ts




                                                                                                                      t
                                                                                                                  en
                                   lin




                                                                                                                  io
                                                                                                                  io




                                                                                                                  ta
                                                                                                                 tc




                                                                                                                 or
                                                                     ra




                                                                                                                ba
                                                       ra




                                                                                                       za c
                                                                                                       Ed ns




                                                                                                               m
                                                                                                               at




                                                                                                             Re




                                                                                                               at
                                                                                                              ,e
                                                                                                    ni so
                                                       et


                                                                 et




                                                                                                              rp
                                  se




                                                                                                            nd




                                                                                                           od
                                                                                                           uc




                                                                                                            in
                                                                                                           ks




                                                                                                           ai
                             Ba




                                                   m

                                                                om




                                                                                                 ga d




                                                                                                        rta
                                                                                                          a




                                                                                                        m
                                                                                               or s an




                                                                                                       ar
                                                  ho




                                                                                                      nd
                                                                                                      ts
                                                            eh




                                                                                                   om


                                                                                                     te
                                                                                                    (p




                                                                                                   an


                                                                                                  sa
                                             in




                                                                                                 En
                                                                                                   u
                                                       sid




                                                                                                 es




                                                                                                cc
                                                                                                io




                                                                                                ur
                                            ith




                                                                                               ad
                                                                                              ac




                                                                                              A
                                                                               lig




                                                                                            sta
                                                       ut
                                           W




                                                                                           Ro
                                                                                           sp
                                                   O




                                                                           re




                                                                                         Re
                                                                                        or
                                                                          l,
                                                                      vi




                                                                                     do
                                                                     Ci




                                                                                  ut
                                                                                O




                                           Figure 5: Experienced Isolation Relative to Baseline by Location
Notes: We plot the population weighted mean experienced isolation in a particular feature and compare
with our baseline measure. Error bars show ±the population weighted standard deviation of experienced
isolation across MSAs.




                                                                                          24
                             Online Appendix:
                          Experienced Segregation

                   Susan Athey, Stanford University and NBER
                       Billy Ferguson, Stanford University
                 Matthew Gentzkow, Stanford University and NBER
                            Tobias Schmidt, QuantCo



A1      Defining Geographic Features

A1.1     InfoUSA
We use data from InfoUSA to define the following features: (i) civil, religious, and social or-
ganizations; (ii) retail; (iii) restaurants and bars; (iv) accommodation; (v) entertainment; (vi)
sports and recreation. We combine InfoUSA data with Open Street Maps data to define educa-
tion features, as detailed in Appendix A1.2 below.
     For each feature, InfoUSA provides latitude, longitude, and an 8-digit NAICS industry
code. We focus on the top 334 NAICS codes in the data which together cover 95 percent of all
establishments and assign them manually to our aggregated categories. The mapping between
NAICS8 and categories is given in Table A1. We assign each feature to the geohash7 that
contains its latitude-longitude pair.


A1.2     OpenStreetMaps
We use data from Open Street Maps (OSM) to define outdoor spaces and to supplement In-
foUSA data in defining education features. OSM is an open source mapping project that defines
geographic features and associates them with metadata tags. Whereas InfoUSA provides point
locations for each feature, OSM defines two-dimensional polygons. These provide a more ac-
curate representation for features like parks that occupy a large amount of space. As noted in
the main text, we associate each OSM feature with all geohash7s that intersect its polygon.
     We define features to be outdoor spaces if they are associated with the tags "leisure=park,"
"leisure=playground," "leisure=pitch," or "leisure=garden." We define features to be education-
related if they are associated with the tags "amenity=school," "amenity=kindergarten,"

                                               25
"amenity=university," or "amenity=college." We define geohash7s to contain education fea-
tures if they are associated with such a feature in either InfoUSA or OSM.


A1.3         Transportation Infrastructure
We define transportation features by combining polygon data on primary and secondary roads
from the US Census' TIGER database (U.S. Census Bureau 2017) with airport polygon data
from OSM (polygons with the tag aeroway=aerodrome). We associate each such feature with
all geohash7s that intersect its polygon.



A2          Robustness
Table A10 probes the robustness of our experienced isolation estimates. The first row repeats
our baseline estimate. Each subsequent row reports a separate robustness check. For each, we
report the mean, median, 5th, and 95th percentiles of estimated experienced isolation by MSA,
as well as the correlation between that row's estimates and the baseline.


A2.1         Excluding Transportation Infrastructure
The first two robustness checks show how the results change if we exclude pings that are likely
to come while people are in transit. People sharing the same space while commuting or traveling
(e.g., driving next to another car on a highway) may be relatively unlikely to have meaningful
interactions, and so it is interesting to know whether these observations play a large role in our
conclusions. Figure A13 shows the frequency of pings across geohash7s in Birmingham, AL,
confirming visually that a substantial amount of activity indeed occurs on roads.20
        In row (2) of Table A10, we exclude all pings in geohashes we identify as containing roads
or airports. In row (3) we exclude all pings that are part of a sequence suggesting the device is
moving at more than 12 miles per hour.21 In both cases experienced isolation rises, consistent
with time in transit having lower than average isolation, but the difference is modest and the
correlation with the baseline estimates is high.



20
     Online Appendix Table A11 reports summary statistics for pings that maybe in transit.
21
     We take the sequence of timestamped latitudes and longitudes, compute the Haversine distance between succes-
     sive pings in the sequence, and divide by the time difference to estimate device speed.

                                                        26
A2.2     Imputing Geohash7 Demographics from Individual Data
Our baseline estimates impute geohash7 demographics from 2010 census data as described in
Section 2.3. A weakness of this approach is that census blocks (the smallest units at which
demographics are reported in the census) do not align exactly with geohash7s. An alternative
approach is to impute geohash7 demographics from individual-level data sources where we
observe individuals' exact addresses.
     Row (4) of Table A10 reports estimates based on demographics imputed from an
individual-level voter file provided by the company L2. These data provide home addresses
of registered voters. The data include self-reported race in eight states that collect this as part of
the registration process (Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, North Carolina, South Carolina,
Tennessee and Texas), and imputed race based on a proprietary algorithm elsewhere. We use
the L2 category "European" as our measure of "white." We successfully match at least one L2
individual in 5,767,098 of our 7,288,958 geohash7s. For the remaining geohash7s, we use our
baseline imputation.
     Row (5) reports estimates based on demographics imputed from individual-level data from
the company Infutor. These data provide names, address, immigration status and demographics
of around 80% of the adult population in the US. Race is defined in accordance with census
categories and is imputed as described in Diamond et al. (2019). We exclude all individuals
over the age of 80 and determine the home-geohash7 of each individual based on the last address
they were registered at. We successfully match at least one Infutor individual in 5,079,532 of
our 7,288,958 geohash7s. For the remaining geohash7s, we use our baseline imputation.
     The results show that these alternative approaches lead to even lower estimates of experi-
enced isolation, strengthening our main conclusion. The correlation with our baseline estimates
remains high in both cases.


A2.3     Alternative Temporal Weighting
As discussed in Section 3.2, our baseline estimates rely on an assumption of uniform sampling.
One way this may be violated is if some devices emit large numbers of pings at specific times
when relevant apps are used heavily. In row (6) of Table A10, we partially address this possi-
bility by only using the first ping emitted by a device in a given hour in a particular geohash7.
This effectively gives equal weight to each device-geohash7-hour tuple in the data. We find
experienced isolation is even lower in this specification, suggesting that non-random weighting

                                                 27
may if anything lead us to understate the gap between residential and experienced isolation.


A2.4     Other Robustness Checks
The final rows of Table A10 consider other variations in the baseline sample. Row (7) drops
pings from the sample devices whose home location is not in the same MSA as the ping, to give
a sense of how out-of-town visitors influence the estimates. Row (8) drops the top 5 percent
of devices in terms of number of pings per day, to address the possibility that such heavy users
might have undue influence on the results. Row (9) excludes pings during late night hours from
midnight to 6 a.m., to assess how much our results are influenced by the way we treat sleep
time. None of these make a large difference to the estimates.
     Finally, row (10) shows how the results are impacted by the leave-out correction in equa-
tion (5). If we instead use the naive estimator that includes a device's own observations in the
estimation of sl , we would over-estimate segregation. This is consistent with prior literature
showing that this small-sample bias leads segregation to be overstated.



A3      Alternative Definitions of Types
Our baseline results measure segregation between WDs (devices from majority-white home
geohash7s) and NWDs (devices from majority-non-white home geohash7s). In Table A12, we
present results for racial segregation under alternative definitions of types.
     In row (2), we change the definition of WD and NWD to depend on whether a home
geohash7 is above or below the overall US share white (63 percent). Results are similar to our
baseline estimates.
     In the following rows, we shift focus to segregation between white and black home lo-
cations rather than white and non-white home locations. Row (3) defines the two types to
be devices from home geohash7s with at least 50 percent white and at least 50 percent black
respectively. Row (4) uses cutoffs of at least 70 percent white and at least 70 percent black
respectively. Row (5) uses cutoffs of at least 90 percent white and at least 90 percent black
respectively. Note that unlike in our baseline specification, some devices here fall into nei-
ther category and so are omitted from the analysis. Results are again similar to baseline, with
somewhat lower estimates of both experienced and residential isolation when we use the more
extreme cutoffs.


                                                28
         In rows (6)-(7), we present an approach to measuring experienced isolation by individual
race. The differences between this and our baseline approach based on home geography are
discussed in Section 3.3. We probabilistically impute individual race at the device level using
the race shares in their home geohash7s (as measured by our baseline imputed demographics)
as probabilities.22 This probabilistic imputation would correctly estimate segregation by indi-
vidual race under the assumption that expected movement patterns are the same for devices of
different races that come from the same geohash7. When this assumption is violated, we expect
the systematic measurement error in imputed race to bias our experienced isolation measure
downward.
         Row (6) shows results where we probabilistically impute white and non-white race. Row
(7) shows results where we probabilistically impute white and black race (allowing for an omit-
ted category of devices that are neither black nor white). Consistent with expectations, estimates
of both experienced and residential isolation fall significantly in these specifications. However,
we find that experienced isolation is substantially lower than residential isolation and that the
two are highly correlated across MSAs continue to hold.




22
     The direct imputation of race assigns to each device the home geohash7 share white and share nonwhite (or
     black) as constructed in Section 2.3. When we observe a device's ping in a geohash7, that device contributes
     the imputed share white to the exposure of that geohash7 instead of contributing a wholly white or nonwhite
     visit. Furthermore, when we construct the average exposure amongst white and nonwhite (or black) devices, we
     cannot simply take the average over devices of each type since each device is probabilistically assigned to both
     groups. Therefore, the average exposure of each group is calculated as a weighted average with the imputed
     home geohash7 demographic shares as the weights.

                                                          29
                     Birmingham-Hoover MSA




                                                         Census Tract 002700



                                                    Census Tract 014302




                     0   5   10   15   20   25 mi




Online Appendix Figure A1: Birmingham-Hoover MSA and Census Tracts 002700 & 014302
Notes: We depict the relative size of urban and rural tracts within the Birmingham-Hoover MSA, which
is the final aggregate unit of analysis.




                                                    30
                Census Tract 002700




                                                       Census Block 3092




                0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0 km




            Online Appendix Figure A2: Relative Geographies in an Urban Center
Notes: This figure illustrates the relative size of census tracts / blocks and geohash7s in an urban area.
The larger black outline depicts census tract 002700 in urban Birmingham, AL. The black grid consists
of three geohash7s that overlap census block 3092.




                                                          31
                         Census Tract 014302




                                        Census Block 1160




                         0     1    2    3 km




             Online Appendix Figure A3: Relative Geographies in a Rural Setting
Notes: This figure illustrates the relative size of census tracts, blocks, and geohash7s in a rural area. The
larger black outline depicts census tract 014302 in rural Birmingham, AL. The black grid consists of 367
geohash7s that overlap the census block 1160.




                                                     32
              Civil, social & religious organizations                         Education




                  Outdoor spaces (parks, etc.)                            Restaurants & bars




             Online Appendix Figure A4: Features in Downtown Birmingham, AL
Notes: Figure highlights geohash7s that contain (i) civil, social, and religious institutions, (ii) educational
instutitions, (iii) outdoor spaces, and (iv) restaurants and bars respectively, in downtown Birmingham,
AL. A single geohash7 can contain multiple features.




                                                        33
     Number of active devices (millions)

                                           15




                                           10




                                            5




                                            0
                                                12 am             6 am               12 pm           6 pm




                                                    Online Appendix Figure A5: Number of Active Devices by Hour
Notes: We plot the number of active devices in millions by hour. A device is considered active if we ever
observe at least one ping within the given hour.




                                                                                34
                              Percent white in census block
                                                              40.0% 50.0% 60.0% 70.0%




              Online Appendix Figure A6: Matching Home Geohash7 to Blocks
Notes: Geohash7 djfq8cs in Jefferson county, AL is the rectangle outlined in red. Census blocks are
the polygons outlined in blue. There are five census blocks overlapping the geohash7 which we color in
relation to their share white. The grey census block is uninhabited.




                                                         35
                               1250000
    Number of home geohash7s




                               1000000



                               750000

                                                                                             NWDs
                                                                                             WDs
                               500000



                               250000



                                     0
                                         0.00   0.25   0.50       0.75             1.00
                                                              Share white of home geohash7



 Online Appendix Figure A7: Home Geohash7 Percent White Histogram by Majority Race
Notes: Figure plots the number of WD and NWD home geohash7s by the share white of the home
geohash7. The mean and median by majority race of the home geohash7 are represented by solid and
dashed red lines respectively. The mean and median share white of NWD home geohash7s are both 0.22
and of WD home geohash7s are 0.85 and 0.89 respectively.




                                                        36
                                Difference in Isolation (Exp - Res)
                                                                      -0.4
                                                                         -0.2
                                                                            0.00.2




Online Appendix Figure A8: Difference Between Experienced and Residential isolation by
MSA
Notes: We color each MSA relative to the difference of experienced minus residential isolation.




                                                       37
    Experienced isolation
                            0.8



                            0.6



                            0.4



                            0.2



                            0.0
                                  0.00     0.25                   0.50                        0.75
                                                                                              Residential isolation

                                         Baseline   Within home tract    Outside home tract




Online Appendix Figure A9: Experienced vs Residential Isolation Relative to Devices' Homes
Notes: We plot three specifications of experienced isolation against residential isolation with each point
representing an MSA. The within and outside home tract specifications only include exposures in geo-
hash7s within or outside individuals' home census tract. The size of each point is proportional to the
MSA's population. We plot the 45 degree line and fit local polynomials to the data.




                                                          38
              30
    Density




              20




              10




               0
                   0.0      0.5             1.0              1.5             2.0              2.5
                                                                                        Exposure ratio

                                                  NWDs     WDs



   Online Appendix Figure A10: Experienced / Residential Exposure for WDs and NWDs
Notes: We plot the distribution of exposure ratios for all WDs and NWDs in our sample. The exposure
         ^i /r
ratio is S   ^c(i) , the exposure to WDs under the experienced measure over the exposure to WDs for the
residential measure. There is much more variation in exposures for NWDs than WDs, suggesting that
the primary mechanism for the greater integration we measure relative to residential isolation is driven
by NWD exposures.




                                                  39
                                 Entertainment                                                                        q       q


                          Sports and recreation                                                               q                       q


                              Accommodation                                                                       q       q


                            Roads and airports                                                            q                       q




                                                             Baseline




                                                                                                                                                        Baseline
                   Outdoor spaces (parks, etc.)                                                   q                                       q


                            Outside home tract                                                        q                               q


     No features, not at home (broadly defined)                                           q                                                   q


                                     Education                                                q                                       q


                          Restaurants and bars                                                    q                           q


                 No homes (narrowly defined)                                      q                                                           q


                                          Retail                                          q                                   q

                     Civil, religious and social                              q                                               q
                                   organizations
                                     No features              q                                                                                             q


                           No roads or airports               q                                                                                         q


                             Within home tract           q                                                                                                         q


                   At home (narrowly defined)        q                                                                                                                 q
                                               0.2




                                                                        0.4




                                                                                                              0.6




                                                                                                                                                  0.8
                                                                                                                                          Average exposure

                                                                                      q
                                                                                          NWD             q
                                                                                                                  WD




Online Appendix Figure A11: Exposure to WDs in Different Features, Decomposition by
Race
Notes: The vertical lines show mean exposures in our baseline specification. The population weighted
mean across MSAs of exposure for WDs and NWDs is represented by open and filled points respectively.
The distance between any pair of points represents the isolation index in that feature. If the points overlap,
isolation is zero. If the WD and NWD populations were contributing equally to their change in exposure,
the points would meet at the dotted line splitting the difference between the baseline estimates.




                                                                         40
                                                                                            Civil, religious and social
                                                        Accommodation                                                                  Education
                                                                                            organizations
                                               0.800%                               2.00%                                      5.00%
    Average daily share of pings when active


                                               0.567%                               1.33%                                      3.33%
                                               0.333%                               0.67%                                      1.67%
                                               0.100%                               0.00%                                      0.00%


                                                        Entertainment                       Homes (narrowly defined)                   Outdoor spaces (parks, etc.)
                                               0.250%                               70.0%                                      3.00%
                                               0.167%                               56.7%                                      2.33%
                                               0.083%                               43.3%                                      1.67%
                                               0.000%                               30.0%                                      1.00%


                                                        Restaurants and bars                Retail                                     Roads and airports
                                               6.00%                                6.00%                                      20.0%
                                               4.33%                                4.33%                                      14.7%
                                               2.67%                                2.67%                                       9.3%
                                               1.00%                                1.00%                                       4.0%
                                                        0    5     10    15    20           0        5    10    15        20           0     5     10    15    20


                                                                                                         NWD      WD




                    Online Appendix Figure A12: Average Share of Pings in Features by Device Group
Notes: We plot the average share of pings in each feature for WDs and NWDs by hour. The solid and
dashes lines depict the average for NWDs and WDs respectively. For several features there are inter-
esting differences between groups: NWDs spend more time at civil, religious and social organizations,
restaurants and bars, retail establishments and outdoor spaces but less time on roads and at airports. We
note that time spent in one's home geohash7, however, is similar for both groups.




                                                                                                     41
                  Online Appendix Figure A13: Activity in Birmingham, AL
Notes: We depict the level of activity in pings across geohash7s in Birmingham, AL. The number of
pings increases as the color moves from blue to yellow. Activity seems to be concentrated on roads and
in the central area of the city.




                                                 42
Online Appendix Table A1: InfoUSA NAICS8 Categories and Combined Feature Category
Combined category                      NAICS8 Category                                     # of items   Share of all items in infoUSA dataset
Retail                                 Supermarkets/Other Grocery (Exc Convenience) Strs      90850     0.58 %
Retail                                 Pharmacies & Drug Stores                               73215     0.47 %
Retail                                 Convenience Stores                                     72947     0.47 %
Retail                                 Used Merchandise Stores                                62472     0.4 %
Retail                                 All Other General Merchandise Stores                   59747     0.38 %
Retail                                 Gift, Novelty & Souvenir Stores                        54629     0.35 %
Retail                                 Women's Clothing Stores                                40032     0.26 %
Retail                                 Beer, Wine & Liquor Stores                             39694     0.25 %
Retail                                 Other Clothing Stores                                  33709     0.22 %
Retail                                 Retail Bakeries                                        29162     0.19 %
Retail                                 Hobby, Toy & Game Stores                               26008     0.17 %
Retail                                 Department Stores (Except Discount Dept Stores)        24993     0.16 %
Retail                                 Optical Goods Stores                                   22419     0.14 %
Retail                                 Hardware Stores                                        22188     0.14 %
Retail                                 All Other Specialty Food Stores                        21094     0.13 %
Retail                                 Food (Health) Supplement Stores                        20193     0.13 %
Retail                                 All Other Health & Personal Care Stores                17774     0.11 %
Retail                                 Book Stores                                            15910     0.1 %
Retail                                 Clothing Accessories Stores                            15578     0.1 %
Retail                                 Office Supplies & Stationery Stores                    12213     0.08 %
Retail                                 Paint & Wallpaper Stores                               10619     0.07 %
Retail                                 Children's & Infants' Clothing Stores                   9963     0.06 %
Retail                                 Electronic Shopping                                     9871     0.06 %
Retail                                 Men's Clothing Stores                                   9420     0.06 %
Retail                                 Meat Markets                                            9398     0.06 %
Restaurants bars                       Full-Service Restaurants                              607719     3.89 %
Restaurants bars                       Snack & Nonalcoholic Beverage Bars                     66575     0.43 %
Restaurants bars                       Limited-Service Restaurants                            16778     0.11 %
Civil social religious organizations   Religious Organizations                               386741     2.47 %
Civil social religious organizations   Civil & Social Organizations                           64645     0.41 %
Education                              Elementary & Secondary Schools                        174380     1.12 %
Education                              Colleges, Universities & Professional Schools          27442     0.18 %
Education                              Libraries & Archives                                   26059     0.17 %
Education                              Museums                                                19108     0.12 %
Accommodation                          Hotels (Except Casino Hotels) & Motels                 70789     0.45 %
Accommodation                          All Other Traveler Accommodation                       12420     0.08 %
Accommodation                          Bed-&-Breakfast Inns                                   10338     0.07 %
Sports recreation                      Fitness & Recreational Sports Centers                  65877     0.42 %
Entertainment                          Motion Picture Theaters (Except Drive-Ins)              8763     0.06 %
Entertainment                          Theater Companies & Dinner Theaters                     6484     0.04 %




                                                                    43
Online Appendix Table A2: Home Census Tract Summary Statistics for Devices in the Sam-
ple.

                                                        US mean      Sample mean
                Female                                      0.508            0.509
                Bachelor's Degree                           0.114            0.121
                Median Age                                 37.385           37.431
                Median Income (in 1000s of USD)            28.618           29.727
                Population in Poverty                       0.133            0.124
                Unemployment Rate                           0.039            0.038
Notes: We aggregate the demographics for the home census tracts in which we observe devices. Data are
collected from the 2010 census. Columns show US averages as well as mean for the unweighted device
sample. Including sample weights as described in Section 2.4 allows us to exactly recover US averages
with the device sample.




                                                 44
Online Appendix Table A3: Summary Statistics for Measures of Activity of Devices in Sam-
ple.

                                                                   Median       Mean
                Number of days active                                51.00  56.92
                Number of hours / active day                          7.10   9.45
                Number of geohash7s visited / active day              9.68  22.95
                Number of pings / active day                         33.88  86.84
                Percent of pings at home (narrowly defined)          36.79  42.15
                Number of geohash7s visited overall                 195.00 720.85
Notes: All statistics are weighted using the sample weights described in Section 2.4. An active day is a
day on which we see at least one ping for the device.




                                                  45
                     Online Appendix Table A4: Summary of Variables and Sources

Variable                        Description                                                      Source
Median Age                      Median Age                                                       2010 ACS variable B01002 001
Median Income                   Median Income In The Past 12 Months (In 2010                     2010 ACS variable B06011 001
                                Inflation-Adjusted Dollars)
Population in Poverty           Count Of Individuals With Income Below Poverty Level For         2010 ACS variable B17001 002
                                The Past 12 Months
Unemployment Count              Unemployment Count                                               Sum of 2010 ACS variables
                                                                                                 B17005 006,         B17005 011,
                                                                                                 B17005 017 and B17005 022
Black Alone                     Single Race Non-Hispanic Black Population Count                  2010 Decennial Census variable
                                                                                                 P009006
Black Alone or in Combination   Single Or Multiracial Non-Hispanic Black Population Count        Sum of 2010 Decennial Census
                                                                                                 variables P009013,     P009018,
                                                                                                 P009019, P009020, P009021,
                                                                                                 P009029, P009030, P009031,
                                                                                                 P009032, P009039, P009040,
                                                                                                 P009041, P009042, P009043,
                                                                                                 P009044, P009050, P009051,
                                                                                                 P009052, P009053, P009054,
                                                                                                 P009055, P009060, P009061,
                                                                                                 P009062, P009063, P009066,
                                                                                                 P009067, P009068, P009069,
                                                                                                 P009071 and P009073
Total Population                Total Population                                                 2010 Decennial Census variable
                                                                                                 P009001
White Alone                     Single Race Non-Hispanic White Population Count                  2010 Decennial Census variable
                                                                                                 P009005
Population Density              Population per square mile                                       2010 Decennial Census variables
                                                                                                 P009001 and SUBHD0303
Public Transit Use              Share of working population using public transprotation to get   2010 ACS variable B08101
                                to work
Share with Bachelors's          Share of population with at least a Bachelor's degree            2010 ACS variables B06009 005
                                                                                                 and B06009 006
Black Income Mobility           share of black individuals born in the 25th percentile of the    Average Chetty et al.'s (2018)
                                income distribution who make it to the top quintile              pooled by race county estimate
                                                                                                 kfr top20 black pooled p25
White Income Mobility           share of white individuals born in the 25th percentile of the    Average Chetty et al.'s (2018)
                                income distribution who make it to the top quintile              pooled by race county estimate
                                                                                                 kfr top20 white pooled p25




                                                                 46
          Online Appendix Table A5: Experienced and Residential Isolation by MSA

 MSA                                     Exp    Res     MSA                                 Exp    Res
 Abilene, TX                             0.30   0.46    Lansing, MI                         0.42   0.48
 Akron, OH                               0.46   0.61    Laredo, TX                          0.22   0.05
 Albany, GA                              0.47   0.54    Las Cruces, NM                      0.39   0.35
 Albany, NY                              0.48   0.68    Las Vegas, NV                       0.46   0.62
 Albuquerque, NM                         0.43   0.51    Lawrence, KS                        0.31   0.10
 Alexandria, LA                          0.44   0.58    Lawton, OK                          0.32   0.24
 Allentown, PA                           0.48   0.68    Lebanon, PA                         0.41   0.44
 Altoona, PA                            -0.00   0.00    Lewiston, ID                        0.54   0.41
 Amarillo, TX                            0.48   0.73    Lewiston, ME                        0.50   0.23
 Ames, IA                                0.35   0.10    Lexington, KY                       0.36   0.41
 Anchorage, AK                           0.40   0.44    Lima, OH                            0.44   0.46
 Anderson, IN                            0.41   0.41    Lincoln, NE                         0.30   0.27
 Anderson, SC                            0.37   0.36    Little Rock, AR                     0.49   0.65
 Ann Arbor, MI                           0.43   0.47    Logan, UT                           0.34   0.08
 Anniston, AL                            0.43   0.45    Longview, TX                        0.38   0.41
 Appleton, WI                            0.42   0.21    Longview, WA                        0.24   0.03
 Asheville, NC                           0.36   0.21    Los Angeles, CA                     0.48   0.77
 Athens, GA                              0.41   0.39    Louisville, KY                      0.45   0.63
 Atlanta, GA                             0.51   0.63    Lubbock, TX                         0.39   0.49
 Atlantic City, NJ                       0.45   0.58    Lynchburg, VA                       0.39   0.43
 Auburn, AL                              0.36   0.32    Macon, GA                           0.47   0.58
 Augusta, GA                             0.44   0.46    Madera, CA                          0.59   0.61
 Austin, TX                              0.44   0.60    Madison, WI                         0.40   0.40
 Bakersfield, CA                         0.55   0.68    Manchester, NH                      0.36   0.18
 Baltimore, MD                           0.52   0.71    Manhattan, KS                       0.42   0.42
 Bangor, ME                              0.53   0.63    Mankato, MN                         0.09   0.02
 Barnstable Town, MA                     0.30   0.13    Mansfield, OH                       0.21   0.36
 Baton Rouge, LA                         0.47   0.58    McAllen, TX                         0.43   0.11
 Battle Creek, MI                        0.43   0.48    Medford, OR                         0.33   0.06
 Bay City, MI                            0.04   0.03    Memphis, TN                         0.52   0.66
 Beaumont, TX                            0.50   0.72    Merced, CA                          0.38   0.34
 Bellingham, WA                          0.38   0.23    Miami, FL                           0.49   0.71
 Bend, OR                                0.21   0.01    Michigan City, IN                   0.43   0.51
 Billings, MT                            0.40   0.20    Midland, TX                         0.38   0.48
 Binghamton, NY                          0.22   0.12    Milwaukee, WI                       0.60   0.88
 Birmingham, AL                          0.57   0.71    Minneapolis, MN                     0.41   0.58
 Bismarck, ND                            0.28   0.03    Missoula, MT                        0.18   0.05
 Blacksburg, VA                          0.13   0.02    Mobile, AL                          0.49   0.64
 Bloomington, IL                         0.34   0.13    Modesto, CA                         0.44   0.47
 Bloomington, IN                         0.32   0.10    Monroe, LA                          0.51   0.63
 Boise City, ID                          0.34   0.22    Monroe, MI                          0.32   0.23
 Boston, MA                              0.45   0.68    Montgomery, AL                      0.48   0.62
 Boulder, CO                             0.39   0.29    Morgantown, WV                      0.01   0.05
 Bowling Green, KY                       0.32   0.37    Morristown, TN                      0.27   0.07
 Bremerton, WA                           0.37   0.05    Mount Vernon, WA                    0.36   0.21
 Bridgeport, CT                          0.47   0.76    Muncie, IN                          0.41   0.82
 Brownsville, TX                         0.42   0.29    Muskegon, MI                        0.51   0.75
 Brunswick, GA                           0.40   0.53    Myrtle Beach, SC                    0.33   0.24
 Buffalo, NY                             0.52   0.78    Napa, CA                            0.35   0.39
 Burlington, NC                          0.45   0.53    Naples, FL                          0.48   0.55
 Burlington, VT                          0.16   0.01    Nashville, TN                       0.45   0.63
 Canton, OH                              0.38   0.48    New Haven, CT                       0.48   0.72
 Cape Coral, FL                          0.45   0.52    New Orleans, LA                     0.45   0.65
 Cape Girardeau, MO                      0.48   0.42    New York, NY                        0.51   0.80
 Carson City, NV                         0.45   0.44    Niles, MI                           0.55   0.73
 Casper, WY                              0.09   0.01    North Port, FL                      0.42   0.52
 Cedar Rapids, IA                        0.27   0.13    Norwich, CT                         0.38   0.49
 Champaign, IL                           0.33   0.52    Ocala, FL                           0.39   0.39
 Charleston, SC                          0.36   0.44    Ocean City, NJ                      0.33   0.34
 Charleston, WV                          0.33   0.38    Odessa, TX                          0.39   0.44
 Charlotte, NC                           0.47   0.62    Ogden, UT                           0.38   0.50


Notes: We report baseline estimates of experienced and residential isolation for each Metropolitan Sta-
tistical Area in alphabetical order here and in Tables A6 and A7.


                                                   47
  Online Appendix Table A6: Experienced and Residential Isolation by MSA: Continued

 MSA                                     Exp    Res    MSA                                  Exp    Res
 Charlottesville, VA                     0.30   0.23   Oklahoma City, OK                    0.44   0.62
 Chattanooga, TN                         0.46   0.67   Olympia, WA                          0.40   0.13
 Cheyenne, WY                            0.30   0.10   Omaha, NE                            0.49   0.68
 Chicago, IL                             0.52   0.73   Orlando, FL                          0.46   0.55
 Chico, CA                               0.39   0.28   Oshkosh, WI                          0.37   0.05
 Cincinnati, OH                          0.47   0.67   Owensboro, KY                        0.34   0.10
 Clarksville, TN                         0.39   0.38   Oxnard, CA                           0.55   0.72
 Cleveland, OH                           0.56   0.78   Palm Bay, FL                         0.36   0.33
 Cleveland, TN                           0.22   0.07   Palm Coast, FL                       0.31   0.02
 Coeur d'Alene, ID                       0.58   0.25   Panama City, FL                      0.35   0.42
 College Station, TX                     0.41   0.53   Parkersburg, WV                      0.19   0.01
 Colorado Springs, CO                    0.45   0.53   Pascagoula, MS                       0.49   0.51
 Columbia, MO                            0.30   0.10   Pensacola, FL                        0.39   0.48
 Columbia, SC                            0.45   0.52   Peoria, IL                           0.46   0.69
 Columbus, GA                            0.48   0.65   Philadelphia, PA                     0.53   0.74
 Columbus, IN                            0.37   0.05   Phoenix, AZ                          0.52   0.70
 Columbus, OH                            0.50   0.66   Pine Bluff, AR                       0.55   0.70
 Corpus Christi, TX                      0.42   0.55   Pittsburgh, PA                       0.43   0.64
 Corvallis, OR                           0.22   0.15   Pittsfield, MA                       0.28   0.07
 Crestview, FL                           0.32   0.10   Pocatello, ID                        0.37   0.39
 Cumberland, MD                          0.25   0.09   Port St. Lucie, FL                   0.41   0.39
 Dallas, TX                              0.48   0.64   Portland, ME                         0.23   0.12
 Dalton, GA                              0.40   0.39   Portland, OR                         0.34   0.30
 Danville, IL                            0.41   0.40   Poughkeepsie, NY                     0.44   0.58
 Danville, VA                            0.45   0.41   Prescott, AZ                         0.30   0.06
 Davenport, IA                           0.36   0.36   Providence, RI                       0.49   0.70
 Dayton, OH                              0.56   0.82   Provo, UT                            0.29   0.16
 Decatur, AL                             0.40   0.48   Pueblo, CO                           0.43   0.49
 Decatur, IL                             0.44   0.52   Punta Gorda, FL                      0.27   0.07
 Deltona, FL                             0.38   0.40   Racine, WI                           0.47   0.50
 Denver, CO                              0.48   0.71   Raleigh, NC                          0.41   0.44
 Des Moines, IA                          0.37   0.54   Rapid City, SD                       0.28   0.18
 Detroit, MI                             0.59   0.82   Reading, PA                          0.59   0.87
 Dothan, AL                              0.38   0.36   Redding, CA                          0.21   0.04
 Dover, DE                               0.39   0.25   Reno, NV                             0.40   0.53
 Dubuque, IA                             0.19   0.03   Richmond, VA                         0.46   0.58
 Duluth, MN                              0.39   0.30   Riverside, CA                        0.48   0.57
 Durham, NC                              0.43   0.51   Roanoke, VA                          0.46   0.66
 Eau Claire, WI                          0.36   0.03   Rochester, MN                        0.36   0.15
 El Centro, CA                           0.48   0.37   Rochester, NY                        0.57   0.83
 El Paso, TX                             0.34   0.39   Rockford, IL                         0.46   0.53
 Elizabethtown, KY                       0.38   0.27   Rocky Mount, NC                      0.43   0.29
 Elkhart, IN                             0.46   0.43   Rome, GA                             0.39   0.35
 Elmira, NY                              0.14   0.70   Sacramento, CA                       0.53   0.68
 Erie, PA                                0.35   0.65   Saginaw, MI                          0.52   0.76
 Eugene, OR                              0.20   0.04   Salem, OR                            0.44   0.41
 Evansville, IN                          0.39   0.41   Salinas, CA                          0.53   0.74
 Fairbanks, AK                           0.29   0.23   Salisbury, MD                        0.37   0.44
 Fargo, ND                               0.27   0.10   Salt Lake City, UT                   0.43   0.54
 Farmington, NM                          0.44   0.46   San Angelo, TX                       0.37   0.49
 Fayetteville, AR                        0.44   0.45   San Antonio, TX                      0.49   0.65
 Fayetteville, NC                        0.40   0.40   San Diego, CA                        0.47   0.67
 Flagstaff, AZ                           0.47   0.62   San Francisco, CA                    0.42   0.70
 Flint, MI                               0.57   0.74   San Jose, CA                         0.42   0.57
 Florence, AL                            0.30   0.23   San Luis Obispo, CA                  0.28   0.39
 Florence, SC                            0.38   0.30   Sandusky, OH                         0.38   0.18
 Fond du Lac, WI                         0.16   0.04   Santa Barbara, CA                    0.43   0.54
 Fort Collins, CO                        0.36   0.29   Santa Cruz, CA                       0.57   0.74
 Fort Smith, AR                          0.40   0.50   Santa Fe, NM                         0.44   0.59
 Fort Wayne, IN                          0.53   0.76   Santa Rosa, CA                       0.37   0.47
 Fresno, CA                              0.47   0.62   Savannah, GA                         0.43   0.51


Notes: We report baseline estimates of experienced and residential isolation for each Metropolitan Sta-
tistical Area in alphabetical order here and in Tables A5 and A7.


                                                      48
  Online Appendix Table A7: Experienced and Residential Isolation by MSA: Continued

 MSA                                     Exp    Res    MSA                                  Exp    Res
 Gadsden, AL                             0.44   0.54   Scranton, PA                         0.40   0.35
 Gainesville, FL                         0.39   0.51   Seattle, WA                          0.39   0.49
 Gainesville, GA                         0.47   0.62   Sebastian, FL                        0.40   0.33
 Glens Falls, NY                         0.18   0.02   Sheboygan, WI                        0.21   0.10
 Goldsboro, NC                           0.41   0.39   Sherman, TX                          0.42   0.33
 Grand Forks, ND                         0.27   0.06   Shreveport, LA                       0.46   0.63
 Grand Junction, CO                      0.33   0.10   Sioux City, IA                       0.45   0.56
 Grand Rapids, MI                        0.44   0.58   Sioux Falls, SD                      0.28   0.12
 Great Falls, MT                         0.32   0.03   South Bend, IN                       0.47   0.65
 Greeley, CO                             0.45   0.52   Spartanburg, SC                      0.40   0.47
 Green Bay, WI                           0.39   0.38   Spokane, WA                          0.22   0.04
 Greensboro, NC                          0.47   0.58   Springfield, IL                      0.41   0.58
 Greenville, NC                          0.42   0.30   Springfield, MA                      0.54   0.72
 Greenville, SC                          0.38   0.38   Springfield, MO                      0.12   0.01
 Gulfport, MS                            0.41   0.40   Springfield, OH                      0.44   0.69
 Hagerstown, MD                          0.30   0.57   St. Cloud, MN                        0.29   0.05
 Hanford, CA                             0.44   0.48   St. George, UT                       0.27   0.05
 Harrisburg, PA                          0.51   0.67   St. Joseph, MO                       0.23   0.07
 Harrisonburg, VA                        0.42   0.24   St. Louis, MO                        0.57   0.76
 Hartford, CT                            0.51   0.74   State College, PA                    0.30   0.21
 Hattiesburg, MS                         0.40   0.40   Steubenville, OH                     0.42   0.20
 Hickory, NC                             0.32   0.23   Stockton, CA                         0.45   0.49
 Hinesville, GA                          0.44   0.36   Sumter, SC                           0.41   0.36
 Holland, MI                             0.43   0.32   Syracuse, NY                         0.53   0.75
 Honolulu, HI                            0.38   0.66   Tallahassee, FL                      0.39   0.48
 Hot Springs, AR                         0.29   0.24   Tampa, FL                            0.46   0.61
 Houma, LA                               0.36   0.23   Terre Haute, IN                      0.16   0.06
 Houston, TX                             0.48   0.66   Texarkana, TX                        0.37   0.41
 Huntington, WV                          0.25   0.22   Toledo, OH                           0.47   0.67
 Huntsville, AL                          0.47   0.59   Topeka, KS                           0.44   0.49
 Idaho Falls, ID                         0.23   0.07   Trenton, NJ                          0.49   0.63
 Indianapolis, IN                        0.50   0.65   Tucson, AZ                           0.49   0.70
 Iowa City, IA                           0.38   0.15   Tulsa, OK                            0.45   0.56
 Ithaca, NY                              0.32   0.23   Tuscaloosa, AL                       0.46   0.49
 Jackson, MI                             0.38   0.60   Tyler, TX                            0.43   0.58
 Jackson, MS                             0.51   0.61   Utica, NY                            0.40   0.67
 Jackson, TN                             0.43   0.58   Valdosta, GA                         0.42   0.47
 Jacksonville, FL                        0.46   0.54   Vallejo, CA                          0.46   0.55
 Jacksonville, NC                        0.34   0.35   Victoria, TX                         0.35   0.43
 Janesville, WI                          0.43   0.43   Vineland, NJ                         0.46   0.53
 Jefferson City, MO                      0.32   0.20   Virginia Beach, VA                   0.42   0.55
 Johnson City, TN                        0.25   0.10   Visalia, CA                          0.40   0.34
 Johnstown, PA                           0.38   0.17   Waco, TX                             0.45   0.60
 Jonesboro, AR                           0.39   0.17   Warner Robins, GA                    0.40   0.31
 Joplin, MO                              0.28   0.17   Washington, DC                       0.47   0.68
 Kalamazoo, MI                           0.44   0.49   Waterloo, IA                         0.43   0.61
 Kankakee, IL                            0.46   0.68   Wausau, WI                           0.23   0.03
 Kansas City, MO                         0.51   0.73   Wenatchee, WA                        0.34   0.16
 Kennewick, WA                           0.47   0.57   Wheeling, WV                         0.24   0.13
 Killeen, TX                             0.50   0.58   Wichita Falls, TX                    0.38   0.43
 Kingsport, TN                           0.29   0.06   Wichita, KS                          0.42   0.57
 Kingston, NY                            0.33   0.35   Williamsport, PA                     0.30   0.20
 Knoxville, TN                           0.42   0.61   Wilmington, NC                       0.35   0.34
 Kokomo, IN                              0.27   0.42   Winchester, VA                       0.40   0.27
 La Crosse, WI                           0.41   0.06   Winston, NC                          0.48   0.60
 Lafayette, IN                           0.33   0.37   Worcester, MA                        0.39   0.50
 Lafayette, LA                           0.39   0.41   Yakima, WA                           0.52   0.63
 Lake Charles, LA                        0.46   0.71   York, PA                             0.50   0.71
 Lake Havasu City, AZ                    0.37   0.22   Youngstown, OH                       0.48   0.68
 Lakeland, FL                            0.43   0.37   Yuba City, CA                        0.40   0.28
 Lancaster, PA                           0.47   0.71   Yuma, AZ                             0.49   0.48


Notes: We report baseline estimates of experienced and residential isolation for each Metropolitan Sta-
tistical Area in alphabetical order here and in Tables A5 and A6.


                                                      49
              Online Appendix Table A8: Regression Coefficients across Samples

                                        Baseline             Top 50            Top 100            Top 200
 Share with Bachelor's         -0.2491 (0.0428)     -0.426 (0.1221)   -0.3269 (0.0812) -0.1403 (0.0647)
 Median income (thousands)     -0.0017 (0.0005)    -0.0032 (0.0014)   -0.0025 (0.0008) -0.0007 (0.0008)
 Unemployment rate              1.7255 (0.2842)      1.0394 (0.918)    1.8567 (0.4544) 1.5621 (0.4083)
 White mobility measure        -0.2302 (0.0449)    -0.4903 (0.1105)   -0.2561 (0.0938) -0.0848 (0.087)
 Black mobility measure           -0.146 (0.105)   -1.3877 (0.3774)   -0.5263 (0.2158) 0.0567 (0.1525)
 log(Population density)       -0.0015 (0.0007)    -0.0044 (0.0026)   -0.0003 (0.0011) -0.0013 (0.0009)
 Public transit use             -0.012 (0.0026)    -0.0273 (0.0073)   -0.0122 (0.0052) 0.0015 (0.0041)
 Median age                    -0.1236 (0.0295)    -0.3949 (0.0881)   -0.3376 (0.0888)    -0.245 (0.104)
Notes: We report the coefficient and standard error from our baseline population weighted regression of
experienced isolation on fifteen residential isolation bin fixed effects and the specified covariate. We also
consider the same regression unweighted and estimated on subsamples of the top 50, 100, and 200 most
populous MSAs.




                                                     50
              Online Appendix Table A9: Experienced isolation by Feature Type

                                        q5         Mean      Median q95          Correl.    N
                                                                                 with
                                                                                 base-
                                                                                 line
 Baseline                               0.323      0.459     0.477     0.557     1.000      366

 Features
 Accommodation                          0.007      0.113     0.115     0.205     0.674      366
 Civil, Religious And Social            0.044      0.251     0.269     0.400     0.888      366
 Organizations
 Education                              0.037      0.235     0.253     0.352     0.859      366
 Entertainment                          0.000      0.112     0.117     0.199     0.635      362
 Outdoor Spaces (Parks, Etc.)           0.050      0.231     0.259     0.356     0.858      366
 Restaurants And Bars                   0.021      0.200     0.210     0.334     0.831      366
 Retail                                 0.025      0.220     0.233     0.356     0.863      366
 Roads And Airports                     0.023      0.155     0.157     0.264     0.813      366
 Sports And Recreation                  0.008      0.164     0.172     0.267     0.761      365
 No Features                            0.342      0.498     0.526     0.593     0.944      366

 Homes
 No Features, Not At Home               0.065      0.261     0.278     0.392     0.887      366
 (Broadly Defined)
 At Home (Narrowly Defined)             0.509      0.672     0.703     0.744     0.939      366
 No Homes (Narrowly Defined)            0.117      0.285     0.297     0.393     0.947      366
 Outside Home Tract                     0.029      0.208     0.216     0.327     0.886      366
 Within Home Tract                      0.450      0.630     0.662     0.713     0.961      366

Notes: We report summary statistics for different specifications of our measure weighted by MSA pop-
ulation. We consider measure experienced isolation restricted to various features and degrees of home
proximity.




                                                 51
                             Online Appendix Table A10: Robustness

                                                                 Experienced Isolation
                                                   q5       Mean      Median q95         Correl. N
                                                                                         with
                                                                                         base-
                                                                                         line
 1        Baseline                                 0.323    0.459     0.477    0.557     1.000    366

 Robustness checks
 2        No Roads Or Airports                     0.339    0.489     0.509    0.586     0.991    366
 3        Only Pings < 12mph                       0.363    0.507     0.524    0.599     0.996    366
 4        All (L2 Imputation)                      0.244    0.390     0.409    0.481     0.908    366
 5        All (Infutor imputation)                 0.251    0.421     0.437    0.530     0.910    366
 6        All (Day-Hour Weighting)                 0.260    0.409     0.427    0.512     0.984    366
 7        Without Out-Of-Towners                   0.341    0.476     0.491    0.577     0.990    366
 8        Without Top 5% Active Users In           0.333    0.476     0.495    0.572     0.992    366
          Terms Of Pings Per Day
 9        Exclude Night Hours                      0.305    0.441     0.459    0.542     0.999    366
 10       All (Without Leave-One-Out               0.384    0.499     0.506    0.596     0.937    366
          Exposures)

Notes: We report summary statistics for different specifications of our measure. We consider excluding
transportation features like roads, airports, or devices moving fast enough to be considered in transit. We
also consider different subsamples of users, weighting schemes, and demographic data sources.




                                                    52
Online Appendix Table A11: Sample Statistics Restricting Exposure During Transportation

                                                      Devices     Geohash7s                 Pings
  Baseline                                 17,397,580 98,853,493 101,989,194,959
  No roads or airports                     17,328,912 91,277,728  76,324,902,186
  Only pings < 12mph                       17,381,896 79,837,642  68,019,968,506
  Only pings < 8mph                        17,381,803 75,775,799  65,123,085,955
  Only pings < 4mph                        17,381,553 69,193,133  60,991,437,300
  Only pings < 4mph & no roads or airports 17,307,535 62,639,284  53,991,029,734
Notes: We remove pings emitted at speeds exceeding different thresholds or on transport infrastructure
and report counts of devices, geohash7s, and pings on these subsamples.




                                                 53
     Online Appendix Table A12: Summary Statistics for Alternative Measures of Isolation

                                          Exp. mean       Res. mean       Correl.         Correl.
                                                                          with res.       with base-
                                                                                          line
 1         Baseline                       0.459           0.605           0.864           1.000

 Home geohash7 race
 2         White-nonwhite (63/37)         0.456           0.598           0.860           0.988
 3         White-Black (50/50)            0.470           0.655           0.867           0.703
 4         White-Black (70/70)            0.474           0.658           0.857           0.612
 5         White-Black (90/90)            0.387           0.450           0.875           0.436

 Direct race imputation
 6         White-nonwhite (direct)        0.185           0.311           0.930           0.838
 7         White-Black (direct)           0.215           0.311           0.985           0.762

Notes: We report mean experienced and residential isolation along with their correlation under the alter-
native measures. We also report the correlation of the alternative measures with baseline. All estimates
are weighted by MSA population. The specification White/Black (XX/YY) indicates that isolation is
estimated between devices from white and black home geohash7s that are considered white if the share
white is above XX and considered black if the share black is above YY. Direct means that individuals
are assigned the indicated device groups probabalistically.




                                                   54
