                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

       OUT OF SIGHT NO MORE? THE EFFECT OF FEE DISCLOSURES ON 401(K)
                        INVESTMENT ALLOCATIONS

                                        Mathias Kronlund
                                        Veronika K. Pool
                                         Clemens Sialm
                                         Irina Stefanescu

                                    Working Paper 27573
                                 www.nber.org/papers/w27573/

                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2020

We thank Jeff Brown, Monika Buetler, Kevin Crotty, Francesco Franzoni, Jeff Harris, Christine
Laudenbach, Lisa Kramer, Iwan Meier, Olivia Mitchell, Diane Pierret, Yang Sun, Alan Zhang,
and seminar and conference participants at the 2019 Cherry Blossom Financial Education
Institute Conference, the 2019 ESMT Berlin Asset Management conference, the 2019 SFS
Cavalcade, the 2019 European Finance Association, the 2019 Financial Management Association,
the 2019 ERMAS, the 2019 Luxembourg Asset Management Summit, the 2019 Northern Finance
Association, the 2019 CEAR-RSI Household Finance conference, American University,
Australian National University, Bocconi University, Georgetown University, Michigan State
University, Purdue University, Rice University, Texas A&M University, Tulane University, the
Universita della Svizzera Italiana in Lugano, the University of Cincinnati, the University of
Colorado, the University of Illinois at Chicago, the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
the University of Kansas, the University of Melbourne, the University of Notre Dame, the
University of Oklahoma, the University of St. Gallen, the University of Technology Sydney, the
University of Texas at Austin, and Vanderbilt University for many helpful comments and
suggestions. Sialm is an independent contractor with AQR Capital Management. The research
reported herein was performed pursuant to a grant from the TIAA Institute through the Pension
Research Council/Boettner Center of the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania
(PRC). The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not reflect the views of
AQR, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Boettner Center, or TIAA. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27573.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Mathias Kronlund, Veronika K. Pool, Clemens Sialm, and Irina Stefanescu. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Out of Sight No More? The Effect of Fee Disclosures on 401(k) Investment Allocations
Mathias Kronlund, Veronika K. Pool, Clemens Sialm, and Irina Stefanescu
NBER Working Paper No. 27573
July 2020
JEL No. G11,G18,G23,G28,G41,G51,H31,H55

                                         ABSTRACT

We examine the effects of a 2012 regulatory reform that mandated fee and performance
disclosures for the investment options in 401(k) plans. We show that participants became
significantly more attentive to expense ratios and short-term performance after the reform. The
disclosure effects are stronger among plans with large average contributions per participant and
weaker for plans with many investment options. Additionally, these results are not driven by
secular changes in investor behavior or sponsor-initiated changes to the investment menus. Our
findings suggest that providing salient fee and performance information can mitigate participants'
inertia in retirement plans.

Mathias Kronlund                                Clemens Sialm
Freeman School of Business                      University of Texas at Austin
Tulane University                               McCombs School of Business
7 McAlister Dr                                  2110 Speedway; B6600
New Orleans, LA 70118                           Austin, TX 78712-1276
mkronlund@tulane.edu                            and NBER
                                                clemens.sialm@mccombs.utexas.edu
Veronika K. Pool
Vanderbilt University                           Irina Stefanescu
401 21st Avenue South                           Federal Reserve Board
Nashville, TN 37203                             Washington, DC 20551
Veronika.pool@vanderbilt.edu                    irina.stefanescu@frb.gov
1         Introduction
Defined contribution (DC) pension plans, such as 401(k) plans, have become an important
investment vehicle for households saving for retirement.1 In DC plans, employees have the
responsibility to decide how much to save and how to allocate their savings across different
investment options. However, many retirement savers may not be sufficiently aware of all
relevant information to make optimal financial decisions. Individual investors often ignore
information that is "out of sight" and react to salient attention-grabbing information, as
discussed by Barber, Odean, and Zheng (2005).
        In this paper, we examine whether the 2012 participant-level disclosure reform by the
Department of Labor (DOL) affects investment decisions in 401(k) plans. Aiming to increase
participants' awareness of the key features of the investment menu, DOL rule 404(a)(5)
requires fiduciaries to provide expense- and performance-related summary statements directly
to participants. While the information contained in these disclosures was publicly available
before the reform, it was often buried in long fund prospectuses or regulatory filings. Hence,
the new rule increased the salience of fees and prior performance and brought this information
more "in sight."
   To investigate whether participants become more attentive to fund fees and investment
performance after the regulatory reform, we hand-collect information on the menu of options
offered in a large sample of 401(k) plans using plan-level annual filings from 2010 to 2013,
along with participants' allocations to each of these options. We augment these plan-option-
year-level data with information on plan- and fund-level characteristics. Based on the timing
of the regulation, the pre-reform observations in our experiment are the years 2010 and 2011,
while the post-reform years are 2012 and 2013.
        Our data have several advantages. For example, a given fund often contemporaneously
appears on several 401(k) menus. Menus offer a different set of investment options, as sponsors
and plan providers select different choices for participants in each plan. In addition, some
mutual funds are not included in 401(k) plans, allowing us to contrast the impact of the
new disclosures on funds that appear on our 401(k) menus to those that do not. These data
features guide our identification strategy.
    We begin by examining whether investors become more attentive to fund fees in their
allocation decisions after the disclosure reform. There are several reasons why one may expect
    1
    401(k) plans held $6.2 trillion in assets as of December 31, 2019, on behalf of more than 58 million active
participants according to the ICI (https://www.ici.org/401k).


                                                      1
to see no change in allocations following the new disclosures. Participants may already be
aware of the fees and performance of their investment options since this information is publicly
available. Alternatively, they may not read the new disclosures or may be overwhelmed by
this information. A tepid response to the new regulation would be consistent with prior
studies that show that retirement savers are often passive and rarely change their investment
allocations (Madrian and Shea (2001), Agnew, Balduzzi, and Sund´
                                                               en (2003), and Sialm,
Starks, and Zhang (2015)).
   We find that participants' sensitivity to fees increases after the reform. This result
holds using several different measures of fund flows: For example, funds with a one-standard-
deviation higher expense ratio (i.e., 0.36 percentage points) experience a statistically significant
reduction in their plan share of 0.17 percentage points per year after the regulatory change.
This annual portfolio reallocation is also economically significant, as it corresponds to around
6% of the median fund plan share of 2.9%.
   We then ask whether our findings are driven by participants merely allocating more money
to cheaper funds, or whether they are also actively withdrawing from the funds that are
more expensive. We find that investors actively move money away from expensive funds: a
one-standard-deviation increase in the expense ratio is associated with an eight percentage
points higher probability that a fund experiences negative flows after the reform.
   To better understand the effect of the reform on fee-sensitivities, we examine whether
the disclosure makes the cheapest and the most expensive options more salient, thus helping
participants to identify these `extreme-fee' options in the plan. Consistent with the rank
effect of Hartzmark (2015), we find that the impact of the reform is non-linear: participants
become especially sensitive to the lowest-fee funds. These extreme funds receive abnormally
high flows after the regulatory change, beyond what can be explained by the linear expense
ratio.
    Index funds may benefit disproportionately from the reform, as these funds tend to
be among the cheapest options in many plans. Thus, at least part of the heightened fee
sensitivity in our baseline results may be a result of investors switching from more expensive
active funds toward cheaper passive funds. We confirm that investors allocate significantly
more flows toward index funds after the reform. Yet, we find that flows become more
sensitive to fees within both actively-managed funds as well as within the set of passively-
managed funds. Taken together, these results suggest that the regulation implicitly promotes
passively-managed funds and thus contributes to the popularity of indexing.



                                                 2
    One concern is that our results may not be unique to the 2012 regulatory reform and
may instead be driven by secular movements in participants' sensitivity to fees. To address
this issue, we re-run our analysis using a series of placebo periods, where we counterfactually
assume that the regulatory reform occurred in different years. We do not find a discontinuous
relation between fees and changes to flows around these placebo years.
    To further confirm that changes in investor attentiveness to fees are not driven by other
confounding factors, we also use fund-level data from CRSP and show that after the disclosure
reform the sensitivity of flows to fees increases significantly with the proportion of assets held
in DC pension plans. Furthermore, we do not find a significant change in the fee sensitivity
for the control group of funds not exposed to DC clients.
    Having shown that participants become significantly more sensitive to fund fees in their
investment allocations after the regulatory reform, it is interesting to ask who reacts to
fee information. In particular, we look at two specific plan-level characteristics that may
influence how participants respond to disclosures, namely participants' average contribution
rate and the number of available choices. Participants with larger contributions may be
financially more sophisticated, or they may pay more attention because they have more
money on the line. On the one hand, if the reform provides new information, these investors
may react more strongly. On the other hand, highly-sophisticated investors could already be
aware of the fees and thus not react to the disclosures. We find that participant-directed
investment allocations in plans where average participant contributions are larger experience
a stronger increase in their sensitivities to fund fees after the reform, compared to other plans.
Additionally, plans with a very large number of options may overwhelm participants with
too much information, making relative comparisons more difficult, as discussed by Cronqvist
and Thaler (2004), Carroll et al. (2009), and Keim and Mitchell (2018). Consistent with this
argument, we find that the post-reform increase in fee sensitivities is larger in plans that do
not offer a large number of investment options.
   While the main focus of rule 404(a)(5) is to better inform participants about plan fees and
expenses, the disclosures also provide participants with comparative information about the
historical performance of the plan's investment options. Specifically, the rule requires that
they tabulate the one-, five-, and ten-year returns for all fund options in the plan, whenever
return information at those horizons is available. To the extent that plan investors chase
performance, we expect return-flow sensitivities to increase around the disclosure reform.
Whereas there is some evidence that high-fee funds on average exhibit inferior long-term net
performance (e.g., Gil-Bazo and Ruiz-Verdu (2009) and Fama and French (2010)), evidence


                                                3
on whether there is persistence in fund performance is more mixed (e.g., Grinblatt and
Titman (1992), Hendricks, Patel, and Zeckhauser (1993) Carhart (1997), Bollen and Busse
(2005), Fama and French (2010), and Berk and van Binsbergen (2015)).
    We find that participant-directed flows become significantly more sensitive to one-year
returns after the reform, but the results on changes in flow sensitivity to five- and ten-year
performance are generally not significant. Higher sensitivity to one-year performance may
occur since one-year performance is typically displayed more prominently in the first column
of the disclosed data table.
    Our interpretation of the previous results is that participants respond to the new disclosures
by allocating more flows to cheaper funds, and to funds with higher one-year performance.
A potential alternative explanation of these findings is that plan sponsors or providers are
mapping participants to cheaper funds by changing the menus. For example, one such
possibility is that sponsors may change the default option around the reform. While the
use of plan-by-fund fixed effects and our results on negative flows mitigate this concern,
we address this alternative explanation by analyzing menu additions and deletions by plan
providers, as well as by re-estimating our results using the subsample of plans that have no
menu changes around the reform. We do not find evidence for a discontinuous change in plan
menus driven by plan sponsors.
    Finally, we examine changes in participant investments in company stock, which is one
of the investment options in many plans. Many plans have the option to invest either in
diversified mutual funds or, alternatively, allocate money to the employer's stock, which
typically has a zero expense ratio. We find that when a plan's mutual fund investment
options are particularly expensive, participants shift more assets toward the employer's
stock once they acquire better information about these fees through the new disclosures.
Furthermore, we also find that plan participants chase short-term employer stock performance
more aggressively after the regulatory reform. This reallocation toward company stock is an
unintended consequence of the fee disclosure.
   The main contribution of our paper is to provide the first evidence on the effect of the
DOL's disclosure reform on fund allocations by 401(k) plan participants. Despite considerable
prior evidence that pension participants are passive and do not react to new information,
our results show that participants become more attentive to fund fees and to short-term
fund performance after the regulation. The shift in investor attention that we document is
important, given that differences in fees or inefficiencies in the selection of investment options
can have a significant impact on retirement savings outcomes.


                                                4
    Our paper directly contributes to the literature that shows that individual decisions are
affected by the salience of information, as discussed theoretically by Bordalo, Gennaioli,
and Shleifer (2012, 2013). Understanding the role of salience when individuals have limited
attention but can access a large amount of information is important because it suggests that
regulatory reforms concerning how information is disclosed or third-party decisions on how
information is aggregated have real-life consequences.
       In the context of financial decisions, Barber, Odean, and Zheng (2005) show that mutual
fund investors are influenced by salient, attention-grabbing information. Similarly, Barber and
Odean (2008) provide evidence that individual investors are net buyers of attention-grabbing
securities. Bertrand and Morse (2011) find that the disclosure of already known information
in a different format affects the behavior of payday borrowers. Agarwal et al. (2015) study the
effect of disclosing interest savings associated with making larger-than-minimum payments for
credit cards. Attention effects have also been documented by Stango and Zinman (2014) for
bank overdraft fees and by Karlan et al. (2016) for commitment savings accounts.2 Several
papers examine attention-induced effects in mutual funds. Choi, Laibson, and Madrian
(2010) use an experimental setting to highlight the dark side of displaying return performance.
Studies also show that investors react to policy changes and are influenced by third-party
data providers.3
    Another related influential literature examines the effectiveness of behavioral nudges
to encourage retirement savings in DC plans and to break the well-documented inertia of
401(k) pension participants. For example, early work by Madrian and Shea (2001) and
Choi et al. (2004a, 2005b) show that default allocations in DC plans have large and lasting
effects on the saving behavior of a substantial fraction of newly-hired employees, and that
opt-out provisions in DC plans dramatically increase 401(k) participation rates.4 Yet, studies
that look at the impact retirement related disclosures show mixed results. For example,
Beshears et al. (2010) use an experiment to estimate the effect of a disclosure intervention
   2
     In a similar spirit, Chetty, Looney, and Kroft (2009) discuss the impact of the salience of commodity
taxes on consumer demand; Figlio and Lucas (2016) examine whether publicly disseminating information on
school quality affects the real estate market in the area; and Dranove et al. (2003) ask how health outcomes
change after the introduction of hospital report cards. See DellaVigna (2009) for a review.
   3
     See for example, Del Guercio and Tkac (2008), Duarte and Hastings (2012), Kaniel and Parham (2017),
Shaton (2017), Gao and Huang (2017), Da et al. (2018), Evans and Sun (2018), and Ben-David et al. (2019))
   4
     Several other papers have identified inefficiencies in the structure of DC plans retirement: Huberman
and Jiang (2006), Elton, Gruber, and Blake (2006, 2007), Brown, Liang, and Weisbenner (2007), Carroll
et al. (2009), Choi, Laibson, and Madrian (2009), Tang et al. (2010), Chalmers, Johnson, and Reuter (2013),
Goldreich and Halaburda (2013), and Dvorak (2015).



                                                     5
that provides experimental subjects with SEC's Summary Prospectus that simplifies mutual
fund disclosure. They find that such an intervention yields little change in allocations among
actively managed funds. Badoer, Costello, and James (2020) find that a more prominent
disclosure of the indirect fees earned by 401(k) service providers is associated with a reduction
in the compensation paid to service providers of small retirement plans, and Hong (2019)
studies the decisions of pension plans and participants following a pension reform in Hong
Kong that broadened the available investment options.
    The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides information on the
legislative timeline of rule 404(a)(5). Section 3 describes our data collection and provides
summary statistics of our 401(k) plans as well as the mutual funds offered on the plans'
menus. Sections 4 and 5 study whether the disclosure reform affected the sensitivity of flows
to fees and performance, respectively. Section 6 investigates whether the investment menus
were adjusted in 401(k) plans. Section 7 concludes.


2     Institutional Background
Individual retirement plan participants are responsible for making investment decisions in
DC plans. An important question is whether participants have the information, ability,
and time to make optimal savings decisions. Accordingly, the DOL has issued a series of
regulatory initiatives in recent years under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of
1974 (ERISA) to ensure that both plan fiduciaries and plan participants receive a clear and
comprehensive description of their plans, especially concerning plan costs. This paper focuses
on the participant-level disclosure reform, rule 404(a)(5), which requires plan fiduciaries to
disclose information about plan fees, expenses, and performance to participants. Figure
1 shows an example of fee and performance disclosures to participants following the 2012
regulation from the Department of Labor.


                                 [Insert Figure 1 about here]

   This regulation had a relatively long legislative history. In particular, as a first step in
developing the disclosure rule, the DOL published a 2007 Request for Information in the
Federal Register. The Request generated over 100 public comment letters concerning the
planned fee and performance disclosures to plan participants. The DOL then published a
notice of proposed rule-making in the 2008 Federal Register, which further solicited public

                                               6
comments on the issue. On October 20, 2010, the Department published the final regulation
in the Federal Register, which mostly followed the structure of the original proposed rule.
    In addition to the participant-level disclosure rule, the DOL simultaneously developed a
rule on fiduciary-level plan disclosures, which requires service providers to furnish information
to the plan's fiduciaries on the direct and indirect fees these providers collect for services
rendered to the plan.5 A proposed rule was published in December 2007, and a corresponding
interim final rule (408(b)(2)) was issued on July 16, 2010. On June 1, 2011, the effective date
of 408(b)(2) was delayed to January 1, 2012.
   Though the participant-level disclosure requirements were set to begin before those at
the fiduciary level, public commentators argued that it would be preferable if the effective
date of the participant-level regulation would be delayed until after 408(b)(2) takes effect, as
information obtained from service providers would be useful to plan fiduciaries when they issue
participant disclosures. In response to these comments, to align the compliance dates of the
two rules, the final compliance date for rule 408(b)(2) was set to April 1, 2012. Additionally,
the DOL amended the transition rule in 404(a)(5) to require that participant-level disclosures
are made no later than 60 days after the effective date of the fiduciary-level disclosures.
   While the two rules were simultaneously developed, it is important to point out that any
potential effects from these regulations likely differ on the extensive and intensive margins. In
particular, plan fiduciaries and providers were aware of the pending rule changes. Accordingly,
they may have made changes to their menu design by adding and deleting investment options
long before the final effective disclosure date. In contrast, the change in plan participants'
information environment occurred at a specific point in time. Thus, rule 404(a)(5) provides a
shock for participant reallocation decisions. For this reason, we focus on whether participants
reallocate their 401(k) savings across options after the reform's effective date. In the latter
part of this paper, we also provide some discussion on whether investment options were
adjusted around the disclosure reform.


3       Data and Summary Statistics
This section describes our data collection and the properties of the sample.
    5
   Badoer, Costello, and James (2020) examine the effect of this law on the prevalence of direct vs. indirect
compensation arrangements in 401(k) plans.




                                                     7
3.1       Data Collection
To investigate whether 401(k) participants become more attentive to investment fees in their
plans after the disclosure reform, we manually collect the investment options offered in a
large sample of 401(k) plans for the 2010-2013 period. Because the first disclosures were sent
out during 2012, we designate the plan-years 2010 and 2011 as the pre-reform period and the
plan-years 2012 and 2013 as the post-reform period.6
       Our sample is comprised of two sets of plans. First, we hand-collect information for the
plans studied in Pool, Sialm, and Stefanescu (2016) for the 2010 to 2013 period. Second, we
augment that original set of plans with information on the 1000 largest plans in the U.S. in
2009. While the original sample in Pool, Sialm, and Stefanescu (2016) was collected from
Form 11-K filings filed with the SEC, information on the menu of investment options for
the new time period and plans is collected from Form 5500 filed with the DOL.7 Form 11-K
and Form 5500 provide the same description of the plans, including the menu of investment
options offered to participants at the end of the fiscal year. However, unlike Form 11-K,
which only covers plans offering the employer's stock as an investment option, Form 5500 is
filed by all pension benefit plans covered by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act
(ERISA).8
    From Form 5500 filings, we collect the table that describes the `Schedule of Assets,'
which is typically included on the last pages of the forms. In most cases, the table reports
the complete set of investment options offered by the plan, including the employers' stock,
mutual funds, separate accounts, stable value funds, and guaranteed investment contracts.
We supplement our menu information with various plan characteristics such as total plan
size and the number of participants, downloaded from various schedules of Form 5500.
    Studying choices between options in defined contribution plans is arguably an ideal setting
to evaluate the effect of fund characteristics on flows. This is because participants' choice
sets are limited and, importantly, fully observable. Plans typically include around 20 options,
which makes a comparison of options feasible.
    To obtain information on the mutual funds included in DC plans, we match our menu data
to the CRSP Survivorship Bias-Free U.S. Mutual Fund database by fund name. We further
   6
     While most of the plans in our sample follow the calendar year as their fiscal year, a small subset does
not. For these plans, we designate any fiscal year end month after December 2012 as the Post period.
   7
     Effective January 1, 2009, the Department of Labor ("DOL") mandated electronic filing of Form 5500,
and these forms and their attachments became easily accessible on the DOL website.
   8
     Our baseline results are nevertheless similar across these two samples, as summarized in the Internet
Appendix.


                                                     8
match to the exact share class of a fund whenever possible. Share class information comes
from several sources. First, for a subsample of plans, share class information is obtained from
the `Schedule of Assets' table. Second, in some of the cases, the `Schedule of Assets' table
contains information on the number of shares held by the plan in addition to the market
value of the position. This allows us to calculate the net asset value (NAV) of the position
on the report date. When the NAV information is available, we match the menu choice to
the CRSP mutual fund files by NAV and date, which allows us to identify the correct share
class. Third, in some cases, Part 1/3 of Schedule C on Form 5500 specifies the share class of
the fund (`payor'), even when the `Schedule of Assets' table does not. Finally, some funds
only have one share class. We can identify the correct share class for over 60% of our funds,
yet there is substantial heterogeneity across plans, as we can identify the actual share class of
every fund in some plans but have no share class information for other plans. Whenever we
know the share class information for more than 95% of funds offered in a plan-year, we use
the share class-specific information; if we do not know the share class for most funds in a
plan, we instead use the minimum expense ratio across the funds' share classes.9 While we
acknowledge that this means that we cannot perfectly measure the fees of all the options in
our sample, any fee mismeasurement should attenuate our results. For funds of funds in our
sample, we calculate expense ratios as the sum of the expense ratio charged by the fund of
funds and the value-weighted expense ratio charged by the portfolio funds.
    Because many of our tests will compare funds within the same broad "style," we manually
classify each mutual fund into the following six style groups: domestic equity funds, foreign
equity funds, balanced funds, domestic fixed income, foreign fixed income, and other, by
mapping Lipper fund styles into these broader categories. We create separate indicator
variables for money market, target-date, and index funds. We manually group funds into
target-date funds based on a fund's name. To identify index funds we utilize the fund's name
along with the CRSP flags for index funds.


3.2     Sample description
Panel A of Table 1 provides summary statistics for our sample at the plan-year level. We
restrict our sample to plan-years that offer at least three and no more than 100 options on
   9
     Most of the 401(k) plans in our sample are very large and thus may have access to the lowest fee share
classes that are available. For robustness, we show in the Internet Appendix that the results are similar if we
ignore all share class information and instead use the value-weighted fee across all share classes of a fund as
our proxy for an option's expense ratio.



                                                      9
the menu. The final sample covers 5,577 plan-years between 2010 and 2013. Throughout our
analysis, all non-binary variables are winsorized at the 1% level.
       The average plan size is $799 million. The average plan has 13,000 participants. Par-
ticipants in our sample have, on average, approximately $77,200 in their 401(k) accounts,
and contribute around $4,600 per year to their plan.10 Although our sample only contains,
on average, 1,395 plans per year, it covers $1.3 trillion in retirement assets in 2013 and
approximately 18 million participants. This represents roughly a third of the total 401(k)
assets in the U.S.11


                                       [Insert Table 1 about here]

   Plans offer around 21 investment options to participants, where 18 of these options
have been on the menu for at least two consecutive years, while the rest are funds that
have been added in the current year. In this paper, we focus on participants' investment
decisions; therefore, we exclude newly added funds as well as deleted funds in our analyses.
We further drop target-date funds from the sample in most of our analyses, as they are often
chosen as default investment options.12 On average, plans in our sample offer a total of 12
non-target-date fund options that have not been newly added to the plan.
   Panel B of Table 1 further describes the set of options across different styles that are
available to participants. Around half of the fund options in our sample are domestic equity
funds (50,469 plan-fund-year observations), 19% are balanced funds, and 17% are domestic
fixed income funds. The sample of balanced funds is dominated by target-date funds. Panel B
also reports the average expense ratio of these different fund styles and how often a plan-year
has at least one fund of a certain style. For example, 98% of plans have at least one domestic
equity fund, whereas only 8% have a foreign fixed income fund. Because plans typically
include about six domestic equity funds (excluding target-date funds), we will often perform
our analyses separately for this style of funds.
  10
     Note that these are not participant-level statistics, but rather plan-level statistics where contributions
are defined as total plan contributions divided by the number of participants.
  11
     According to the ICI, total assets in 401(k) plans amounted to $4.1 trillion at the end of 2013
(https://www.ici.org/info/ret 19 q4 data.xls). Mutual funds accounted for 64% of these assets.
  12
     Although default options are generally not identified in Form 5500, the 2013-2014 Edition of
the Annual Defined Contribution Benchmarking Survey by Deloitte Consulting finds that lifecycle or
target-date funds account for between 72% and 82% of default investment options for automatic en-
rollment (https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/us/Documents/human-capital/us-cons-annual-
defined-contribution-benchmarking-survey2013-081914.pdf, p. 14).


                                                      10
   We use four different measures of fund flows for fund f , in plan p, in year t. The first
measure F low1 normalizes dollar flows by the lagged value of all mutual fund investment
options in a plan:
                                  1         Vp,f,t - Vp,f,t-1 (1 + Rf,t )
                             F lowp,f,t =                                                       (1)
                                                       i Vp,i,t-1


   The dollar flows are estimated as Vp,f,t - Vp,f,t-1 (1 + Rf,t ), where Vp,f,t is the value of the
investments in mutual fund f held in 401(k) plan p at time t and Rf,t is the total return of
fund f at time t. The flows are computed at an annual frequency. This measure gives the
same weight to a dollar flow regardless of whether it flows into a small or a large option in a
plan.
   The second measure F low2 is based on the change in the plan share of an investment
option in a 401(k) plan from one year to the next after adjusting for the returns of the
corresponding investment options:

                               2         Vp,f,t      Vp,f,t-1 (1 + Rf,t )
                          F lowp,f,t =             -                                            (2)
                                          i Vp,i,t    i Vp,i,t-1 (1 + Ri,t )


    The third measure F low3 normalizes the dollar flow by the average of the initial and the
final value of an investment option. This measure gives more weight to a dollar that flows to
a smaller option since it captures the effect of flows on the change in the relative size of a
given option. We divide by the average of the contemporaneous and lagged size to reduce
the impact of outliers, as some of the lagged option sizes tend to be very small:

                                  3         Vp,f,t - Vp,f,t-1 (1 + Rf,t )
                             F lowp,f,t =                                                       (3)
                                               (Vp,f,t-1 + Vp,f,t )/2

   The fourth measure F low4 is simply an indicator variable for whether the dollar flows are
positive:
                               4
                          F lowp,f,t = I (Vp,f,t - Vp,f,t-1 (1 + Rf,t ) > 0)                    (4)

   The fourth measure allows us to separate investment options that receive inflows from
those that receive outflows. Outflows for contributing plan participants require an active
decision to rebalance their investment options, whereas inflows may be driven by automated
contributions.



                                                 11
       Table 2 presents plan-fund-year-level descriptive statistics for the non-target date funds
in our sample.13 Participants invest approximately $21.4 million in the average mutual fund
on the menu, representing 3.91% of the total invested capital across all mutual funds, and
participants pay, on average, around 60 basis points in the form of mutual fund expense
ratios. The first two flow measures have medians close to zero, but exhibit wide distributions.
For example, the change in the plan share ranges from -0.48% at the 25th percentile to 0.26%
at the 75th percentile.14 If we normalize flows by the option size, then the mean flow is 6.7%,
as contributions tend to exceed withdrawals from our plans. Around 54% of plan options
receive positive inflows. The average one-year returns of the investment options tend to be
higher than the annualized five- and ten-year returns due to the relatively poor performance
of the stock market during the financial crisis from 2007-2009.
   Panel B summarizes the correlations between the flow measures. All four flow measures
exhibit relatively high correlations ranging between 0.43 and 0.66.


                                      [Insert Table 2 about here]


4        Fees and fund flows
This section summarizes our results that analyze the impact of the disclosure regulation on
portfolio allocation decisions.


4.1       Aggregate Relation
To illustrate the relation between fees and flows around the time of the disclosure reform,
we begin by describing the changing fee-sensitivities of flows in these 401(k) plans. For each
plan and each year we separately compute flows to low- and high-fee funds:

                        BelowM edian           BelowM edian (Vp,f,t - Vp,f,t-1 (1 + Rf,t ))
                   F lowp,t          =                                                                    (5)
                                                          BelowM edian Vp,f,t-1

                        AboveM edian           AboveM edian(Vp,f,t - Vp,f,t-1 (1 + Rf,t ))
                   F lowp,t          =                                                                    (6)
                                                          AboveM edian Vp,f,t-1
  13
    Table A.1 in the Internet Appendix reports similar statistics for target-date funds.
  14
    The average change in the plan share is negative in this subsample because target date funds are excluded.
When all funds on the menu are included in the calculations, average change in plan share is zero, as expected
based on the definition of this measure.



                                                     12
   In a first step, we sum the dollar flows to below-median (above-median) fee options
within a plan and a year, where the median is measured separately for each plan, year, and
style. We then separately divide the summed dollar flows for below- and above-median-fee
options by the lagged sum of assets held in these fund options at the end of the prior year.
Thus, for each plan and year we have two separate percentage flow measures for below- and
above-median-fee options. In a second step, we then average the below- and above-median
flows across all plans in each year from 2010 to 2013.
   Panel A of Figure 2 plots in blue solid bars the average flow (equal-weighted across plans)
to below-median-fee investment options by year in our sample, and in orange checkered
bars the average equal-weighted flow to above-median-fee investment options by year. The
figure shows that before the 2012 reform, the flows are very similar across high- and low-fee
investment options. We then observe a shift in 2012, where the lower-fee funds now receive
more flows than the more expensive funds, and this trend continues to hold in 2013. After
the reform, the percentage flows of low-fee funds are around double those of high-fee funds.
    We also depict the standard error bars, which capture the 95% confidence intervals based
on the cross-sectional variation in flows across plans. We also test whether the flows are
statistically significantly different across the two fee samples. The p-values for the difference
between low- and high-fee funds are tabulated under the graph. For the sample including all
fund styles, we find p-values of 10.5% in 2012 and 2.6% in 2013. The results are similar for
domestic equity funds, as shown in Panel B.


                                   [Insert Figure 2 about here]

    We can obtain a back-of-the-envelope estimate of the economic magnitude of the total
savings due to the aggregate reallocations based on Figure 2. Annual flows to below-median
funds exceed the flows to above-median funds by around 2.2 percentage points in 2012 and
by 4.8 percentage points in 2013, resulting in a cumulative reallocation from above-median
funds to below-median funds of around 7 percentage points over these two years. The typical
fee difference between above-median and below-median funds is 54 basis points per year, as
indicated by the interquartile range in Table 2. Thus, the savings in fees are around 3.8
basis points per year (i.e., 0.07 × 0.0054). This corresponds to an annual saving of $490
million, given that our sample covers $1.3 trillion of 401(k) assets (i.e., 0.00038 × $1.3 trillion).
Finally, since our sample is around one-third of the overall 401(k) market, the aggregate



                                                13
fee savings can be around three times higher to the extent that participants in other plans
behave similarly.
    The results in Figure 2 need to be interpreted with caution since this methodology does
not enable us to control for plan and fund characteristics. In the remainder of the paper we
include various fixed effects to adjust for important differences across plans and funds.


4.2     Baseline specification
To investigate the relation between low- and high-fee funds before and after the reform
formally, we next estimate the following baseline regression model:

            F lowp,f,t = 1 ExpRatiop,f,t-1 + 2 P ostt + 3 ExpRatiop,f,t-1 × P ostt
                         +  Controlsp,f,t-1 +           p,f,t ,                                             (7)

where F lowp,f,t is one of our four measures of flows for fund f included in plan p in year t,
ExpRatiop,f,t-1 is the lagged expense ratio of fund f in plan p, and P ost is an indicator that
takes the value of one for either of the two fiscal years following the reform, and zero for
the two years before the reform. Controlsp,f,t-1 is a vector of relevant control variables and
fixed effects.15
    We include several types of fixed effects and additional controls to absorb variation in
flows and fees unrelated to the reform. We include size-by-year controls since large options
may have systematically different flows than small options. The size variable is measured as
the lagged fraction of a plan's assets invested in the fund, and we allow its relation with flows
to vary by year. Plan-by-fund fixed effects allow for a within-investment-option comparison
of fees and flows and further control for possible compositional changes in a plan's menu.
Additionally, we also control for plan-by-style-by-year fixed effects (plan-by-year fixed effects
in specifications where we analyze the results within domestic equity funds only), which make
the comparison of flows and fees across options to be within the same plan, year, and fund
style. Finally, we also include fund family-by-year fixed effects to account for possible time
variation in flows and fees specific to a particular fund family. Such time variation could be
driven by omitted variables or events at the family level, such as marketing or media coverage.
The standard errors are two-way clustered throughout our analyses by fund and plan. The
  15
    Note that the expense ratio of a fund can differ across 401(k) plans if plans choose different share classes.
This explains why the expense ratio has subscripts p, f , and t.




                                                      14
sample in the baseline regression includes 1803 unique funds and 1385 unique plans, while
the regressions within domestic equity funds includes 917 unique funds and 1366 plans.
   Panel A of Table 3 reports the results for the four flow measures for our full sample
of mutual fund investment options across all fund styles. We find that flows (normalized
by the sum of lagged assets across all options) become significantly more sensitive to fees
after the disclosure reform, as shown in the first column. The coefficient estimate of -0.559
implies that a fund with a one-standard-deviation higher expense ratio (i.e., 0.36 percentage
points) experiences a 0.20 percentage-point lower flow per year (i.e., 0.559 × 0.36) after the
reform when measured as a fraction of the lagged sum of money invested across all options.
Economically, this magnitude corresponds to around one-quarter of the inter-quartile range
from -0.355 to 0.430.
    The second column reports results using our second flow measure based on the change in
percentage allocations adjusted for returns. This measure has a nice interpretation: Fund
options with a one-standard-deviation lower expense ratio experience an increase in their
plan allocations of 0.17 percentage points per year (i.e., 0.474 × 0.36) after the reform. This
annual portfolio reallocation corresponds to around 6% of the median fund plan share of
2.9%.
    The results are also consistent if we normalize dollar flows by the average of the lagged
and current option size. These estimates indicate that a fund with a one-standard-deviation
higher expense ratio is predicted to receive around 2.1 percentage points lower flows per year
after the reform.
    The regressions that use continuous dependent variables show that funds with lower
fees receive relatively higher flows after the reform. We next ask whether this is driven
by participants merely allocating more of their investments to cheaper funds, or whether
they also withdraw money from more expensive funds. This is important, because if our
findings are merely driven by the former, the change in fee sensitivities may not come from
participants' heightened awareness of investment costs. Instead, the change may be driven by
plan providers who select the menu of investment options for the plan. For example, these
providers may designate the cheapest fund on the menu as the default option around the
reform.
    To test whether more expensive funds are more likely to experience negative flows after
the reform, column (4) uses an indicator for whether the sign of flows is positive as the
dependent variable. The results are consistent with participants withdrawing money from
more expensive funds after the reform. Specifically, a one-standard-deviation higher fee is


                                              15
associated with an eight percentage point (i.e., 0.36 × 0.23) greater probability that a fund
experiences negative flows. This is an economically sizeable effect compared to an average
probability of having negative flows of 46%. Another feature of using an indicator variable for
the sign of flows is that this measure is not affected by the choice of scaling, that is, whether
flows are normalized by the sum of lagged assets across all mutual funds in the plan (as in
column (1)) or by the average of the lagged and current option size (as in column (3)).


                                  [Insert Table 3 about here]

    The results in Panel A include plan-style-year fixed effects to control for the fact that
different styles of funds can have systematically different fees and may also see correlated
flows. For example, fixed income or international funds may be more popular in some years
than others, and these fund styles also have different fees on average. Yet, there remains
much heterogeneity across the options when analyzing all funds simultaneously. To address
this concern, we re-estimate the results using only domestic equity funds, which correspond
to a more homogeneous group of mutual funds. This may facilitate the interpretation and
help ensure the robustness of our results. We choose to focus specifically on domestic equity
funds because this fund style has by far the highest number of options. As Panel B of Table
1 shows, 98% of all plan-years have at least one domestic equity fund, and on average these
plans offer six different domestic equity funds (excluding target-date funds). By contrast, the
number of possible choices within the other fund styles is typically more limited.
    Panel B of Table 3 shows that the results are similar in magnitude among the domestic
equity funds as across the full sample. For example, a one-standard-deviation change in the
expense ratio predicts a 0.21 percentage point higher flow when normalized by the sum of all
mutual fund options. In sum, these results show that flows from plan participants become
significantly more sensitive to fund expenses after the defined contribution disclosure reform
of 2012.
    The economic magnitude of these effects is sizable, especially taking into account that
small fee differences can have major impacts on accumulated wealth levels for retirement
savers with long investment horizons. However, fee disclosures in and of themselves may not
be sufficient. Disclosure policies need to be complemented with well-designed plan menus,
reasonable default options, and financial education for participants.




                                               16
4.3    Alternative specifications and subsamples
The baseline specification in Table 3 includes high-dimensional fixed effects that absorb
variation of flows due to time, plan, style, fund, and family. To investigate whether the
results are sensitive to the various specifications, in Table 4 we present results using different
combinations of fixed effects. We sequentially introduce style-year fixed effects, plan-year fixed
effects, plan-style-year fixed effects, plan-fund fixed effects, and family-year fixed effects. All
specifications include size controls that differ across years. The last specification corresponds
to the baseline specification in Table 3. Fund flows are captured by our first flow measure,
which normalizes dollar flows by the sum of mutual fund assets.


                                  [Insert Table 4 about here]

    Table 4 reports that the coefficients on the interaction between the expense ratio and the
reform indicator variable are significantly negative for all specifications. The magnitude of
the coefficient more than doubles in magnitude (i.e., from -0.289 to -0.672) after introducing
plan-by-fund fixed effects. Thus, the effects of the reform are more pronounced when we
focus on changes of allocations within the same funds of the same plans.
    Interestingly, the coefficients on the uninteracted expense ratio change substantially across
specifications. The coefficient is negative without plan-by-fund fixed effects. This indicates
that investment options with higher fees attract lower money flows before the reform. This
sensitivity to fees more than doubles after the disclosure reform, as the magnitude on the
interaction effect exceeds the direct effect. In contrast, the coefficients on the expense
ratio become insignificant in the two specifications that include plan-by-fund fixed effects.
This result occurs because mutual fund fees do not change substantially over time. The
plan-by-fund fixed effects therefore absorb the effect of average fund expenses on flows.
    Although fund fees do not typically change from one year to the next, the disclosure
reform of 2012 may have motivated some funds to adjust their fees. Panel A of Table A.2 in
the Internet Appendix uses fees that are kept constant over the sample period. Specifically,
in this panel, we measure each fund's expense ratio as of 2009 instead of using the one-year-
lagged expense ratio. This allows us to abstract from changes in fees that could contaminate
our results. Because this fee is held constant over the sample period, it is fully subsumed
by the plan-by-fund fixed effects. The results in this panel are consistent with those in
Table 3. Finally, in Panel B of Table A.2, we re-estimate our baseline model by using the



                                                17
value-weighted expense ratio across the share classes of a fund as the proxy for each option's
expense ratio. We find that these results are again very similar to our results in Table 3.
    Our baseline results combine two samples that include plans with different characteristics.
The 11-K sample is based on publicly-traded firms that include company stocks as a menu
option and the Form 5500 sample includes the largest 1000 plans in 2009. Table A.3 in the
Internet Appendix shows that our baseline results are similar across the two data sources.
   In Table 3, we compare fund flows during the two-year post-period with those in the
two-year pre-period. In Table A.4 in the Internet Appendix, we compare flows in the year
after the reform (2012) with those in the year before the reform (2011). This allows us to
focus on the immediate impact of the reform. The results are similar to the results of our
baseline event window of 2010-2013.
    Although we have plan menu data prior to 2010, in our baseline specification in Table 3
we only use data from 2010-2013. This ensures that the pre- and post-periods are of equal
length and not too distant from our regulatory change. Furthermore, our sample composition
is more homogenous over the 2010-2013 period. Prior to 2010 we only have the 401(k) plan
menus from Form 11-K, which only covers plans where the employer's stock is an investment
option. Nonetheless, we re-estimate Table 3 using the entire 2000-2013 sample. The results,
which are reported in Table A.5 in the Internet Appendix, show that our baseline findings
are robust to using this extended time period. In all specifications, our coefficient estimates
on the interaction term between the expense ratio and the reform indicator are similar to
those estimated in Table 3, both in terms of economic magnitude and statistical significance.
    In Table 3 and the subsequent robustness checks, we cluster the standard errors by fund
and plan as flows are correlated within these dimensions. Table A.6 shows that the disclosure
effect is statistically significant using other clustering assumptions. Clustering the standard
errors by fund and plan corresponds to relatively conservative estimates of the standard
errors.


4.4    Extreme fees
One feature of the disclosure reform is that it may facilitate identifying and thus choosing the
cheapest fund in a plan. In Table 5, we examine the extent to which flows respond differently
to funds that have the most extreme expenses (defined as the cheapest or most expensive




                                              18
option in the plan) around the reform. In columns (1)­(3), we examine all funds, and in
columns (4)­(6) we further focus on the set of domestic equity funds.16


                                      [Insert Table 5 about here]

       Table 5 shows that after the reform, the cheapest funds receive significantly higher flows.
The coefficient of 0.446% on the indicator variable for the cheapest fund in column (1)
corresponds to around one-quarter of the standard deviation of 1.7% of flows in Table 2.
Column (2) further shows that the most expensive funds also receive lower flows after the
reform, although this result is only marginally significant. In column (3), we further control for
the linear relation with expenses and show that the lowest­expense funds receive abnormally
high flows, after the reform beyond what can be explained by their continuously measured
expense ratio. In other words, the reform has a differential effect on the options with the
most extreme expenses, consistent with the rank effect of Hartzmark (2015).
       We find broadly similar results in columns (4)­(6) where we only focus on domestic
equity funds. The cheapest option receives more flows than what can be explained by the
continuously measured expense ratios in this subsample as well.


4.5       Index funds
We next investigate to what extent the reform resulted in reallocations from active funds to
index funds, and whether participants also become more sensitive to fees within the available
set of active funds, as well as within the set of index funds.
    Index funds on average tend to be significantly cheaper options than actively managed
funds. Therefore, at least part of the heightened sensitivity to fees that we observe is likely to
result from participants allocating more flows toward index funds. We test this in Panel A of
Table 6, where we interact P ost with whether the option is an index fund or not. The results
confirm that DC plan participants indeed allocate significantly more flows toward index funds
after the reform. However, the table also shows that the lowest-fee funds continue to attract
additional flows in the post-reform period in this specification.


                                      [Insert Table 6 about here]
  16
    In the regressions that only use domestic equity funds, the cheapest and most expensive funds are defined
within domestic equity.


                                                     19
    A second possible effect of the increased fee sensitivity could be a reallocation from the
relatively more expensive active funds toward the relatively cheaper active funds in a plan
and, similarly, reallocations within the set of index funds. In Panel B of Table 6, we split
the sample into active funds (columns (1)­(2)) and index funds (columns (3)­(4)). We find
that participants become more sensitive to fees after the reform within both their choice set
of active funds and index funds. For active funds, the estimates on the interaction effect
decrease (when compared to those in Table 3) from -0.559 to -0.195 for the whole sample and
from -0.586 to -0.258 for domestic equity funds. Thus, the impact of the disclosure is more
muted within the group of actively-managed funds, indicating that the reallocation from
active funds to index funds partially contributes to the overall effects. In columns (3)­(4), we
consider fee sensitivities within the sample of index funds. We find that the relatively cheaper
index funds in a plan receive more flows after the reform compared to the more expensive
index funds in the same plan. The point estimates are larger than those within the set of
active funds.
    Taken together, the results in Table 6 provide some insights on the interaction between
the regulatory change and the popularity of indexing. In particular, they suggest that the
regulation implicitly promotes passively-managed funds and thus contributes to the recent
shift towards indexing.


4.6    Counterfactual placebo events
The previous sections show that flows become more sensitive to fees after the disclosure
reform. It is possible, however, that this result could be confounded by a secular movement
over time whereby flows become increasingly more sensitive to fees year-after-year. In this
section, we therefore examine how significant the measured effect around the reform is in a
historical context, and whether there is a trend toward ever greater fee-sensitivities in the
years leading up to the reform.
   To examine these questions, we rerun our baseline model using a series of `placebo periods.'
In other words, instead of using the actual experiment with pre-period 2010-2011 and post-
period 2012-2013, we extend our sample backward in time and run the same regression over
alternative rolling four-year periods before the passage of the 404(a)(5) DOL rule. Other
than using different sample years, the empirical specification in these models is identical to
that in Table 3.
   The results of these tests are reported in Table 7. Panel A shows results for all funds, while
Panel B tabulates the results for the subsample of domestic equity funds. The results confirm

                                               20
that the 2010­2013 period is a significant outlier in the distribution of fee-sensitivities. All
coefficients on the interaction effect for the placebo events are smaller in absolute terms than
the corresponding estimates reported in Table 3. In fact, five out of nine coefficient estimates
in the overall sample are (insignificantly) positive, including the two periods immediately
preceding the reform. More importantly, there is no trend of ever-increasing fee-sensitivities
in the years immediately before the reform that could confound our baseline results. This
result holds both across all funds (Panel A) and among domestic equity funds (Panel B).


                                      [Insert Table 7 about here]

   Two interaction effects are marginally statistically significant, albeit with opposite signs:
The coefficient for 2001­2004 in the overall sample is negative with a t-statistic of -1.74 and
the coefficient for 2008­2011 in the domestic equity sample is positive with a t-statistic of
1.77. Obtaining two marginally significant coefficients is not too surprising as one would
expect 10% of the 18 interaction coefficients to be significant at a 10% significance level.17
       The placebo results also provide an alternative method to evaluate our baseline estimates.
In particular, our baseline coefficient estimate for model 1 in Table 3 (-0.559) lies well to
the left of zero, specifically 3.12 standard deviations away, based on the standard deviation
inferred from the placebo analysis. While this is comforting, there are limitations to using
our nine placebo estimates to infer standard errors. One potential concern of this placebo
specification is that the composition of plans changes over time. As mentioned previously,
the sample prior to 2010 is based on 11-K forms, which have to be filed by firms that include
their common stock as an investment option in their 401(k) plans. We augment this sample
from 2010-2013 with the menus from the Form-5500 filings of the largest 1000 plans. Thus,
the plans prior to 2010 tend to be smaller than the plans in our main sample. Furthermore,
we observe substantially fewer plans prior to 2010. For example, the number of annual
observations equals 47,634 for our baseline sample in Table 3, but just an average of 25,182
for the nine placebo periods ranging from 2000-2011.
  17
    Possible drivers of the negative coefficient may be the 2004 reform that improved mutual fund disclosures
involving mutual funds (https://www.sec.gov/rules/final/33-8393.htm), the increased scrutiny of mutual
funds in the early 2000s due to the Enron bankruptcy in 2001, or the mutual fund scandal of 2003 (e.g.,
Poterba (2003), Houge and Wellman (2005), Zitzewitz (2006), Karpoff, Lee, and Martin (2008) and Sialm
and Tham (2016)).




                                                    21
    In summary, these analyses show that the baseline results in Table 3 are substantial--not
only in absolute economic magnitude--but also when compared to other recent periods, and
are not driven by an increasing trend in fee-sensitivities in the years leading up to the reform.


4.7    Heterogeneity across plan participants

Although the disclosure reform affects all 401(k) plans in the United States, we may expect
that participant responses to these disclosures to vary depending on the characteristics of
plans. This section studies two such possibilities: we investigate whether participants who
make large annual contributions to their retirement accounts and whether participants in
plans that have more investment options on the menu react differently to the regulatory
change.
    Participants who contribute more money to their plans have a stronger reason to pay
attention to the underlying investment fees, so we may expect their fee-sensitivities to
be stronger. A limitation of our data is that we only observe aggregate plan-fund-level
information, but not individual contributions or balances. Yet, we do know the total
contributions across all participants in a plan, and the number of participants, which allows
us to exploit heterogeneity across plans in the average dollar contributions per participant.
   While we expect participants who make larger contributions to care more about fees, this
does not necessarily mean that they will respond more to the change in disclosures. This is
because these participants may have a stronger incentive to learn about fees and performance
even before the reform. Therefore, new disclosures will only benefit these participants if they
did not acquire sufficient information on these plan features before the reform.
   In Panel A of Table 8, we study the heterogeneous effects across plans of average participant
contributions by interacting Expense ratio × P ost with Large contributions in equation
(7), where Large contributions is an indicator variable based on whether the annual dollar
contribution per participant is above the sample median in 2009 (the year immediately before
the start of our main period of analysis). We do not need to include the direct effect for large
contributions separately, since it is absorbed by Plan-by-Fund fixed effects.
    The coefficients on the triple-interactions Expense ratio × P ost × Large contributions
are negative for the overall sample and the domestic equity subsample. This implies that the
disclosure has a stronger effect on fee-flow-sensitivities in plans where participants contribute
more money to the plan. In terms of economic magnitudes, the effect in the overall sample
is almost 50% larger for plans where the average contribution rate by participants is high;


                                               22
specifically, the effect is -0.440 for low-contribution plans vs. -0.641 (i.e., -0.440 - 0.201)
for high-contribution plans. Column (2) shows that this difference is even larger when we
focus on allocations within the set of domestic equity funds. These findings suggest that the
new disclosures provide useful information to even those participants who are more likely to
be motivated to minimize fees and thus seek information on their 401(k) funds before the
reform.


                                  [Insert Table 8 about here]

   In Panel B of Table 8, we study whether the reform differentially affects participants in
plans with many options compared to those participants who have relatively fewer options.
The number of choices can have an ambiguous effect on allocations around the reform. On
the one hand, the disclosure could make fee sensitivity stronger among plans with many
choices if the reform simplifies comparisons among the investment options. On the other
hand, the reform could have a larger effect in plans with fewer choices as these disclosures
may be easier to process. This latter hypothesis is related to Cronqvist and Thaler (2004),
Carroll et al. (2009), and Keim and Mitchell (2018), who find that retirement savers are often
overwhelmed when facing a larger number of investment options.
   To study this question, we divide the number of plans into equal terciles in the corre-
sponding years. The low group includes plans with fewer than 16 or 17 choices (the cutoff
varies slightly across years) and the high group includes plans with more than 24 choices.
The middle group is the omitted category in the regression. The triple-interaction term is
positive for the high group, which means that participants in plans with many choices react
less to the new information. Interestingly, the coefficient on the triple interaction for the low
group is also positive, although not statistically significant. We do not include the direct
effects for the two size categories separately, since they are absorbed by the plan-fund fixed
effect.


4.8       Target-date funds
In the previous tests, we focus specifically on the sample of non-target-date funds. The reason
is that target-date funds tend to be default options, and their flows are thus more likely to
be confounded by plan sponsor choices. Some participants may simply be defaulted in the
target-date option corresponding to their age if they do not make an active decision about


                                               23
how to allocate their retirement contributions. Furthermore, if a participant wants to invest
in a target-date fund, the choice of the specific fund (e.g., whether it is a 2030 or a 2040
target-date fund) is less likely to be affected by differences in fees between these funds than
by other factors such as the intended retirement horizon and the desired risk level. Therefore,
we hypothesize that the disclosure reform has a smaller impact among target-date funds.
    Table A.8 in the Internet Appendix tabulates results on the effect of the regulatory change
on fee-sensitivities if we add target-date funds to our sample. Our sample size increases
from 47,634 to 75,814 observations. We report the results for all fund styles using the four
measures of flows. We include interaction effects with an indicator variable for target-date
funds. The results confirm that the disclosure reform increased the sensitivity of flows to fees
after the reform for non-target date funds. However, the coefficients on the triple interaction
Expense ratio × P ost × T arget-date f und are not statistically significant for three of the
four flow measures. Furthermore, the overall change in the sensitivity to fees after the reform
for target-date funds (i.e., 2 + 5 ) is not significantly-different from zero, as summarized
in the last row. These results are consistent with the argument that participants choose
a particular target-date fund not based on its fee, but rather on the expected retirement
horizon or the fund's risk profile.


4.9    Fund-level evidence
The previous sections study the effects of the new disclosures on the allocation of flows across
the set of options within individual 401(k) plans. Efficient allocation of flows is important for
retirement savers, and our evidence suggests that the reform significantly affected flows. In
this section, we bring the analysis to a more aggregate level and ask whether the reform also
affected overall mutual fund flows.
    Table 9 reports our analysis, which is based on fund-year level data from the CRSP mutual
fund database for the 2010­2013 period. Using a triple-difference test, we examine how funds'
fee-sensitivities change from the pre- to the post-reform period, interacted with a measure of
each fund's exposure to flows from DC participants and the new disclosure requirement. We
use three different measures of exposure, which we will refer to as DC intensity : (1) whether
the fund is included in any of the plans in our sample, (2) the natural logarithm of one plus
the number of 401(k) plans in our sample that include the fund, and (3) the fraction of a
fund's net assets that can be attributed to the 401(k) plans in our sample.




                                               24
       This specification also allows us to compare the change in the sensitivity of flows to fees
for our treatment sample of funds with a presence in 401(k) plans to the change for a control
sample of funds with no presence in 401(k) plans.
       The summary statistics in Panel A of Table 9 show that around a third of all funds in
CRSP are included in at least one of the 401(k) plans in our sample, and conditional on
being included in at least one plan, the average number of plans that a fund belongs to is
eight. Moreover, for those funds, the fraction of a fund's total net asset value made up of
401(k) assets from these plans is 7.2%.


                                        [Insert Table 9 about here]

    It is important to emphasize that these numbers are only a proxy for DC intensity because
our data only contain a subsample of all DC plans. However, we have no reason to expect
that our measure is biased in the cross-section in terms of capturing funds' relative degrees
of exposure to flows to and from DC plans; in other words, funds with higher DC intensity
based on our sample should also likely have higher exposures to those DC plans that are not
captured in our sample.
    Panel B reports the results on fee sensitivities. We regress fund-year level flows on expense
ratios, with interactions with Post and DC intensity. The primary variable of interest is
the triple-interaction Expense ratio × P ost × DC intensity . This variable captures whether
funds with higher DC intensity experience stronger increases in fee-sensitivities after the
reform than other funds. In all regressions, we include separate size controls by year (size is
measured as the log of total net assets), fund fixed effects, fund style-by-year fixed effects, as
well as family-by-year fixed effects. DC intensity is measured as of 2009 (the year immediately
before our sample period), and held constant during our sample period; the non-interacted
variable DC intensity is thus subsumed by fund fixed effects. As in our previous analysis,
target-date funds are excluded from the data, although results are essentially unchanged if
we do include them.18
    The results in Panel B show that DC intensity predicts a stronger change in the fee-
sensitivity of fund flows after the disclosure reform. This result shows that the disclosure
reform has a measurable effect at the fund-level as well. These findings hold when measuring
DC intensity based on whether a fund is included in any plan at all, when based on the
  18
       At the fund-level across all funds in CRSP, less than 5% of funds are target-date funds.



                                                       25
number of plans a fund is a part of, or when measured as the fraction of a fund's assets that
comes from the DC plans in our sample.
    Furthermore, the coefficients on the interaction between the expense ratio and Post are
insignificant across all specifications. This means that mutual funds that are not part of any
of the 401(k) plans in our sample do not exhibit any differential sensitivity of flows to fees
after the regulatory reform. Thus, the treated sample of mutual funds in DC plans exhibit a
change in sensitivity to fees whereas the control sample does not exhibit a change.


5        Performance and flows
The 2012 disclosures provide plan participants with a new way of comparing fees across invest-
ment options. However, the new disclosures also offer participants comparative information
about past performance. Specifically, the new disclosure format requires plan fiduciaries to
tabulate one-, five-, and ten-year returns for all fund options whenever these return horizons
are available.19
    For a small fraction of funds the past performance is missing, as they do not have sufficiently
long return histories.20 The absence of returns may also influence plan participants, as they
may be unwilling to invest in investment options that do not exhibit a sufficiently long track
record.
    To the extent that plan participants chase performance, we may expect return-flow
sensitivities to increase after the disclosure reform. While chasing low fees will predictably
result in lower fees, chasing high past performance may not necessarily produce higher future
returns due to the relatively low persistence of performance in the mutual fund industry
(Carhart (1997)). Therefore, it is unclear whether participants may react at all to the
performance information.
       In Table 10, we examine whether fund flows become more sensitive to returns after the
regulatory change. In these regressions, we add one-, five-, and ten-year returns (measured up
until the start of the plan's fiscal year) and their interactions with our Post indicator to our
baseline model in equation (7). Furthermore, we also include interaction effects that capture
  19
     An extensive literature has studied the relation between flows and performance in mutual funds (e.g.,
Chevalier and Ellison (1997), Sirri and Tufano (1998), Del Guercio and Tkac (2002), Berk and Green (2004),
Barber, Odean, and Zheng (2005), Ivkovic and Weisbenner (2009), Spiegel and Zhang (2013), Sialm, Starks,
and Zhang (2015), Solomon, Soltes, and Sosyura (2014), Barber, Huang, and Odean (2016), Berk and van
Binsbergen (2016), Phillips, Pukthuanthong, and Rau (2016), and Dannhauser and Pontiff (2020)).
  20
     We find that 0.17% of observations have missing one-year returns, 2.4% have missing five-year returns,
and 8.2% have missing ten-year returns.


                                                    26
when an investment option does not have a sufficiently long return history. Specifically, if
returns at a given horizon are missing, we replace these missing returns with the mean return
by style and year and include interaction effects with an indicator variable for missing returns.
Thus, the coefficient on the interaction effects with missing returns will indicate whether
plan participants reacted differently to short return histories after the disclosure reform. We
also control for the expense ratio and the expense ratio interacted with the P ost indicator
variable to avoid spurious estimates that could arise from a possible correlation between
fees and past performance. As in Table 3, we further control for plan-by-fund fixed effects,
plan-by-style-by-year fixed effects, family-by-year fixed effects, and size controls by year.
    The results in Table 10 show that the flow sensitivity to one-year returns becomes stronger
after the reform. The economic magnitude of the one-year performance effect is similar to
the magnitude of the expense effect. For example, a one-standard-deviation change in the
one-year performance of 15% is associated with a 0.31 percentage point increase in flows
(i.e., 0.15 × 2.070). Yet, this sensitivity is weak or mostly not significant for the five- and
ten-year performance horizons. The heightened sensitivity to short-term performance may be
justified since empirical evidence indicates that there is more performance persistence in the
short term (e.g., Hendricks, Patel, and Zeckhauser (1993), Carhart (1997), and Bollen and
Busse (2005)). It is also likely that participants more heavily update their one year return
expectations when disclosures are received.
    We also observe a significantly negative coefficient on the interaction with the missing
return indicator variable. For example, flows decline by 0.23 percentage points using the first
flow measure after the reform for funds that do not exhibit a ten-year track record.


                                 [Insert Table 10 about here]

   The results in Panel B are consistent if we focus only on domestic equity funds.
   Finally, we note that the one-year sensitivity results have to be interpreted with caution.
Participants may have been just as sensitive to short-term performance before the reform, but
their short-horizon return information varied based on when they accessed this information.
After the disclosure reform, participants update their information sets about one-year returns
based on the same data at the same time, allowing the econometrician to identify the
sensitivity. Longer-horizon return metrics are less sensitive to this timing effect.




                                               27
6      Menu allocations
In this section we discuss whether the regulatory reform affected the menus in 401(k) plans
and the allocations to employer stock.


6.1     Menu changes
Our interpretation of the previous results is that participants respond to the new disclosures
by allocating more flows to cheaper funds, and to some extent also to funds with higher
one-year performance. A potential alternative explanation of these findings is that plan
sponsors or providers are mapping participants to cheaper funds by changing the menus.
One such possibility is that the sponsor may change the default option around the reform.
Several arguments speak against this hypothesis. First, it is unlikely that the majority of
sponsors change default options at the same time, and precisely in 2012.21 Second, as shown
in Table 3, we observe strong evidence of more negative flows for relatively more expensive
funds after the reform--a result that cannot be explained by sponsors merely changing where
new money goes.
   Nonetheless, we further investigate the possibility that sponsors change the investment
options around the time of the reform. When a mutual fund option in a plan is deleted, assets
from this fund will typically be moved to a new option, unless participants actively allocate
their investments to a different fund. Such reallocations could influence our results if the
money is reinvested in a cheaper option and if the trend toward using cheaper replacement
options increases precisely in 2012.
   To examine whether reinvestments could drive our results, we re-estimate our analyses
excluding all plan-years where any option is dropped. Fund deletions are relatively common--
around 60% of plan-years have at least one option dropped, and on average around 10­15%
of options are replaced in any given year. As an alternative and slightly less conservative
approach, we exclude any funds where at least one option within that fund-style is dropped
from the plan. We do so because, when a fund is dropped, the default replacement is generally
in the same style. Because the probability of deleting at least one option is higher when there
are more options in a plan, the number of plan-fund-year observations drops by more than
60%. Table A.8 in the Internet Appendix reports these results. We find that the estimates are
remarkably similar in economic magnitude even in this more limited sample. These findings
  21
    This regulatory reform has been in the works for many years before plan participants received their first
disclosures, giving plan sponsor several years to make changes to plans in light of the pending reforms.



                                                     28
suggest that our baseline results are not an artifact of plan sponsors changing their behavior
around the reform.
   Finally, another possibility is that plan sponsors more aggressively remove particularly
expensive options in 2012, which would result in participants having no choice but to direct
money toward cheaper funds. This hypothesis cannot drive our baseline results, which employ
plan-by-fund fixed effects and thus control for the composition of funds in a plan. Further,
as Figure A.1 in the Internet Appendix shows, deletions are not particularly common right
around 2012 compared to other years.
   The question of whether the reform makes plan sponsors more likely to delete relatively
expensive options to make the plans look better to participants is nevertheless an interesting
one on its own. In other words, did the disclosure reform to participants also affect sponsor
incentives? To test this, Table A.9 in the Internet Appendix regresses an indicator for an
option being deleted on the fee of the option interacted with Post, as well as several plan-
and fund-level control variables. We find that the coefficient on the expense ratio itself is
positive, which means that on average more expensive funds are more likely to be deleted,
but this sensitivity of deletions to fees does not become stronger after the disclosure reform.


6.2     Allocation to employer stocks
We next look at the choice between investing in mutual funds, compared to the alternative
of investing in employer stock.22 In the 66% of plans in our sample that have the option to
invest in employer stock, participants on average allocate 15.4% of the plan's assets toward
employer stock. Investing in employer stock is typically a zero-fee option to participants. It
is, however, fraught with high idiosyncratic risk and limits participants' ability to diversify
their labor income.
    We hypothesize that if a plan's mutual fund options are relatively more expensive, then
participants may shift more assets toward their employer stock when they acquire better
information about these fees through the new disclosures. To address this question, we regress
the fraction of plan assets invested in employer stock on the average fee of a plan's mutual
fund options. The results are tabulated in Table 11.
   The table shows that plan participants reallocate toward employer stock after the reform
when the investment options in a plan are relatively expensive and when the one-year
  22
    See Benartzi (2002), Poterba (2003), Huberman and Sengmueller (2004), Benartzi et al. (2007), and
Brown, Liang, and Weisbenner (2007) for discussions on the optimality of employer stock as an investment
option in 401(k) plans.



                                                  29
performance of the company's stock is relatively high. As reported in Table 1, the average
fee across all funds in a plan is 57 basis points with a standard deviation of 19 basis points.
The regression coefficient of 0.013 in Table 11 means that, after the reform, plans with a
one-standard-deviation higher average fee experience an approximately 0.25 percentage-point
larger change in assets allocated to employer stock. While this magnitude is economically
and statistically small, it nevertheless shows that participants can be incentivized to increase
their investments in employer stock by being presented with more expensive mutual fund
options in their 401(k) plans. This reallocation toward company stock thus is a potential
unintended consequence of the fee disclosure.


7     Conclusions
Participants in DC pension plans have been shown to be inert and to rarely change their
investment allocations, as discussed by Madrian and Shea (2001), Agnew et al. (2003), and
Sialm, Starks, and Zhang (2015). Our paper argues that this inertia can be mitigated by
providing more salient fee and performance information to plan participants.
    Using a hand-collected dataset on investment menus for a large sample of 401(k) plans,
we study a 2012 regulatory reform that provides plan participants data on the expense ratios
and the prior performance of the investment options in their plans. We find that participants
become significantly more attentive to expense ratios after the reform. We also find some
evidence that investor flows become more sensitive to short-term prior performance. Our
results show that such disclosures can facilitate portfolio allocations by plan participants by
bringing relevant decision criteria within sight.




                                              30
References
Agarwal, S., S. Chomsisengphet, N. Mahoney, and J. Stroebel (2015). Regulating consumer
  financial products: Evidence from credit cards. Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (1),
 111­164.
Agnew, J., P. Balduzzi, and A. Sund´
                                   en (2003). Portfolio choice and trading in a large 401(k)
  plan. American Economic Review 93 (1), 193­215.
Badoer, D. C., C. P. Costello, and C. M. James (2020). I can see clearly now: Salience and
  the impact of disclosure requirements. Journal of Financial Economics 136, 471­489.
Barber, B. M., X. Huang, and T. Odean (2016). Which factors matter to investors? evidence
  from mutual fund flows. Review of Financial Studies 29 (10), 2600­2642.
Barber, B. M. and T. Odean (2008). All that glitters: The effect of attention and news
  on the buying behavior of individual and institutional investors. Review of Financial
 Studies 21 (2), 785­818.
Barber, B. M., T. Odean, and L. Zheng (2005). Out of sight, out of mind: The effects of
  expenses on mutual fund flows. Journal of Business 78 (6), 2095­2120.
Ben-David, I., J. Li, A. Rossi, and Y. Song (2019). What do mutual fund investors really
  care about? (2019-03), 005. Working Paper, Fisher College of Business.
Benartzi, S. (2002). Excessive extrapolation and the allocation of 401(k) accounts to company
  stock. Journal of Finance 56 (5), 1747­1764.
Benartzi, S., R. H. Thaler, S. P. Utkus, and C. R. Sunstein (2007). The law and economics
  of company stock in 401(k) plans. Journal of Law and Economics 50 (1), 45­79.
Berk, J. B. and R. C. Green (2004). Mutual fund flows and performance in rational markets.
  Journal of Political Economy 112, 1269­1295.
Berk, J. B. and J. H. van Binsbergen (2015). Measuring skill in the mutual fund industry.
 Journal of Financial Economics 118, 1­20.
Berk, J. B. and J. H. van Binsbergen (2016). Assessing asset pricing models using revealed
  preference. Journal of Financial Economics 119, 1­23.
Bertrand, M. and A. Morse (2011). Information disclosure, cognitive biases, and payday
  borrowing. Journal of Finance 66 (6), 1865­1893.
Beshears, J., J. Choi, D. Laibson, and B. C. Madrian (2010). How does simplified disclosure
  affect individuals' mutual fund choices? In D. A. Wise (Ed.), Explorations in the Economics
  of Aging, pp. 75­96. University of Chicago Press.
Bollen, N. P. B. and J. A. Busse (2005). Short-term persistence in mutual fund performance.
  Review of Financial Studies 18 (2), 569­597.
Bordalo, P., N. Gennaioli, and A. Shleifer (2012). Salience theory of choice under risk.
 Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (3), 1243­1285.
Bordalo, P., N. Gennaioli, and A. Shleifer (2013). Salience and consumer choice. Journal of
 Political Economy 121 (5), 803­843.

                                             31
Brown, J. R., N. Liang, and S. Weisbenner (2007). Individual account investment options and
  portfolio choice: Behavioral lessons from 401(k) plans. Journal of Public Economics 91,
  1992­2013.
Carhart, M. M. (1997). On persistence in mutual fund performance. Journal of Finance 52 (1),
  57­82.
Carroll, G. D., J. J. Choi, D. Laibson, B. C. Madrian, and A. Metrick (2009). Optimal
  defaults and active decisions. Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, 1639­1674.
Chalmers, J., W. Johnson, and J. Reuter (2013). The effect of pension design on employer costs
  and employee retirement choices: Evidence from oregon. Journal of Public Economics 116,
 17­34.
Chetty, R., A. Looney, and K. Kroft (2009). Salience and taxation: Theory and evidence.
 American Economic Review 99 (4), 1145­1177.
Chevalier, J. A. and G. D. Ellison (1997). Risk taking in mutual funds as a response to
 incentives. Journal of Political Economy 105 (6), 1167­1200.
Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, and B. C. Madrian (2009). Mental accounting in portfolio choice:
 Evidence from a flypaper effect. American Economic Review 99 (5), 2085­2095.
Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, and B. C. Madrian (2010). Why does the law of one price fail? An
 experiment on index mutual funds. Review of Financial Studies 23 (4), 1405­1432.
Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, B. C. Madrian, and A. Metrick (2004a). Employees' investment
 decisions about company stock. In O. S. Mitchell and S. P. Utkus (Eds.), Pension Design
 and Structure: New Lessons from Behavioral Finance.
Choi, J. J., D. Laibson, B. C. Madrian, and A. Metrick (2004b). For better or for worse:
 Default effects and 401(k) savings behavior. In D. A. Wise (Ed.), Perspectives on the
 Economics of Aging, Volume 401, pp. 81­125.
Cronqvist, H. and R. H. Thaler (2004). Design choices in privatized social-security systems:
  Learning from the Swedish experience. American Economic Review 94 (2), 424­428.
Da, Z., B. Larrain, C. Sialm, and J. Tessada (2018). Destabilizing financial advice: Evidence
  from pension fund reallocations. Review of Financial Studies 31 (10), 3720­3755.
Dannhauser, C. D. and J. Pontiff (2020). Flow. Working Paper, Villanova University and
 Boston College.
Del Guercio, D. and P. Tkac (2002). The determinants of the flow of funds of managed
 portfolios: Mutual funds versus pension funds. Journal of Financial and Quantitative
 Analysis 37, 523­557.
Del Guercio, D. and P. A. Tkac (2008). Star power: The effect of Monrningstar ratings on
  mutual fund flow. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 43 (4), 907­936.
DellaVigna, S. (2009). Psychology and economics: Evidence from the field. Journal of
 Economic Literature 47 (2), 315­72.
Dranove, D., D. Kessler, M. McClellan, and M. Satterthwaite (2003). Is more information
  better? The effects of "report cards" on health care providers. Journal of Political
 Economy 111 (3), 555­588.

                                             32
Duarte, F. and J. S. Hastings (2012). Fettered consumers and sophisticated firms: Evidence
 from Mexico's privatized social security market. Working Paper.
Dvorak, T. (2015). Do 401(k) plan advisors take their own advice? Journal of Pension
 Economics and Finance 14, 55­75.
Elton, E. J., M. J. Gruber, and C. R. Blake (2006). The adequacy of investment choices
  offered by 401(k) plans. Journal of Public Economics 90, 1299­1314.
Elton, E. J., M. J. Gruber, and C. R. Blake (2007). Participant reaction and the performance
  of funds offered by 401(k) plans. Journal of Financial Intermediation 16, 249­271.
Evans, R. B. and Y. Sun (2018). Models or stars: The role of asset pricing models and
  heuristics in investor risk adjustment. Available at SSRN 3287997 .
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (2010). Luck versus skill in the cross-section of mutual fund
  returns. Journal of Finance 65, 1915­1947.
Figlio, D. N. and M. E. Lucas (2016). What's in a grade? School report cards and the
  housing market. American Economic Review 21 (3), 201­214.
Gao, M. and J. Huang (2017). Informing the market: The effect of modern information
 technologies on information production. Working Paper.
Gil-Bazo, J. and P. Ruiz-Verdu (2009). The relation between price and performance in the
  mutual fund industry. Journal of Finance 64 (5), 2153­2182.
Goldreich, D. and H. Halaburda (2013). When smaller plans are better: Variability in
 menu-setting ability. Management Science 59 (11), 2518­2535.
Grinblatt, M. and S. Titman (1992). The persistence of mutual fund performance. Journal
 of Finance 47 (5), 1977­1984.
Hartzmark, S. M. (2015). The worst, the best, ignoring all the rest: The rank effect and
 trading behavior. Review of Financial Studies 28 (4), 1024­1059.
Hendricks, D., J. Patel, and R. Zeckhauser (1993). Hot hands in mutual funds: Short-run
  persistence of relative performance, 1974-1988. Journal of Finance 48 (1), 93­130.
Hong, C. (2019). Freedom of choice in pension plans: Evidence from a quasi-natural
 experiment. Working Paper, Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance.
Houge, T. and J. Wellman (2005). Fallout from the mutual fund trading scandal. Journal of
 Business Ethics 62, 129­139.
Huberman, G. and W. Jiang (2006). Offering versus choice in 401(k) plans: Equity exposure
 and number of funds. Journal of Finance 61, 763­801.
Huberman, G. and P. Sengmueller (2004). Performance and employer stock in 401(k) plans.
 Review of Finance 8 (3), 403­443.
Ivkovic, Z. and S. Weisbenner (2009). Individual investor mutual fund flows. Journal of
  Financial Economics 92 (2), 223­237.



                                            33
Kaniel, R. and R. Parham (2017). WSJ category kings­The impact of media attention on
 consumer and mutual fund investment decisions. Journal of Financial Economics 123 (2),
 337­356.
Karlan, D., M. McConnell, S. Mullainathan, and J. Zinman (2016). Getting to the top of
 mind: How reminders increase saving. Management Science 62 (12), 3393­3411.
Karpoff, J. M., D. S. Lee, and G. S. Martin (2008). The cost to firms of cooking the books.
 Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 43 (3), 581­612.
Keim, D. B. and O. S. Mitchell (2018). Simplifying choices in defined contribution retirement
  plan design. Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 17 (3), 363­384.
Madrian, B. C. and D. F. Shea (2001). The power of suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) participation
 and savings behavior. Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (4), 1149­1187.
Phillips, B., K. Pukthuanthong, and P. R. Rau (2016). Past performance may be an illusion:
  Performance, flows, and fees in mutual funds. Critical Finance Review 5, 351­398.
Pool, V. K., C. Sialm, and I. Stefanescu (2016). It pays to set the menu: Mutual fund
  investment options in 401(k) plans. Journal of Finance 71 (4), 1779­1812.
Poterba, J. M. (2003). Employer stock and 401(k) plans. American Economic Review 93 (2),
  398­404.
Shaton, M. (2017). The display of information and household investment behavior. Working
  Paper, FEDS.
Sialm, C., L. T. Starks, and H. Zhang (2015). Defined contribution pension plans: Sticky or
  discerning money? Journal of Finance 70 (2), 805­838.
Sialm, C. and T. M. Tham (2016). Spillover effects in mutual fund companies. Management
  Science 62, 1472­1486.
Sirri, E. R. and P. Tufano (1998). Costly search and mutual fund flows. Journal of
  Finance 53 (5), 1598­1622.
Solomon, D. H., E. Soltes, and D. Sosyura (2014). Winners in the spotlight: Media coverage
  of fund holdings as a driver of flows. Journal of Financial Economics 113 (1), 53­72.
Spiegel, M. and H. Zhang (2013). Mutual fund risk and market share-adjusted fund flows.
  Journal of Financial Economics 108 (2), 506­528.
Stango, V. and J. Zinman (2014). Limited and varying consumer attention: Evidence from
  shocks to the salience of bank overdraft fees. Review of Financial Studies 27 (4), 990­1030.
Tang, N., O. S. Mitchell, G. R. Mottola, and S. P. Utkus (2010). The efficiency of sponsor and
  participant portfolio choices in 401(k) plans. Journal of Public Economics 94, 1073­1085.
Zitzewitz, E. (2006). How widespread was late trading in mutual funds? American Economic
  Review 96 (2), 284­289.




                                             34
Figure 1 Example of the new disclosure format
This figure shows an example of the fee and performance disclosure following the reform. Panel A shows the
fee disclosure table format, and Panel B shows the performance disclosure format. Source: Department of
Labor            at          https://www.dol.gov/sites/default/files/ebsa/about-ebsa/our-activities/resource-
center/publications/providing-information-in-participant-directed-plans-model-chart.pdf

                                           A. Fee disclosure example
                                                Fees and Expenses
                               Total Annual
        Name /                  Operating
                                                                       Shareholder-Type Fees
     Type of Option             Expenses
                               As a    Per
                                %     $1000
      Equity Funds
                                                    $20 annual service charge subtracted from investments held in
    S&P 500 Index Fund         0.18%    $1.80
                                                              this option if valued at less than $10,000.
                                                   2.25% deferred sales charge subtracted from amounts withdrawn
      Large Cap Fund           2.45%   $24.50
                                                                    within 12 months of purchase.
      Int'l Stock Fund         0.79%    $7.90             5.75% sales charge subtracted from amounts invested.
      Bond Funds
     Bond Index Fund           0.50%    $5.00                                    N/A
         Other
                                                     Amounts withdrawn may not be transferred to a competing
     Stable Value Fund         0.65%    $6.50
                                                                 option for 90 days after withdrawal.
                                                     Excessive trading restricts additional purchases (other than
   Target Date 2020 Fund       1.50%   $15.00
                                                          contributions and loan repayments) for 85 days.

                                       B. Performance disclosure example
                           Performance Information ­ Variable Return Investments
                                    Average Annual Total Return                 Benchmark
                                           as of 12/31/12
        Name/
                                1yr.    5yr.    10yr.    Since         1yr.  5yr.   10yr.   Since
     Type of Option
                                                       Inception                          Inception
      Equity Funds
                                                                              26.46%   .42%   -.95%      9.30%
    S&P 500 Index Fund         26.5%   .34%      -1.03%        9.25%
                                                                                           S&P 500
                                                                              27.80% 1.02%     N/A       2.77%
      Large Cap Fund           27.6%   .99%      N/A           2.26%
                                                                                   US Prime Market 750 Index
                                                                              40.40% 5.40% 2.40%        12.09%
      Int'l Stock Fund        36.73%   5.26%     2.29%         9.37%
                                                                                          MSCI EAFE
       Bond Funds
                                                                              5.93%     4.97% 6.33%         7.01%
     Bond Index Fund           6.45%   4.43%    6.08%          7.08%
                                                                                       Barclays Cap. Aggr. Bd.
          Other
                                                                               1.8%    3.1%     3.3%     4.99%
     Stable Value Fund         4.36%   4.64%    5.07%          3.75%
                                                                                    3-month US T-Bill Index
                                                                              26.46%    N/A     N/A      3.09%
                                                                                            S&P 500
   Target Date 2020 Fund      27.94%    N/A      N/A           2.45%
                                                                              23.95%    N/A     N/A      3.74%
                                                                                Generations 2020 Composite Index




                                                          35
Figure 2 Fee sensitivity of flows
These figures plot flows to low-fee (blue solid bars) vs. high-fee (orange checkered bars) funds by year around the
disclosure reform. Flows to low-fee funds are calculated as the sum of all flows to below-median fee funds (the
median is defined within each plan, year, and style), divided by the lagged sum of assets in those funds. Flows to
high-fee (above-median) funds are defined analogously. We limit the sample to plan-years that have between 3 and
100 funds and exclude target-date funds and funds that were added or deleted during the year. Panel A shows
results for all funds and Panel B for domestic equity funds only. Below the graph, we report p-values for the
difference between the flows to high- and low-fee funds each year. These p-values are for the coefficients for the
vector 1 based on the year-by-year regression: flow =  + 1 * I[high-fee] + , employing standard errors that are
robust to heteroskedasticity.

                                                A. All fund styles

                            Flows to low- and high-fee funds around the reform
              0.12

               0.1

              0.08

              0.06

              0.04

              0.02

                 0
                            2010                2011                 2012              2013
                              Flow to low-fee funds          Flow to high-fee funds


           Year              2010               2011                 2012              2013
        p-value for
                             0.885              0.981                0.105             0.026
        difference:




                                                        36
Figure 2, continued

                                 B. Domestic equity funds only
                       Flows to low- and high-fee domestic equity funds
              0.2


             0.15


              0.1


             0.05


                   0
                       2010            2011               2012                2013
            -0.05
                        Flow to low-fee funds        Flow to high-fee funds


        Year           2010            2011               2012            2013
     p-value for
                       0.241           0.198              0.001           0.130
     difference:




                                                37
Table 1 Descriptive statistics: Plan-level variables
This table reports sample summary statistics for variables used in this paper. The sample covers plans that
have between 3 and 100 funds as investment options, from 2010 to 2013. Panel A shows statistics of variables
at the plan-year level. #Funds in plan is the number of fund options available in a plan. Fee dispersion is the
difference in expense ratio between the 10th and 90th percentile fund in a plan-year. The table reports indicators
of whether a plan includes employer stock, target-date funds, or index funds, and the fraction of mutual fund
assets that are invested in these options conditional on having that option (the fraction of plan assets in the
case of employer stock). Panel B shows the number of funds available across various fund styles. We group
our sample into the following six fund styles: balanced funds, domestic equity funds, foreign equity funds,
domestic fixed income, foreign fixed income, and other, by mapping Lipper codes into these broader categories.

A. Summary statistics (plan-year level variables)
                                            mean        sd      p1       p25     p50      p75      p99          N
 Plan size ($m)                              799      2,004      2        67     322      747     8,536       5,577
 # Plan participants (`000)                  13.0      41.9     0.1       1.3     4.4     11.5    139.4       5,576
 Contributions per participant ($)          4,586     2,448     601     2,650   4,274    6,470    8,794       5,492
 Assets per participant ($ `000)             77.2      62.7     2.1      34.6    61.9    102.1    301.5       5,576
 # Funds in plan (incl. newly added)        20.57     10.07      4        14      20       25       62        5,577
 # Funds in plan (continued)                17.63      9.17      1        11      18       23       46        5,577
 # Funds in plan, (cont. non-target date) 11.85        7.23      1         8      11       14       41        5,577
 # Funds in plan, (cont. target date)        5.78      5.09      0         0       6       11       13        5,577
 Average fee across all funds in plan (%)    0.57      0.19    0.16      0.44    0.61     0.69     1.05       5,575
 Fee dispersion within plan (%)              0.70      0.25    0.10      0.54    0.71     0.86     1.29       5,575
 Any employer stock in plan                  0.66      0.47      0         0       1        1        1        5,577
 Pct. of assets in employer stock           15.4%     16.4%    0.0%     4.3%    10.5%    20.7%    80.5%       3,693
 Any target-date fund in plan                0.72      0.45      0         0       1        1        1        5,577
 Pct. in target-date funds                  25.5%     18.0%    0.0%     13.2%   21.5%    33.5%    84.7%       3,986
 Any index fund in plan                      0.92      0.27      0         1       1        1        1        5,575
 Pct. in index funds                        26.3%     23.0%    0.0%     8.7%    18.6%    39.5%    94.1%       5,111


B. Fund choice sets
                                     Fund-Plan-Year level                 Plan-year level (non-target date funds)
                          Total    % of Non- Target-    Avg. Std.Dev.     % of plan-years #funds p10 p50 p90
                          funds     all Target- date    exp. of exp.      with at least one
                                  funds date funds      ratio  ratio            fund
                                         funds           (%)                                  (if at least   one)
Balanced                 18,525   18.8%   3,596 14,929 0.57     0.27            48%         1.35      1      1    2
Domestic Equity          50,469   51.3%   36,745 13,724 0.58    0.35            98%         6.76      3      6 10
Domestic Fixed Income    17,188   17.5%   13,585 3,603 0.38     0.23            93%         2.63      1      2    4
Foreign Equity           10,646   10.8%   10,646    0   0.73    0.36            92%         2.08      1      2    3
Foreign Fixed Income      530     0.5%     530      0   0.74    0.20             8%         1.19      1      1    2
Other                     971     1.0%     971      0   0.82    0.29            13%         1.31      1      1    2




                                                       38
Table 2 Descriptive statistics: Investment option-level variables
Panel A reports sample summary statistics for fund-by-plan level variables used in this paper. The sample
covers plans that have between 3 and 100 funds as investment options, from 2010 to 2013. The observations
are at the fund-plan-year level. We only include continuing funds (i.e., newly added or deleted funds are
excluded), and we further limit the sample to non-target-date funds. Fund value is the dollar value invested
in a mutual fund option in a plan, Fund plan share is the "market share" of a fund within a plan. Expense
ratio is measured as the expense ratio of the specific fund share class in the plan, or as the minimum fee of the
fund if the share class information is not available. Flow (to plan assets) is the annual dollar flow to a fund in
a plan divided by the lagged sum of assets across all mutual funds in the plan; Flow (change in plan share) is
the change in the market share of a fund in a plan from last year to the current year, adjusted for the return of
each option over the same period, where the market share is defined among all continued funds that have available
returns; Flow (to option size) is the dollar flow to a fund divided by the average of the starting and ending
total fund value. Returns are annualized returns. Panel B reports the correlations between the four different
measures of flows. All continuous variables are winsorized at the 1% level.

A. Summary statistics (fund-plan-year level variables, continued non-target-date funds)
                                         mean       sd        p1     p25     p50    p75           p99       N

 Fund value ($1,000)                       21,400 36,800    2    1,037         6,050   23,700 177,000 64,995
 Fund plan share (%)                         3.91  3.57    0.00   1.09         2.95     5.75   15.23 64,559
 Expense ratio (%)                           0.60  0.36    0.04   0.32         0.62     0.85    1.39  64,483
 Flow (to plan assets) (%)                   0.12  1.71   -4.46  -0.36         0.02     0.43    7.89  60,957
 Flow (change in plan share) (%)            -0.11  1.16   -4.22  -0.48         -0.03    0.26    3.98  60,957
 Flow (to option size) (%)                   6.69  37.79 -100.00 -7.08         1.09     13.20 171.48 60,957
 Flow positive (indicator)                  0.537 0.499     0       0            1        1       1   60,957
 Return 1-year (%)                           14.5  15.0   -16.0    4.0         13.8     23.0    57.4  64,881
 Return 5-year (%)                           3.1    3.3    -4.6    1.1          3.0      5.3    11.8  63,438
 Return 10-year (%)                          6.1    3.6    -1.9    3.6          6.2      8.2    15.6  59,543


B. Correlation between flow measures
                                          Flow                Flow               Flow
                                     (to plan assets)    (change in plan    (to option size)     Flow positive
                                           (%)             share) (%)             (%)             (indicator)
Flow   (to plan assets) (%)                 1
Flow   (change in plan share) (%)         0.579                 1
Flow   (to option size) (%)               0.657               0.459                1
Flow   positive (indicator)               0.511               0.427              0.553                  1




                                                        39
Table 3 Fee-flow sensitivities around the disclosure reform
This table reports results on the change in fee-flow sensitivities following the 2012 disclosure reform. The
observations are at the fund-plan-year level. The sample period is 2010-2013, two years before and two years
after the reform. The sample includes only continuing funds, (i.e., we exclude funds that were newly added
and funds that were deleted during the year). Panel A describes results for all fund styles, and Panel B for
domestic equity funds only. Expense ratio is the expense ratio of the fund (for the exact share class in the plan
when available, or otherwise the minimum expense ratio across a fund's share classes). Post is an indicator for
plans' fiscal years that end after December 1, 2012. The size control is measured as the lagged fund "market
share" within the plan, interacted with year indicators. Plan*Fund fixed effects, Plan*Style*Year fixed effects
(which become Plan*Year fixed effects in Panel B), and Fund Family*Year fixed effects are included as
indicated. The sample includes 1803 unique funds and 1385 unique plans (Panel B includes 917 unique domestic
equity funds and 1366 plans). t-statistics based on standard errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity and
two-way clustered by fund and plan are reported in parentheses below the coefficient estimates. *, **, and ***
represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

A. All fund styles

                                                           Flow
                                       Flow          (change in plan            Flow           Flow positive
                                 (to plan assets)         share)          (to option size)      (indicator)
                                        (1)                 (2)                  (3)                 (4)
Expense ratio * Post                -0.559***           -0.474***            -5.882***           -0.230***
                                      (-4.58)             (-5.03)              (-2.88)             (-6.35)
Expense ratio                          0.204               0.176                5.739             0.183***
                                      (1.33)              (1.34)               (1.33)              (2.90)

Plan*Fund FE                           Yes                   Yes                Yes                 Yes
Size*Year controls                     Yes                   Yes                Yes                 Yes
Plan*Style*Year FE                     Yes                   Yes                Yes                 Yes
Fund Family*Year FE                    Yes                   Yes                Yes                 Yes

R2                                    0.821                  0.697             0.765                0.702
N                                    47,634                 47,634            47,634               47,634




                                                       40
Table 3, continued

B. Domestic equity only

                                                   Flow
                                Flow         (change in plan         Flow         Flow positive
                          (to plan assets)        share)       (to option size)    (indicator)
                                 (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)
Expense ratio * Post         -0.586***          -0.518***         -6.517***         -0.229***
                               (-3.97)            (-4.78)           (-2.63)           (-4.90)
Expense ratio                   0.180              0.224           9.463**           0.204***
                               (1.00)             (1.55)            (2.07)            (2.62)

Plan*Fund FE                    Yes                 Yes              Yes              Yes
Size*Year controls              Yes                 Yes              Yes              Yes
Plan*Year FE                    Yes                 Yes              Yes              Yes
Fund Family*Year FE             Yes                 Yes              Yes              Yes

R2                             0.815                0.667           0.773             0.690
N                             29,545               29,545          29,545            29,545




                                              41
Table 4 Fees and fund flows, fewer fixed effects and controls
This table is similar to Table 3 with fewer fixed effects, where the controls are introduced sequentially.

A. All fund styles

                                          (1)               (2)         (3)             (4)            (5)

Expense ratio * Post                   -0.290***      -0.272***      -0.289***      -0.561***       -0.559***
                                         (-4.41)        (-4.87)        (-4.97)        (-6.37)         (-4.58)
Expense ratio                           -0.100*       -0.180***      -0.196***         0.186           0.204
                                         (-1.95)        (-4.33)        (-4.81)        (1.23)          (1.33)

Style*Year FE                             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
Size*Year controls                        Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
Plan*Year FE                                             Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
Plan*Style*Year FE                                                      Yes            Yes             Yes
Plan*Fund FE                                                                           Yes             Yes
Fund Family*Year FE                                                                                    Yes

R2                                       0.057          0.513           0.596          0.812          0.821
N                                       60,061         59,988          53,676         47,840         47,634


B. Domestic equity only

                                        (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)

Expense ratio * Post                 -0.337***       -0.385***      -0.672***       -0.586***
                                       (-4.49)         (-6.09)        (-7.13)         (-3.97)
Expense ratio                        -0.163***       -0.199***         0.128           0.180
                                       (-2.62)         (-4.02)        (0.70)          (1.00)


Year FE                                 Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
Size*Year controls                      Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
Plan*Year FE                                            Yes            Yes             Yes
Plan*Fund FE                                                           Yes             Yes
Fund Family*Year FE                                                                    Yes

R2                                      0.068          0.597           0.805          0.815
N                                      33,276         33,117          29,692         29,545




                                                       42
Table 5 Extreme fees
This table reports results on the change in the flow sensitivities to extreme fees (defined as the maximum or
minimum fee within the plan-year) following the 2012 disclosure reform. The observations are at the fund-
plan-year level. The sample, control variables, and fixed effects are defined in the same way as in Table 3.
Columns (1)-(3) report results using the full sample (all fund styles), and columns (4)-(6) limit the sample to
domestic equity funds only (Plan*Style*Year FE becomes Plan*Year FE for the domestic equity subsample).
Minimum fee and Maximum fee are indicators for whether the fund is the lowest- or highest-fee option in the
plan (columns (1)-(3)), or within the set of domestic equity funds (columns (4)-(6)). t-statistics based on
standard errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity and two-way clustered by fund and plan are reported in
parentheses below the coefficient estimates. *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% levels, respectively.

 Dependent variable: Flow (to plan assets)
                                              All fund styles                    Domestic equity only
                                        (1)            (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)
 Minimum fee * Post                 0.446***       0.445***     0.345***    0.446***   0.443***     0.361***
                                      (5.25)         (5.24)       (4.13)     (5.16)      (5.11)       (4.36)
 Minimum fee                        -0.191*** -0.190***          -0.123*     -0.135      -0.133       -0.079
                                      (-2.61)       (-2.59)       (-1.67)    (-1.25)     (-1.23)      (-0.73)
 Maximum fee * Post                                 -0.087*       -0.007                -0.081*       -0.033
                                                    (-1.79)       (-0.14)                (-1.73)      (-0.61)
 Maximum fee                                         -0.003       -0.040                  0.014       -0.005
                                                    (-0.07)       (-0.77)                (0.31)       (-0.11)
 Expense ratio * Post                                           -0.359***                            -0.269**
                                                                  (-3.34)                             (-1.98)
 Expense ratio                                                     0.131                               0.081
                                                                  (0.83)                              (0.43)

 Plan*Fund FE                          Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
 Size*Year controls                    Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
 Plan*Style*Year FE                    Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
 Fund Family*Year FE                   Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes

  2
 R                                    0.821         0.821         0.821       0.816       0.816       0.816
 N                                   47,634        47,634        47,634      29,545      29,545      29,545




                                                       43
Table 6 Active and Index funds
Panel A reports results on the effects of the disclosure reform on flows to index funds. Panel B reports results
on the change in the fee-flow sensitivities in separate subsamples for active funds (columns (1)-(2)) and index
funds (columns (3)-(4)), respectively. The observations are at the fund-plan-year level. The sample, control
variables and fixed effects are defined as in Tables 3 (as before, Plan*Style*Year FEs are Plan*Year FEs for
the domestic equity subsample). t-statistics based on standard errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity and
two-way clustered by fund and plan are reported in parentheses below the coefficient estimates. *, **, and ***
represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

A. Effect on indexing
                                         Dependent variable: Flow (to plan assets)

                                         All fund styles                        Domestic equity only
                                 (1)           (2)             (3)         (4)          (5)            (6)
 Index Fund * Post            0.405***      0.298***        0.268***    0.383***    0.201***        0.167**
                               (5.83)         (5.19)         (4.23)      (4.15)       (2.68)         (2.03)
 Minimum fee * Post                         0.283***        0.267***                0.333***       0.322***
                                              (3.44)         (3.19)                   (4.22)         (4.00)
 Maximum fee * Post                                          -0.046                                  -0.056
                                                             (-0.85)                                (-1.04)
 Expense ratio * Post                                        -0.098                                  -0.083
                                                             (-0.81)                                (-0.54)
 Minimum fee                                 -0.085          -0.077                   -0.067         -0.060
                                             (-1.17)         (-1.07)                  (-0.62)       (-0.55)
 Maximum fee                                                 -0.021                                  0.005
                                                             (-0.42)                                 (0.10)
 Expense ratio                                                0.024                                  0.005
                                                             (0.15)                                  (0.03)

 Plan*Fund FE                    Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
 Size*Year controls              Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
 Plan*Style*Year FE              Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
 Fund Family*Year FE             Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
  2
 R                              0.821          0.821         0.821         0.815        0.816         0.816
 N                             47,983         47,983         47,634       29,752       29,752        29,545




                                                       44
Table 6, continued

       B. Fee-flow sensitivities in subsamples of active funds and index funds
       Dependent variable: Flow (to plan assets)

                                          Only active funds        Only index funds
                                            (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)
      Expense ratio * Post               -0.195*     -0.258*    -1.520**    -1.415**
                                         (-1.72)     (-1.76)     (-2.53)     (-2.22)
      Expense ratio                       -0.021      0.023       0.150       0.536
                                         (-0.12)      (0.11)     (0.15)      (0.46)

      Sample                            All fund    Domestic All fund       Domestic
                                         styles    equity only styles      equity only
      Plan*Fund FE                        Yes         Yes       Yes           Yes
      Size*Year controls                  Yes         Yes       Yes           Yes
      Plan*Style*Year FE                  Yes         Yes       Yes           Yes
      Fund Family*Year FE                 Yes         Yes       Yes           Yes

      R2                                  0.841        0.845      0.845          0.852
      N                                  36,359       22,384      5,732          5,142




                                                     45
Table 7 Placebo periods
This table replicates the tests in Table 3 but for different four-year rolling windows between 2000 and 2011. t-
statistics based on standard errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity and two-way clustered by fund and
plan are reported in parentheses below the coefficient estimates. *, **, and *** represent statistical significance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

A. All fund styles
Dependent variable: Flow (to plan assets)

                    Period:   2000-      2001-   2002-           2003-    2004-     2005-     2006-    2007-      2008-
                               2003       2004   2005             2006     2007     2008      2009      2010      2011
                                (1)        (2)    (3)              (4)      (5)      (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)
Expense ratio * Post          0.022     -0.441* -0.163           0.011    0.124    -0.128    -0.130    0.144      0.030
                              (0.08)    (-1.74) (-0.70)          (0.05)   (0.71)   (-0.92)   (-1.12)   (1.17)    (0.29)
Expense ratio                 0.094      0.502   0.472           0.354    0.383    0.552*    0.482*    0.114     -0.073
                              (0.21)     (1.33) (1.37)           (1.12)   (1.28)   (1.87)    (1.92)    (0.47)    (-0.40)

Plan*Fund FE                   Yes       Yes       Yes            Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Size*Year controls             Yes       Yes       Yes            Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Plan*Style*Year FE             Yes       Yes       Yes            Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Fund Family *Year FE           Yes       Yes       Yes            Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes

R2                             0.838     0.840     0.830          0.822    0.824    0.814     0.784     0.791     0.803
N                             12,965    18,158    22,445         25,719   26,821   27,396    27,756    28,150    37,231


B. Domestic equity funds only
Dependent variable: Flow (to plan assets)

Period:                        2000-     2001-     2002-      2003-       2004-     2005-     2006-     2007-     2008-
                               2003      2004      2005       2006         2007     2008      2009      2010      2011
                                (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)          (5)      (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)
Expense ratio * Post           0.062    -0.400    -0.218     -0.034       0.092    -0.108    -0.046     0.223    0.186*
                              (0.17)    (-1.33)   (-0.82)    (-0.13)      (0.43)   (-0.64)   (-0.31)   (1.56)    (1.77)
Expense ratio                 -0.492     0.237     0.508      0.299       0.591     0.441    -0.013    -0.324    -0.384
                              (-0.76)   (0.50)    (1.14)     (0.74)       (1.63)   (1.38)    (-0.04)   (-1.05)   (-1.60)

Plan*Fund FE                   Yes       Yes       Yes            Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Size*Year controls             Yes       Yes       Yes            Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Plan*Year FE                   Yes       Yes       Yes            Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Fund Family *Year FE           Yes       Yes       Yes            Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes

R2                            0.833      0.843     0.835          0.832    0.835    0.825     0.788     0.796     0.803
N                             8,730     12,347    15,389         17,687   18,604   19,079    19,334    19,582    24,887




                                                            46
Table 8 Heterogenous effects
This table reports results on how changes to fee-flow sensitivities around the disclosure reform differ depending
on characteristics of the participants and plan features. In Panel A, we study the effects of the contribution
rate of plan participants. Large contributions is an indicator variable based on whether the annual dollar
contribution per participant is above the sample median (measured as of 2009). In Panel B, we examine how
changes to fee-flow sensitivities around the disclosure reform differ depending on the number of choices in the
plan. We divide the number of plans into three equal terciles: those with few choices, middle (the omitted
category in the regression), and many choices in that year. Few choices are those plans with fewer than 16 or
17 choices (the cutoff number varies slightly across years); Middle number of choices are plans between around
17 and 24 choices; and Many choices are those plans with more than 24 choices. We adjust the expense measure
by subtracting the average expense ratio in the plan-year. As in the previous tables, Plan*Style*Year FEs are
Plan*Year FEs for the domestic equity subsample. t-statistics based on standard errors that are robust to
heteroskedasticity and two-way clustered by fund and plan are reported in parentheses below the coefficient
estimates. *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

       Panel A: Participant contribution rate and fee-flow sensitivities
                                                                 All fund styles         Domestic
                                                                                           equity
                                                                         (1)                 (2)
        Expense ratio (plan-year adj.)                                  0.133               0.154
                                                                       (0.76)              (0.76)
        Expense ratio * Post                                         -0.440***           -0.445***
                                                                       (-3.76)             (-3.14)
        Expense ratio * Large contributions                             0.131               0.063
                                                                       (0.50)              (0.20)
        Expense ratio * Post * Large contributions                    -0.201*             -0.262**
                                                                       (-1.91)             (-2.21)

        Plan*Fund FE                                                    Yes                 Yes
        Size*Year controls                                              Yes                 Yes
        Plan*Style*Year FE                                              Yes                 Yes
        Fund Family*Year FE                                             Yes                 Yes

        R2                                                              0.823              0.816
        N                                                              45,948             28,490




                                                       47
Table 8, continued

       Panel B. Number of choice categories and fee-flow sensitivities
                                                                All fund styles   Domestic
                                                                                    equity
                                                                       (1)            (2)
        Expense ratio (plan-year adj.)                              0.384**        0.382**
                                                                     (2.27)         (2.01)
        Expense ratio *Post (baseline: middle choices)             -0.805***      -0.768***
                                                                     (-6.13)        (-5.12)
        Expense ratio * Few choices                                   0.183          0.117
                                                                     (1.14)         (0.67)
        Expense ratio * Many choices                               -0.369***      -0.387***
                                                                     (-3.25)        (-3.18)
        Expense ratio * Post * Few choices                            0.186          0.082
                                                                     (1.20)         (0.49)
        Expense ratio * Post * Many choices                         0.376***       0.300**
                                                                     (3.72)         (2.57)

        Plan*Fund FE                                                 Yes            Yes
        Size*Year controls                                           Yes            Yes
        Plan*Style*Year FE                                           Yes            Yes
        Fund Family*Year FE                                          Yes            Yes

        R2                                                           0.821          0.815
        N                                                           47,634         29,545




                                                     48
Table 9 Fund-level effects of the reform
This table reports fund-level results on the effects of the disclosure reform, excluding target-date funds. The data
are at the fund-year level (we aggregate across all share classes within a fund), and the sample period is 2010-2013.
Post-reform years are 2012 and 2013. Panel A reports summary statistics at the fund-year level. In Panel B, we test
whether the flow-sensitivities to fees experience differential changes around the reform for funds that are more or
less exposed to flows from defined contribution plans. Flows are measured using the average monthly flows over the
fund-year. The expense ratio is measured as the value-weighted expense ratio across a fund's share classes and
adjusted by subtracting the average expense ratio in the same fund-style and year. The measures of exposure to
DC plans, called DC intensity, are based on 1) whether the fund is part of any plan in our sample, 2) the Log(Number
of plans with fund+1), which is the natural logarithm of one plus the number of defined contribution plans in our
sample that include the fund, and 3) the Percent of fund assets in plans, which is the fraction of a fund's TNA that
can be attributed to these DC plans. These DC intensity measures are measured as of 2009, the year immediately
before the sample period. We control for size (log TNA) interacted with year indicators, fund fixed effects, fund-
style-by-year fixed effects, and family-by-year fixed effects as indicated. t-statistics based on standard errors that
are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered by fund are reported in parentheses below the coefficient estimates.
*, **, and *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

A. Summary statistics
                                               mean     sd    p1    p25   p50  p75    p99                        N
Flow, monthly average (%)                       0.85   6.29  -7.42 -1.29 -0.25 1.20  34.09                    27,062
Expense ratio (%)                              0.980 0.497   0.13  0.62  0.95  1.30   2.37                    27,592
Fund included in any plan                      0.338 0.473     0     0     0     1      1                     27,592
Number of plans with fund                       2.79  15.79    0     0     0     1     51                     27,592
Number of plans with fund | >0                  8.27  26.31    1     1     2     6    105                      9,327
Percent of fund assets in plans (%)            2.43% 9.62% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.17% 50.69%                     27,592
Percent of fund assets in plans | >0 (%)       7.19% 15.48% 0.00% 0.15% 1.50% 6.99% 99.85%                     9,327

B. Fund-level evidence of fee sensitivities around the reform
 Dependent variable: Fund flow
                                                               Measure of DC intensity:
                                                                  Log(Number of      Percent of fund assets
                                              Fund in any plan
                                                                plans with fund+1)         in plans
                                                      (1)                     (2)                       (3)
 Expense ratio (lagged, style adj.)                 0.9708                 0.8955                    0.5523
                                                    (1.36)                  (1.30)                    (0.83)
 Expense ratio * Post                               0.0711                 0.0639                    -0.1071
                                                    (0.22)                  (0.21)                   (-0.39)
 Expense ratio * DC intensity                      -1.4932                 -0.9764                   6.3145
                                                    (-1.03)                (-1.40)                    (0.72)
 Post * DC intensity                              -0.4382**              -0.3415***                  -1.5910
                                                    (-2.37)                (-3.69)                   (-1.22)
 Expense ratio * Post * DC intensity              -0.8840**              -0.6700***                -7.8746***
                                                    (-2.39)                (-3.27)                   (-2.77)

 Size*Year control                                   Yes                     Yes                      Yes
 Fund FE                                             Yes                     Yes                      Yes
 Fund-style * Year FE                                Yes                     Yes                      Yes
 Fund Family * Year FE                               Yes                     Yes                      Yes

 R2                                                  0.547                  0.547                     0.547
 N                                                  25,226                  25,226                   25,226


                                                           49
Table 10 Return-flow sensitivities and the disclosure reform
This table reports results on the change in return-flow sensitivities following the 2012 disclosure reform. Return
is the return of the fund, measured over one, five, and ten years. We measure these past returns as of the start
of the plan's fiscal year. For example, the one-year returns for a plan-year that starts in January 2012 are the
annualized returns of the mutual fund options between January 2011 and December 2011. If a fund does not
have a return over some horizon, that value is set to the average in the same style and year, and controlled
for separately with a "missing" indicator. All other measures and controls are the same as in Table 3. t-statistics
based on standard errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity and two-way clustered by fund and plan are
reported in parentheses below the coefficient estimates. *, **, and *** represent statistical significance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

A. All funds
                                  Flow (to plan       Flow (change in      Flow (to option       Flow positive
                                      assets)           plan share)               size)           (indicator)
                                        (1)                  (2)                   (3)                  (4)
 Return 1-year * Post               2.047***              1.858***            54.626***            0.985***
                                      (5.20)               (5.84)                (4.44)               (4.99)
 Return 5-year * Post                2.275**                0.963                4.870                 0.363
                                      (2.40)               (1.14)                (0.18)               (0.81)
 Return 10-year * Post                -1.179               -1.037               -49.072            -1.446***
                                      (-1.33)              (-1.21)              (-1.63)              (-3.34)
 No 1-year Return * Post              -0.543             -1.065***           -67.729***             -0.631**
                                      (-0.82)              (-7.41)              (-4.47)              (-2.13)
 No 5-year Return * Post               0.067                0.138                1.177                 0.009
                                      (0.39)               (0.97)                (0.22)               (0.14)
 No 10-year Return * Post            -0.180**            -0.194***             -4.632**               -0.036
                                      (-2.24)              (-2.82)              (-2.31)              (-1.16)
 Return 1-year                       0.401**                0.157                4.217               0.161**
                                      (2.39)               (1.05)                (0.91)               (2.22)
 Return 5-year                         0.179                0.269               -20.510             -1.119**
                                      (0.16)               (0.27)               (-0.58)              (-2.34)
 Return 10-year                     3.364***              2.780***            36.894**               0.598**
                                      (4.32)               (4.68)                (2.15)               (2.37)
 No 1-year Return                     -0.255               -0.099             53.120***               0.242*
                                      (-0.88)              (-0.44)               (5.29)               (1.81)
 No 5-year Return                     -0.012               -0.039                2.616                 0.033
                                      (-0.10)              (-0.39)               (0.86)               (0.72)
 No 10-year Return                   0.129**                0.063              5.065**                 0.016
                                      (2.51)               (1.35)                (2.44)               (0.68)
 Expense ratio * Post               -0.463***            -0.386***               -2.814            -0.162***
                                      (-4.24)              (-4.40)              (-1.37)              (-4.63)
 Expense ratio                         0.076                0.060                3.476               0.130**
                                      (0.52)               (0.47)                (0.82)               (2.07)

 Plan*Fund FE                          Yes                    Yes                Yes                  Yes
 Size*Year controls                    Yes                    Yes                Yes                  Yes
 Plan*Style*Year FE                    Yes                    Yes                Yes                  Yes
 Fund Family*Year FE                   Yes                    Yes                Yes                  Yes

 R2                                    0.822                  0.699              0.767                0.704
 N                                    47,634                 47,634             47,634               47,634


                                                        50
Table 10, continued

B. Domestic equity only
                            Flow (to plan   Flow (change in   Flow (to option   Flow positive
                                assets)       plan share)            size)       (indicator)
                                  (1)              (2)                (3)             (4)
 Return 1-year * Post          1.326**          1.429***         67.673***        1.161***
                                (2.45)           (3.39)             (4.55)          (4.41)
 Return 5-year * Post            1.529            0.851             8.142            0.522
                                (1.36)           (0.84)             (0.26)          (0.93)
 Return 10-year * Post         -2.295**         -2.087**         -61.771**        -1.733***
                                (-2.24)          (-2.22)           (-2.02)          (-3.61)
 No 1-year Return * Post        -0.845           -0.280         -93.192***          -0.787
                                (-0.62)          (-0.16)           (-6.43)          (-1.34)
 No 5-year Return * Post         0.106            0.054           -11.965*          -0.139
                                (0.41)           (0.26)            (-1.88)          (-1.38)
 No 10-year Return * Post       -0.036           -0.096             -0.589          -0.035
                                (-0.47)          (-1.39)           (-0.30)          (-0.92)
 Return 1-year                0.842***          0.536**             5.306            0.157
                                (3.27)           (2.49)             (0.90)          (1.50)
 Return 5-year                   1.114            0.616            -31.738         -1.132*
                                (0.77)           (0.49)            (-0.83)          (-1.81)
 Return 10-year               3.403***          2.820***           30.064          0.535**
                                (4.23)           (4.74)             (1.64)          (1.98)
 No 1-year Return               -0.240            0.054          78.843***           0.072
                                (-0.58)          (0.28)             (9.64)          (0.33)
 No 5-year Return             0.347***           0.211*          11.604***           0.090
                                (2.82)           (1.67)             (3.12)          (1.54)
 No 10-year Return             0.157**           0.114*             1.455            0.002
                                (2.28)           (1.90)             (0.66)          (0.05)
 Expense ratio * Post         -0.391***        -0.347***            -2.832        -0.151***
                                (-3.09)          (-3.50)           (-1.07)          (-3.53)
 Expense ratio                   0.075            0.127            7.552*           0.148*
                                (0.44)           (0.88)             (1.68)          (1.90)

 Plan*Fund FE                   Yes                Yes             Yes              Yes
 Size*Year controls             Yes                Yes             Yes              Yes
 Plan*Year FE                   Yes                Yes             Yes              Yes
 Fund Family*Year FE            Yes                Yes             Yes              Yes

 R2                             0.817              0.670           0.775            0.692
 N                             29,545             29,545          29,545           29,545




                                             51
Table 11 Plan-level reallocation: Mutual funds vs. employer stock
This table reports results on how allocations to employer stock are affected by the fee disclosure, depending
on the average fees of the available mutual funds in the plan. The dependent variable is the fraction of assets
in employer stock to total plan assets. The explanatory variables are the average fee of the available mutual
funds in a plan and the return on the employer stock over the prior year, both interacted with the disclosure
reform indicator variable. We limit the sample to plans that include both an option to invest in employer stock
and in mutual funds. The regressions include plan fixed effects and time fixed effects based on the fiscal year-
end month of the plan. t-statistics based on standard errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered
by plan are reported in parentheses below the coefficient estimates. *, **, and *** represent statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

       Plan-level reallocation between mutual funds vs. employer stock

                                                         (1)          (2)            (3)
        Expense ratio (plan average) * Post            0.013*      0.015**        0.014**
                                                        (1.81)      (2.04)         (2.02)
        Expense ratio (plan average)                   -0.021*    -0.025**       -0.024**
                                                       (-1.84)     (-2.03)        (-1.99)
        Return on employer stock (1-year)                         0.006***        0.003**
                                                                    (4.66)         (2.45)
        Return on employer stock (1-year) * Post                                 0.019***
                                                                                   (5.22)

        Plan FE                                         Yes         Yes            Yes
        Time FE                                         Yes         Yes            Yes

        R2                                             0.969       0.967           0.967
        N                                              3,426       2,978           2,978




                                                      52
INTERNET APPENDIX
Figure A.1 Reshuffling of funds within plans
This figure plots the fraction of plans that have any deletions or additions of funds (top panel), as well as the
number of deletions and deletions scaled by the lagged number of available funds (bottom panel). We limit
the sample to plan-years that have between 3 and 100 funds.


                             Plans with any deleted or added options
 0.8

 0.7

 0.6

 0.5

 0.4

 0.3

 0.2

 0.1

   0
                 2010                      2011                      2012                      2013
                                       Any deletions         Any additions



                           Fraction of options deleted or newly added
  0.3

 0.25

  0.2

 0.15

  0.1

 0.05

    0
                  2010                      2011                     2012                      2013
                    Fraction of options deleted             Fraction of options newly added



                                                       53
Table A.1 Summary statistics for target-date funds
This table describes summary statistics like those in Table 2, but for target-date funds, which were not
included in Table 2.

                                            mean     sd     p1   p25    p50   p75    p99      N
 Fund value ($1,000)                        11,100 23,800    2   633   2,852 9,931 142,000 32,256
 Fund plan share                              1.87  2.28  0.00   0.37   1.07 2.50   11.47 32,097
 Expense ratio (%)                            0.49  0.27  0.16   0.18   0.57 0.73    1.07  31,405
 Flow (to plan assets) (%)                    0.42  1.38  -2.54  0.01   0.20 0.55    7.89  30,731
 Flow (change in plan share) (%)             0.218 0.714 -1.842 -0.002 0.154 0.402 3.027 30,731
 Flow (to option size) (%)                   23.07 45.89  -100   1.53 15.58 36.14 188.44 30,731
 Flow positive (indicator)                   0.774 0.418     0     0      1    1       1   30,731
 Return 1-year (%)                            13.1  10.8   -5.0   5.2   13.9 16.7    39.0  31,596
 Return 5-year (%)                             2.3   1.4   -0.9   1.3    2.5  3.4     5.0  22,477
 Return 10-year (%)                            4.4   2.2   0.0    2.7    3.7  6.5     8.4   4,633




                                                     54
Table A.2 Fees and fund flows, alternative measurement of fees
This table is similar to Panel A of Table 3, but uses different definition of fees. In Panel A we replace the
expense ratio with the fund's fee in 2009, and in Panel B we use the value-weighted fee across all share classes
of a fund.


       A. Fees measured as of 2009
                                          Flow (to         Flow     Flow (to       Flow
                                         plan assets)    (change     option       positive
                                                         in plan      size)     (indicator)
                                                          share)
                                              (1)           (2)        (3)          (4)
       Expense ratio (2009) * Post        -0.511***     -0.408***   -4.208**    -0.215***
                                           (-4.43)       (-4.77)     (-2.23)      (-6.24)

       Plan*Fund FE                          Yes             Yes      Yes          Yes
       Size*Year controls                    Yes             Yes      Yes          Yes
       Plan*Style*Year FE                    Yes             Yes      Yes          Yes
       Fund Family*Year FE                   Yes             Yes      Yes          Yes

       R2                                   0.821         0.697       0.765        0.702
       N                                   47,462        47,462      47,462       47,462


       B. Value-weighted fee for the fund
                                         Flow (to          Flow     Flow (to       Flow
                                        plan assets)     (change     option       positive
                                                         in plan      size)     (indicator)
                                                          share)
                                              (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)
       Expense ratio (value-weighted      -0.513***     -0.431***   -5.510***   -0.208***
       across share classes) * Post         (-4.83)       (-5.35)     (-2.84)     (-6.21)
       Expense ratio (value-weighted         0.412         0.196       2.694       0.128
       across share classes)                (1.59)        (0.95)      (0.40)      (1.34)

       Plan*Fund FE                          Yes             Yes      Yes          Yes
       Size*Year controls                    Yes             Yes      Yes          Yes
       Plan*Style*Year FE                    Yes             Yes      Yes          Yes
       Fund Family*Year FE                   Yes             Yes      Yes          Yes

       R2                                   0.821         0.697       0.765        0.702
       N                                   47,627        47,627      47,627       47,627




                                                        55
Table A.3 Fees and fund flows, 11-K vs. top-1000 samples
This table is similar to Panel A of Table 3, but limited to the sample based on form 11-K filers (Panel A) or
top 1000 largest plans from Form 5500 (Panel B), respectively. These samples overlap for around 15% of plans.

       A. 11-K sample only
                                         Flow (to         Flow     Flow (to       Flow
                                        plan assets)    (change     option       positive
                                                        in plan      size)     (indicator)
                                                         share)
                                             (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)
       Expense ratio * Post              -0.572***     -0.477***    -4.434*    -0.202***
                                           (-4.16)       (-4.81)    (-1.82)      (-4.81)
       Expense ratio                       0.313*       0.317**      5.517     0.188***
                                           (1.66)        (2.01)      (1.34)      (2.87)

       Plan*Fund FE                         Yes             Yes      Yes          Yes
       Size*Year controls                   Yes             Yes      Yes          Yes
       Plan*Style*Year FE                   Yes             Yes      Yes          Yes
       Fund Family*Year FE                  Yes             Yes      Yes          Yes

       R2                                  0.821         0.703       0.775        0.705
       N                                  30,801        30,801      30,801       30,801


       B. Top-1000 sample only
                                         Flow (to         Flow     Flow (to       Flow
                                        plan assets)    (change     option       positive
                                                        in plan      size)     (indicator)
                                                         share)
                                             (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)
       Expense ratio * Post              -0.604***     -0.508***   -8.749***   -0.305***
                                           (-4.19)       (-4.36)     (-3.00)     (-6.98)
       Expense ratio                        0.207         0.055       8.516     0.227**
                                           (1.05)        (0.32)      (1.15)      (2.12)

       Plan*Fund FE                         Yes             Yes      Yes          Yes
       Size*Year controls                   Yes             Yes      Yes          Yes
       Plan*Style*Year FE                   Yes             Yes      Yes          Yes
       Fund Family*Year FE                  Yes             Yes      Yes          Yes

       R2                                 0.827          0.692       0.762        0.711
       N                                  24,001        24,001      24,001       24,001




                                                       56
Table A.4 Fees and fund flows, shorter window (2011-2012)
This table is similar to Table 3, but limited to the 2011-2012 sample period.

       A. All funds
                                         Flow (to        Flow      Flow (to        Flow
                                        plan assets)   (change      option        positive
                                                       in plan       size)      (indicator)
                                                        share)
                                             (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)
       Expense ratio * Post              -0.490***     -0.411***   -4.749**     -0.209***
                                           (-4.88)       (-4.51)    (-2.08)       (-4.38)
       Expense ratio                      0.526**      0.731***    12.687*         0.152
                                           (1.99)        (3.11)     (1.84)        (1.17)

       Plan*Fund FE                         Yes             Yes      Yes           Yes
       Size*Year controls                   Yes             Yes      Yes           Yes
       Plan*Style*Year FE                   Yes             Yes      Yes           Yes
       Fund Family*Year FE                  Yes             Yes      Yes           Yes

       R2                                  0.883         0.794       0.826         0.786
       N                                   22,198       22,198      22,198        22,198

       B. Domestic equity funds only
                                         Flow (to        Flow      Flow (to        Flow
                                        plan assets)   (change      option        positive
                                                       in plan       size)      (indicator)
                                                        share)
                                             (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)
       Expense ratio * Post              -0.561***     -0.472***   -7.931***    -0.246***
                                           (-4.31)       (-4.12)     (-2.87)      (-4.14)
       Expense ratio                       0.562*      1.017***    15.100**        0.099
                                           (1.67)        (3.59)      (2.33)       (0.67)

       Plan*Fund FE                         Yes             Yes      Yes           Yes
       Size*Year controls                   Yes             Yes      Yes           Yes
       Plan*Year FE                         Yes             Yes      Yes           Yes
       Fund Family*Year FE                  Yes             Yes      Yes           Yes

       R2                                  0.883         0.779       0.830         0.776
       N                                   13,722       13,722      13,722        13,722




                                                       57
Table A.5 Fees and fund flows, longer window (2000-2013)
This table is similar to Table 3, but for a longer sample period between 2000 and 2013.

       A. All funds
                                         Flow (to        Flow      Flow (to    Flow
                                        plan assets)   (change      option   positive
                                                       in plan       size)  (indicator
                                                        share)                   )
                                            (1)           (2)         (3)       (4)
       Expense ratio * Post              -0.484***     -0.398***   -4.276**   -0.211***
                                           (-4.58)       (-4.61)    (-2.10)     (-6.12)
       Expense ratio                     0.375***      0.347***    7.489***   0.078***
                                           (3.18)        (2.96)     (3.34)      (2.60)

       Plan*Fund FE                         Yes             Yes      Yes        Yes
       Size*Year controls                   Yes             Yes      Yes        Yes
       Plan*Style*Year FE                   Yes             Yes      Yes        Yes
       Fund Family*Year FE                  Yes             Yes      Yes        Yes

       R2                                  0.782         0.647      0.736      0.680
       N                                  110,714       110,714    110,714    110,714

       B. Domestic equity funds only
                                         Flow (to         Flow     Flow (to      Flow
                                        plan assets)    (change     option      positive
                                                        in plan      size)    (indicator)
                                                         share)
                                             (1)           (2)        (3)         (4)
       Expense ratio * Post              -0.477***     -0.427***    -3.842    -0.202***
                                           (-3.68)       (-4.25)    (-1.49)     (-4.50)
       Expense ratio                        0.223        0.293*    8.590***    0.088**
                                           (1.52)        (1.93)     (3.26)      (2.42)

       Plan*Fund FE                         Yes             Yes      Yes         Yes
       Size*Year controls                   Yes             Yes      Yes         Yes
       Plan*Year FE                         Yes             Yes      Yes         Yes
       Fund Family*Year FE                  Yes             Yes      Yes         Yes

       R2                                 0.784          0.634       0.743       0.668
       N                                  72,850        72,850      72,850      72,850




                                                       58
Table A.6 Alternative levels of clustering standard errors

This table is similar to Panel A of Table 3 using the first flow measure but employs different levels of clustering. The dependent variable throughout is
the flow to plan assets.



Clustering level:         Plan-Fund Fund-time     Plan-time Plan-time &     Fund        Plan     Fund family Family &     Family, Fund, Plan, Base Case:
                                                             Fund-time                                         Plan      Plan, Time Time       Fund &
                                                                                                                                                Plan
                              (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)        (8)          (9)     (10)        (11)
Expense ratio * Post        -0.56***   -0.56***    -0.56***    -0.56***    -0.56***   -0.56***    -0.56***    -0.56***    -0.56***   -0.56***    -0.56***
                            (-8.11)     (-5.07)     (-8.15)     (-5.50)    (-4.18)     (-7.99)     (-4.36)     (-5.86)    (-6.03)     (-4.92)     (-4.58)
Expense ratio                 0.20       0.20        0.20        0.20        0.20       0.20        0.20        0.20        0.20       0.20        0.20
                             (1.63)     (1.41)      (1.61)      (1.44)      (1.29)      (1.59)     (1.39)      (1.64)      (1.72)      (1.34)     (1.33)


Plan*Fund FE                  Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
Size*Year controls            Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
Plan*Style*Year FE            Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
Fund Family*Year FE           Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes


 2
R                            0.821       0.821      0.821       0.821       0.821       0.821       0.821      0.821       0.821       0.821       0.821
N                           47,634      47,634      47,634      47,634     47,634      47,634      47,634      47,634      47,634     47,634      47,634




                                                                            59
Table A.7 Alternative flow measures for extreme fee regressions

This table is similar to Table 5, but using alternative dependent variables.


                                    Flow (change in plan share)                    Flow (to option size)                Flow positive (indicator)
                                    (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)       (7)           (8)           (9)
   Minimum fee * Post            0.316***     0.315***      0.213***       4.630***      4.611***      3.631**    0.107***      0.106***      0.053**
                                  (4.72)        (4.71)       (3.23)         (3.07)        (3.06)         (2.07)    (4.08)        (4.06)        (2.04)
   Minimum fee                    -0.065        -0.064        0.006         -1.505        -1.479         -0.694   -0.064**      -0.063**       -0.024
                                  (-1.06)      (-1.05)       (0.09)         (-0.92)       (-0.90)       (-0.41)    (-2.51)       (-2.48)       (-0.96)
   Maximum fee * Post                          -0.073*        0.009                      -2.395**        -1.592                -0.082***      -0.039*
                                               (-1.76)       (0.20)                       (-2.03)       (-1.34)                  (-3.62)       (-1.74)
   Maximum fee                                  -0.021       -0.061                        0.295         -0.328                   0.032         0.006
                                               (-0.46)       (-1.30)                      (0.23)        (-0.25)                  (1.55)        (0.30)
   Expense ratio * Post                                    -0.364***                                     -3.382                              -0.188***
                                                             (-4.18)                                    (-1.44)                                (-5.15)
   Expense ratio                                              0.172                                      5.173                                0.166**
                                                             (1.29)                                      (1.18)                                (2.56)

   Plan*Fund FE                     Yes           Yes          Yes              Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes
   Size*Year controls               Yes           Yes          Yes              Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes
   Plan*Style*Year FE               Yes           Yes          Yes              Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes
   Fund family*Year FE              Yes           Yes          Yes              Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes          Yes           Yes

   R2                               0.697       0.697         0.697             0.765      0.765        0.766       0.701        0.701        0.702
   N                               47,634       47,634        47,634           47,634     47,634       47,634      47,634       47,634        47,634




                                                                               60
Table A.8 Fee-flow sensitivities of target-date vs. non-target date funds around the reform
This table reports results on fee-flow sensitivities around the disclosure reform for target-date funds relative
to non-target date funds. Target-date funds often are default choices and the choice of which target-date fund
is likely driven by reasons other than fees. t-statistics are reported in parentheses below the coefficient
estimates. The standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and two-way clustered by fund and plan. *,
**, and *** represent statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                         Flow (to plan     Flow (change         Flow (to        Flow positive
                                             assets)       in plan share)      option size)      (indicator)
                                               (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)
 Expense ratio                                0.136             0.138             5.820           0.158***
                                             (1.05)            (1.20)            (1.39)             (2.61)
 Expense ratio * Post                      -0.397***         -0.352***          -4.518**          -0.190***
                                             (-3.39)           (-3.79)           (-2.13)            (-5.18)
 Expense ratio * Target-date fund            -0.233            -0.197            -8.131             -0.029
                                             (-0.81)           (-0.83)           (-0.91)            (-0.27)
 Target-date fund * Post                      0.084             0.050             3.363             -0.004
                                             (0.77)            (0.55)            (1.08)             (-0.16)
 Expense ratio * Post * Target-date           0.271             0.244            -0.490            0.118**
 fund                                        (1.31)            (1.49)            (-0.09)            (2.38)

 Plan*Fund FE                                  Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
 Size*Year controls                            Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
 Plan*Style*Year FE                            Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
 Fund Family*Year FE                           Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes

 R2                                           0.822             0.676             0.765             0.701
 N                                           75,814            75,814            75,814            75,814

 p-value for coef [2]+[5] = 0                0.5937            0.5580            0.3876            0.2394




                                                      61
Table A.9 Robustness: Excluding plans with fund deletions or additions
This table replicates Table 3 but excludes any plan-years where funds were deleted or added during the year.
The observations are at the plan-fund-year level. In column (1), we delete all observations where there are
deletions of any kind in the plan-year. In column (2), we only delete observations where a deletion takes place
in the same fund style (where styles are defined as described in Table 1). Columns (3) and (4) are similar but
exclude plans with additions.



                               No deleted funds    No deleted funds     No added funds      No added funds
                                   in plan           within style                            within style
                                      (1)                 (2)                  (3)                (4)
 Expense ratio * Post             -0.699***           -0.549***            -0.659***          -0.610***
                                    (-4.19)             (-4.61)              (-5.13)            (-4.90)
 Expense ratio                       0.125               0.109               -0.160             0.345*
                                    (0.41)              (0.52)               (-0.70)            (1.82)

 Plan*Fund FE                         Yes                   Yes               Yes                  Yes
 Size*Year controls                   Yes                   Yes               Yes                  Yes
 Plan*Style*Year FE                   Yes                   Yes               Yes                  Yes
 Fund Family*Year FE                  Yes                   Yes               Yes                  Yes

 R2                                  0.872                  0.852            0.887                0.847
 N                                  11,058                 25,430            8,640               23,047




                                                      62
Table A.10 Sensitivity of deletions to fees around disclosure reform
This table shows results for the sensitivity of plan deletions to expenses. The dependent variable is an indicator
for whether a fund is deleted from a plan (i.e., the fund disappeared between the end of the last fiscal year
and the current fiscal year). The explanatory variable is the fund's lagged expense ratio interacted with Post
(the years after the reform). The estimates are based on an OLS regression model. Control variables are the
fraction of plan assets invested in the fund, and plan*style*year fixed effects. The standard errors are robust
to heteroskedasticity and two-way clustered by fund and plan. *, **, and *** represent statistical significance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                              Dependent variable: Fund deleted (indicator)
                                                    All funds Domestic equity
                                                       (1)           (2)

                              Expense ratio * Post       0.001         0.004
                                                        (0.08)        (0.19)
                              Expense ratio           0.063***       0.052***
                                                        (4.84)        (3.54)
                              Option plan share (lag) -0.541***      -0.371**
                                                        (-4.22)       (-2.52)

                              Plan*Style*Year FE            Yes         Yes

                                2
                              R                           0.443        0.389
                              N                          64,026       39,123




                                                       63
