                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           THE ROLE OF ASSETS IN PLACE:
                   LOSS OF MARKET EXCLUSIVITY AND INVESTMENT

                                        Matthew J. Higgins
                                        Mathias J. Kronlund
                                           Ji Min Park
                                          Joshua Pollet

                                        Working Paper 27588
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27588


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2020




We thank IMS Health Incorporated, now IQVIA, for their generous support and access to their
data. The statements, findings, conclusions, views, and opinions contained and expressed herein
are not necessarily those of IQVIA, IMS Health Incorporated or any of its affiliated or subsidiary
entities. The statements, findings, conclusions, views, and opinions contained and expressed in
this article are based in part on data obtained under license from the following IMS Health
Incorporated or affiliate information service(s): IMS MidasTM and IMS NDTI. Higgins
acknowledges support from the Sorenson Center for Discovery and Innovation. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Matthew J. Higgins, Mathias J. Kronlund, Ji Min Park, and Joshua Pollet. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Role of Assets In Place: Loss of Market Exclusivity and Investment
Matthew J. Higgins, Mathias J. Kronlund, Ji Min Park, and Joshua Pollet
NBER Working Paper No. 27588
July 2020, Revised August 2020
JEL No. D92,G31,G32,G35,L65,O30

                                              ABSTRACT

We utilize a novel identification strategy to analyze the impact of assets in place on firms' decisions
for future projects. We exploit the context in the pharmaceutical industry, where the loss of market
exclusivity for a branded drug can be used to separate the impact of cash flows generated by a firm's
current assets in place from the characteristics of its future investment opportunities. We first show
that around the exclusivity losses in our sample of large drugs, the affected firms' profitability drop
significantly. The timing of this profitability decrease was predetermined many years ago, and therefore,
arguably independent of current investment opportunities. Nevertheless, we find that R&D spending
drops by approximately 25% over two years following the loss of exclusivity. We also find that stock
repurchases and cash balances decline significantly. Our findings do not support the predictions of
traditional capital budgeting, but are more consistent with the pecking order theory. These results further
point to a lack of long-term lifecycle management that could mitigate the effect of predictable negative
shocks to cash flows.


Matthew J. Higgins                                   Ji Min Park
David Eccles School of Business                      Gies College of Business
University of Utah                                   University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
1731 E Campus Center Drive                           607 E Gregory Drive
Salt Lake City, UT 84112                             Champaign, IL 61820
and Max Planck Institute for                         jpark358@illinois.edu
Innovation and Competition
and also NBER
matt.higgins@eccles.utah.edu                         Joshua Pollet
                                                     Gies College of Business
                                                     University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
                                                     4039 BIF
Mathias J. Kronlund Freeman                          515 E. Gregory Drive
School of Business Tulane                            Champaign, IL 61820
University                                           pollet@illinois.edu
7 McAlister Dr
New Orleans, LA 70118
mkronlund@tulane.edu
1         Introduction

Many factors contribute to a firm's investment and financing decisions. The baseline model
is provided by traditional capital budgeting. Firms invest to undertake positive net-present-
value (NPV) projects with the funds for these investments being raised from either internal
or external sources of financing without frictions (Modigliani and Miller (1958)). Alterna-
tively, in the presence of asymmetric information, external financing is costly, and firms
may optimally choose to forgo a positive-NPV project if the project cannot be financed us-
ing internal cash flows or pre-existing cash on the firm's balance sheet (Myers and Majluf
(1984)).1 Costly external finance leads to a pecking order theory for financing a firm's in-
vestment, whereby available internally generated cash or cash flows are used before issuing
external debt or equity to finance new projects.
        It is typically challenging to distinguish between these theories' relative contributions
and assess the role of financing frictions on firms' investments. This is because it is difficult
to separate the impact from changes that affect cash flows available for investment (often
generated from a firm's assets in place), from the changing valuations of a firm's current
investment opportunities. In other words, whenever a firm's current profitability falls, the
NPV of its investment opportunities tends to decline at the same time, thus reducing the
benefits of such investment. In this context, even a model with frictionless investment would
predict less investment in the face of lower cash flows.
        The expiration of pharmaceutical patents protecting a branded drug or the resulting loss
of market exclusivity represents a unique situation that can distinguish between these two
theories. Immediately following the loss of market exclusivity, other firms may directly com-
pete by providing a bioequivalent generic version of the original drug that does not require
clinical testing as part of the approval process created by the Food and Drug Administration
    1
    There exist other mechanisms that also can affect external financing decisions; for instance, market
timing predicts that firms issue and repurchase equity to take advantage of mispricing (Baker, Ruback, and
Wurgler (2007); Stein (1996)). However, a market-timing hypothesis does not make precise predictions about
the relation between the timing of investment or R&D and profitability patterns.


                                                    1
(FDA).2 This form of competition from generic entry dramatically reduces revenue for the
affected branded drug, and consequently, the profitability of the branded firm (e.g., Reiffen
and Ward (2005); Branstetter, Chatterjee, and Higgins (2016)).
    Crucially, it is implausible for the timing of the change in cash flow associated with the
loss of market exclusivity to contain information about future investment opportunities for
the affected firm. The timing is pre-determined based on the drug's patents, which were
granted many years prior. The fact that a drug losses exclusivity on a specific date has no
bearing on the future profitability of other drugs in the affected firm's development pipeline.3
This implies a predictable change in the cash flow from assets in place, which is caused by
the loss of market exclusivity. This change is plausibly exogenous to current investment
opportunities to develop new drugs by the firm.4 The impact of these losses of market
exclusivity is often also economically large; thus, we expect that they may cause measurable
effects on investment if firms indeed act as if they are financially constrained.
    To study the effects of these loss-of-market-exclusivity events, we follow the methodology
in Gormley and Matsa (2011) to construct cohorts of peer firms. Treated firms in each
cohort consists of firms that experience a loss of market exclusivity in that quarter, and
these firms are then compared to peer control firms that did not suffer such a loss. We
compare these groups of firms over eight quarters before and after the loss by employing a
difference-in-differences approach.
    Our results indicate that quarterly firm revenues decrease by more than three percentage
   2
     To be more precise, this is accurate for chemical-based drugs as opposed to biologic-based drugs. For this
paper's purposes, our focus will be on the loss of market exclusivity (i.e., patent protection) and subsequent
generic entry surrounding chemical-based drugs. The current regulatory environment faced by pharmaceuti-
cal companies in the U.S. and the delineation between chemical- and biologic-based drugs will be discussed
in Section 2.1.
   3
     As a consequence of external technology markets, including licensing, merger and acquisitions, the patent
holder at expiration was often not responsible for the original patent application or the underlying research.
   4
     Multiple patents often protect drugs, and patent protection can be extended under particular circum-
stances. Furthermore, some patents are subject to"Paragraph IV" legal challenges by generic manufactures.
These challenges can occur anytime between the end of the regulatory data exclusivity period and the end
of patent protection. For a more complete discussion, see Voet (2016). Our empirical analysis examines cor-
porate decisions over sufficiently long time windows before and after the expected date of patent expiration;
any residual uncertainty is unlikely to have an appreciable impact on the timing patterns that we find.



                                                      2
points, as scaled by lagged total assets, following the loss of market exclusivity for a branded
drug. Because the average firm in our sample has quarterly drug revenue scaled by lagged
assets of approximately 17 percent, this decrease is approximately 20 percent of the baseline
revenue. We find even larger effects when we further exclude any events where the branded
drugs are relatively less economically important (i.e., those that generate less than 1 percent
of a firm's revenue before the loss of exclusivity); these tests thus focus on the relatively
more significant events. We observe similar patterns of decreases in firm profitability and
cash flows, especially around these larger events.
   Since new investment and research and development (R&D) are critically important for
firms in the pharmaceutical industry, we expect these corporate decisions to reflect the ratio-
nal assessment of investment opportunities and any trade-off imposed by external financing.
According to Acemoglu and Linn (2004) and Dubois, Mouzon, Scott-Morton, and Seabright
(2015), pharmaceutical companies do respond to the predictable changes in demand induced
by demographics. The industry as a whole develops more drugs for categories that are pre-
dicted to have an increase in patients. Additionally, Ellison and Ellison (2011) show that
pharmaceutical companies use advertising expenditures in a sophisticated manner to strate-
gically deter entry. Based on these findings, it certainly appears as if firms in this industry
are sophisticated actors that implement corporate decisions using a logical evaluation of
the available investment opportunities so that when a firm's internal cash flows fall, it also
reduces investments in new projects.
   How should firm decisions regarding investment opportunities be affected by a substan-
tial and predictable decrease in revenue and profitability generated by assets in place? If
traditional capital budgeting largely explains firm decisions, then investment and R&D ex-
penditures should only depend on whether current projects have an NPV that is greater than
zero. Expenditures supporting investment opportunities should be unrelated to the timing
of the loss of market exclusivity. Moreover, the timing for raising external financing should
be positively related to the timing of these expenditures on investment opportunities. By


                                               3
contrast, if external financing is costly, then revenues and profitability from assets in place
should be positively associated with higher expenditures on investment opportunities.
   Our evidence indicates that R&D decreases significantly during the eight quarters fol-
lowing the loss of market exclusivity. During these eight quarters, quarterly R&D expenses,
normalized by lagged assets, decrease by about 0.6 percentage points (relative to a sample
mean of 2.36%) for the affected firms, when compared to peer firms that do not experience a
loss of market exclusivity at the same time. In other words, R&D is around 25 percent lower
for the affected firms following the loss of market exclusivity. The estimated impact on cap-
ital expenditures is also negative, but this effect is economically smaller and not statistically
significant.
   Next, we examine the impact of this predictable decrease in cash flows from the loss of
market exclusivity on the firms' financing and cash policies. First, consistent with almost any
theory in which internal pre-existing cash balances are deployed to support the firm when
it suffers a negative shock to cash flows, we find that cash balances significantly decrease.
We also find that total shareholder payouts decrease following the loss of market exclusivity.
However, this effect is driven entirely by a sharp cutback of share repurchases. The decrease
is approximately 0.5 percentage points relative to the mean of 0.68 percent. This pattern is
consistent with the pecking order theory in which the firm adjusts cash and payout policy
to finance investment before issuing new securities. By contrast, we find some evidence of
a slight increase in dividends after these events. However, this effect is mostly driven by
events that involve smaller and thus less-economically important drugs.
   The pattern linking the loss of market exclusivity and external finance is more nuanced.
We find some evidence that debt issuances increase and equity issuances decrease around
these loss-of=exclusivity events, but only for firms that are relatively more financially con-
strained. On the other hand, firms that are likely to be less financially constrained (measured
as the largest firms in the sample), do not exhibit any patterns regarding security issuance




                                               4
following the loss of market exclusivity. The decline in R&D we observed is also lower for
these relatively less constrained firms.
       The paper presents several tests to ensure the robustness of the results. We first show
that there are no significant pre-trends in investment or financial policies before the loss
events between the firms that experience a loss of exclusivity and control firms. To further
ensure that the negative effect on revenues and cash flows is not somehow spuriously driven
by our methodology for collecting patent information, we also consider the expiration of
"non-critical" patents as a "placebo" robustness test. We define non-critical patents as
those that expire but that are not followed by generic entry. We find that the expiration of
non-critical patents is not associated with a statistically significant impact on firm revenues,
and consequently, also is not associated with cuts to investment. We similarly separately
study the impact of the loss of exclusivity for economically less important drugs--defined as
those that represent less than 1% of firm revenues before the loss--and find little measured
impact on any of our outcome variables.
       These results provide important evidence of how generic entry impacts future innovation
(e.g., Branstetter, Chatterjee, and Higgins (2014); Murphy (2017)). Crucially, this evidence
is broadly consistent with the view that revenue from existing branded products are used to
support subsequent innovation. However, our evidence does not allow us to assess whether
this subsequent innovation would be socially optimal (Branstetter et al. (2016)). Importantly,
our findings also suggest that firms are practically failing to effectively plan across their
pipeline and product lifecycles.5
       Overall, these results point to assets in place as having a vital role in firm decisions. First,
expenditures on investment opportunities, as measured by investment and R&D, are strongly
related to the loss of market exclusivity for branded drugs, particularly those that generate
a large share of the firm's revenue. Second, the timing of these expenditures on investment
   5
    This does not mean they are not trying (e.g., Amoresano (2007); Prajapati and Dureja (2012)). However,
these efforts do not appear to be sufficiently effective. For example, Pfizer's efforts to develop a follow-on or
next-generation drug for their global blockbuster, Lipitor, ultimately failed.



                                                       5
opportunities is not strongly related to raising funds from equity. Critically, these findings
contradict the main predictions of traditional capital budgeting explanations. Instead, this
evidence suggests that costly external financing affects firms' decisions in a manner that is
more consistent with the pecking order theory.
        The paper is organized in the following manner. Section 2 provides an overview of
the setting and regulatory environment, describes the loss of market exclusivity events,
and explains how this information is linked to data about firms' investment and financing
decisions. Section 3 describes the empirical strategy. Section 4 documents the substantial
negative impact of the loss of market exclusivity on firm revenue and profitability. This
section also analyzes the relation between the loss of market exclusivity and the investments
in R&D and capital expenditures, payouts, cash holdings, and external financing. Section 5
describes cross-sectional evidence regarding the role of financial constraints, and Section 6
discusses robustness tests. We conclude in Section 7.



2         Data

2.1        Regulatory environment

The current regulatory environment faced by pharmaceutical companies in the United States
can be traced to the passage of the Drug Price Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act
in 1984, informally known as the "Hatch-Waxman" Act. The Act provided a delicate balance
between expedited FDA approval for generic entry and extensions to pharmaceutical patents
in order to compensate innovators for lost time while waiting for FDA approval (Grabowski
and Kyle (2007)).6 When a pharmaceutical company submits a New Drug Application
(NDA) to the FDA for approval they are required, by law, to identify all relevant patented
    6
     There are limits to such extensions. Pharmaceutical firms cannot receive a patent extension of more than
five years, nor are they entitled to patent extensions that provide them with a patent life (post-approval)
that is effectively greater than 14 years.




                                                     6
technologies necessary to create the drug; these patents are subsequently listed in the FDA
Orange Book.7
       Upon approval, the FDA will grant each new drug regulatory protection lasting for five
years (also known as data exclusivity) which runs concurrently with patent protection.8
During this data exclusivity period, regardless of the status of the underlying patent(s),
no generic entry may occur. At the conclusion of data exclusivity, branded products are
protected only by their patents; this period running from the cessation of data exclusivity to
the expiration of the patent(s) is commonly referred to as "market exclusivity" (see Appendix
Figure 1).
       Prior to the passage of Hatch-Waxman, generic manufacturers seeking to enter the mar-
ket had to demonstrate the safety and efficacy of their products by putting them through
clinical trials (Mossinghoff (1999)). While Hatch-Waxman did not lessen the burden of the
clinical trials process for branded pharmaceutical companies seeking approval for new drugs,
it virtually eliminated the requirement for separate clinical trials for generic manufacturers.
This was made possible since generic manufacturers could simply demonstrate "bioequiva-
lence" with branded products by showing that the active ingredient in their product diffused
into the human bloodstream in a manner similar to the original product.
       Hatch-Waxman provides four pathways (or "Paragraphs") a generic firm may follow in
order to gain entry into a market. The process starts with filing an Abbreviated New Drug
Application by a generic manufacturer with one of the four Paragraph certifications. A Para-
graph I certification is one for which the originator firm has not filed patent information for
its branded product. Paragraph II certification relates to when the branded product's patent
has already expired (i.e., the end of market exclusivity), and Paragraph III certification re-
   7
      Importantly, outside of the requirement to list relevant patents, there is no regulatory screening of which
patents firms ultimately choose to list in the Orange Book. This has led to criticism of gaming in terms of
when patents get listed (Bulow (2004)) and the relevance of the patents themselves (Hemphill and Sampat
(2011); Hemphill and Sampat (2012)). The implication of this regulatory anomaly is that not every patent
attached to a branded drug will allow for generic entry upon the patent expiring. We use this anomaly as a
basis for one of our placebo tests.
    8
      Orphan drugs receive seven years of data exclusivity, reformulations receive three years of data exclu-
sivity, and pediatric indications receive an additional six months of data exclusivity.


                                                       7
lates to cases when the generic manufacturer notes that the patent on the branded product
will expire on a specific date and that it seeks to enter only after patent expiry or end of mar-
ket exclusivity. Paragraph IV, the fourth certification, argues that the generic manufacturer
does not infringe on a branded product's patents or that those patents are invalid. More
importantly, however, a Paragraph IV certification can be acted on by the FDA after the
conclusion of data exclusivity anytime during the market exclusivity window (see Appendix
Figure 1).9 These certifications result in litigation, and in the case that the challengers are
successful, this would bring generics to the market earlier than otherwise would be the case
(Higgins and Graham (2009); Grabowski and Kyle (2007); Panattoni (2011); Palermo et al.
(2019)).
       It is critical to note that the preceding discussion relates only to chemical-based or small-
molecule drugs. Generic versions of biologic-based drugs (often referred to as biosimilars)
are governed by the Biologics Products Competition and Innovation Act, which was passed
in 2009. However, due to a delay in the enabling regulations, the first biosimilar was not
introduced in the U.S. until 2015. As we discuss below, this will be outside of our sample
period. For this paper's purposes, our focus will be on the loss of market exclusivity and
subsequent generic entry surrounding chemical-based or small-molecule drugs.


2.2       Sample of branded drugs

Our sample begins by creating a sample of loss-of-exclusivity events between 1999 and 2016
for drugs that have significant sales. To do so, we first collect revenue information on branded
drugs in the U.S. market. Our main source for this data is the IMS MIDAS (now IQVIA)
database. This is a quite comprehensive database of quarterly drug sales, and our sales
data covers the years 1998­2010. We use several additional resources to build out our list
   9
     Paragraph I and II certifications are rarely used. Paragraph III certifications are the most common
filing by generic firms because they will be anticipating the expiration of underlying patents (Federal Trade
Commission (2002)). Paragraph IV challenges have increased over time, especially since 2003; however, this
mode of entry is still probabilistic as it depends on a litigation outcome (Berndt, Danzon, and Kruse (2007);
Palermo, Higgins, and Ceccagnoli (2019)). For reasons we discuss below, we will focus on generic entry via
Paragraph III certifications.

                                                     8
and to ensure that our data covers as many of the highest-revenue drugs as possible. These
additional data sources consist of lists from two pharmaceutical magazines, Drug Topics
and Medical Advertising News, which publish lists of either Top-100 or Top-200 branded
drugs by sales, and the online website drugs.com. In general, these high-revenue drugs or
'blockbusters' tend to persist over time.
   Next, we hand-collect the expiration dates for all the patents attached to these drugs
from the FDA Orange Book. This dataset contains detailed information on approved drugs,
including the name of applicants, active ingredients, availability of generic counterparts,
and each patent's expiration date. Firms will frequently get regulatory extensions for their
patents, for example, due to the time spent in the FDA approval process. To ensure that
the patent expiration dates that we identify include any granted extensions, we augment our
data using the extended patent information as published by the United States Patent and
Trademark Office.
   Next, we take these patent expiration dates, including their extensions, and look for
introductions of generic drugs entering within six months of a patent expiration. This merge
between patent expiration dates that are followed by generic entry forms our main set of
loss of market exclusivity events. We use the IMS MIDAS data to measure revenue during
specifically in the quarter preceding patent expiration; for dugs with patents that expire after
2010 when our IMS MIDAS data ends, we use the last available sales data. The branded
drug's revenue before expiration is used to determine if the patent's expiration is likely to
have a meaningful impact on the firm. Even if a drug has substantial sales, it can still be
a small portion of overall revenues for the largest pharmaceutical firms. Because our IMS
data starts in 1998, this data requirement narrows the list of drugs to those with patents
that expire after this date.
   Merging the patent expiration dates and generic entry dates has two purposes. First, we
seek to eliminate generic entry that is not associated with loss of market exclusivity (i.e.,
those that are not Paragraph III generic entry). In these cases, the entry may be unantici-


                                               9
pated, or at least probabilistic (Lemley and Shapiro (2005)). For example, as discussed in
the prior section, a firm's monopoly position can be lost before losing market exclusivity if
a branded firm loses an early generic "Paragraph I" challenge (Palermo et al. (2019)). By
contrast, if a generic enters because of the loss of market exclusivity (i.e., Paragraph III
generic entry), then that event can be fully anticipated.
       Second, we also exclude patent expirations that are not followed by generic entry. One
plausible explanation why this may occur, as noted previously, is that not every patent listed
in the FDA Orange Book will allow for generic entry upon expiration. These "non-critical"
patents will become the basis of one of our placebo tests, but they are excluded from our
main specifications because there is no resulting shock to a firm's cash flow. In total, we
identify 410 branded drugs with patent expiration information data, and that are associated
with generic entry.10


2.3       Merging loss of market exclusivity events to firm-level vari-

          ables

We next manually match the owner of each branded drug to company identifiers in Com-
pustat North America. We require a company to be covered by Compustat to obtain stan-
dardized accounting information; this requirement nevertheless results in excluding pharma-
ceutical firms that are based abroad. When a firm's subsidiary owns the branded drug, we
identify its parent firm in Compustat. We specifically identify the owner as of the patent
expiration date, and this owner may not be the original patent holder. For example, owners
of branded drugs can change due to several reasons such as licensing, mergers and acquisi-
tions, corporate spin-offs, or sales of the individual drug. Overall, the sample period from
  10
    As we noted in Footnote 8, while there is a patent reporting requirement, there is no formal screening
mechanism for which patents get listed in the FDA Orange Book. As a result, firms may have an incentive
"over-list" patents. Moreover, not every patent will cover a drug's entirety, so its expiration should not be
expected to allow for entry.




                                                     10
Compustat ranges from 1996 to 2017, so as to include data both in the period before the
first loss-of-exclusivity event and after the last event.
       Next, we apply a few filters to our data. First, we drop firms from the sample if R&D or
revenues are zero or missing. This is to ensure we have data to measure the impact on R&D,
and to remove firms whose main role may be purely marketing. Second, we remove firms
if their quarterly C.P.I.-adjusted assets or quarterly revenues are smaller than $1 billion or
$100 million, respectively. Third, we exclude firms if their age is younger than 15 years.

These latter two filters only remove one loss-of-exclusivity event from our sample; however,
this filter is crucial as the purpose of the study is to determine the impact of the loss of
market exclusivity for the affected firms, as compared to a control group of firms that do
not experience such a loss. It is, therefore, important to filter on the firm's age to ensure
that we are comparing established companies with similar peers as control firms, and we
correspondingly apply a symmetric filter to our "control" firms. If we did not impose these
filters, the firms experiencing a loss of market exclusivity would almost by construction be
older and larger than the control firms, which in turn could shed doubt on the parallel
trends assumption that is necessary for an interpretation of plausibly causal effects in the
difference-in-differences framework.
       This procedure yields 115 loss-of-exclusivity events for our sample period that are matched
to Compustat firms and meet the above filters.11 Table 1 lists the 25 drugs with the largest
sales during the quarter before the loss of market exclusivity in our sample. Many of these
brands and the associated firms are widely recognized even outside the medical field.
       To measure these events' predicted impact, we use the IMS MIDAS data to measure a
drug's sales before the loss of exclusivity, scaled by the firm's total revenue. Even if a drug
has substantial sales, it can still be a small portion of overall revenues for one of the largest
pharmaceutical firms. We will use a sample of such "small impact" events for a placebo-type
robustness test.
  11
    In a few instances, a firm experiences several loss-of-exclusivity events within the same quarter; in these
cases, we sum the revenues of the drugs to estimate the impact of the event.


                                                      11
2.4    Drug-level cash flow patterns around the loss of market ex-

       clusivity

To illustrate the impact the loss of market exclusivity can have, consider the example of
Lipitor, which is marketed by Pfizer. In our sample, Lipitor had the highest revenue before
the loss of market exclusivity (see Table 1). It also had the highest annual revenue in the U.S.
of all drugs from 2003 to 2009 and was the second-highest revenue drug in 2010. In November
2011, the patent for Lipitor expired. Figure 1 shows the revenue pattern from Lipitor around
the date of the loss of market exclusivity. The event is represented by the vertical line in the
middle of the figure. As reported, quarterly global revenues were approximately $2.5 billion
for the quarter before the loss of market exclusivity. Following the loss of market exclusivity,
quarterly revenues decreased to less than $1 billion within four quarters and continued to
fall by another 30 percent the following year. In the two years following the loss of market
exclusivity, the annual revenues generated from Lipitor declined by approximately $8 billion.
   Unsurprisingly, this significant change in revenue for Lipitor also had a substantial impact
on Pfizer's total revenue. Pfizer's 2011 revenues were approximately $65 billion, declining
to approximately $55 billion in 2012 and continuing to decline in 2013. Such a significant
revenue decrease also affected Pfizer's profitability and cash flow metrics. Importantly, this
decrease in revenue was nevertheless "predetermined" by many years based on the patents
protecting the drug, which makes the loss of market exclusivity event predictable long in
advance, and the loss-of-exclusivity event by itself contained little information about the
NPV of Pfizer's other drugs in development and the potential of future research.
   In Figure 2, we use all drugs in our sample to study the average change in drug revenues
around the loss of market exclusivity. This figure plots the average fraction of revenues for
each drug relative to that drug's maximum quarterly revenues in our sample period in event
time (quarters) around the quarter when the loss of exclusivity took place. This quarter




                                              12
(t = 0) is represented by the vertical line. Scaling by maximum quarterly revenues for each
drug is designed to standardize the magnitude of the decline across drugs.
       The pattern for this average of scaled revenues around the end of market exclusivity across
all drugs in our sample is roughly similar to the pattern we saw for Lipitor in Figure 1. This
pattern is also consistent with the extant literature (e.g., Branstetter et al. (2016); IMS
Institute for Healthcare Informatics (2016); Reiffen and Ward (2005)). Average revenues
decline by more than 80% within the two first years after the loss of market exclusivity.
Specifically, the graph shows that sales decrease from approximately 80 percent of a drug's
maximum sales from the quarter before losing market exclusivity to less than 15 percent of
the maximum sales within two years of losing market exclusivity.
       Even though generic entry after the loss of market exclusivity occurs relatively quickly,
the graph shows that the full impact on the branded drug's revenues does not take place
immediately.12 For example, it may take time for consumers to renew a prescription, at
which time state substitution laws would transition the consumer, in most cases, to a generic.
Branded drug companies can also seek to moderate the decline, for example, by distributing
discount cards to consumers, subsidizing co-pays, and other kinds of rebates to try to extend
branded usage.
       Nevertheless, based on this figure, most of the decline in revenues due to the loss of
market exclusivity occurs within the first year.13 To ensure that our results are not spuriously
affected by such mitigating actions a firm may take, our identification will crucially not use
the actual sales decline after a loss of exclusivity event; instead, we will only exploit variation
in the predicted sales decline based on each drug's pre-loss-of-exclusivity sales.
  12
     This revenue decrease is driven by lower quantities. By contrast, branded drug prices often tend to
increase as firms are exploiting the relatively more price inelastic consumers that remain on branded drugs
even in the presence of generic drugs (Frank and Salkever, 1997).
  13
     There remains the nuance of different dosages. For example, suppose a drug is sold in 30 mg and 60 mg
forms. Generic entry is form specific; for example, suppose it only applies to the 60 mg tablet. If a consumer
took the 60 mg tablet, they would get the 60 mg generic because of state substitution laws. However, their
doctor could prescribe twice the amount of 30 mg pill, in which case they would get the 30 mg branded pills.
Our revenue data are at the brand-level, not the dosage level, so some of the slower dissipation could be due
to the existence of multiple dosages and the rates at which generics come online for additional dosages.



                                                     13
    As firms know about this expected decrease in revenues resulting from the loss of market
exclusivity well before the actual expiration date, we can use this predetermined event to
analyze how critical corporate decisions are affected by the change in cash flows from these
"assets in place." In the next section, we consider these effects in the context of pharma-
ceutical firms experiencing the loss of market exclusivity in terms of their policies regarding
investment, R&D, payout, and external financing.



3     Empirical strategy and identification

Our baseline empirical strategy compares firm-level outcomes between firms that experience
a loss of market exclusivity ("treated" firms), compared to a control set of peer firms that do
not experience such a loss over the same period. The underlying identification assumption
is that the treated firms would have behaved similarly to the control firms in the absence of
having experienced the loss of market exclusivity event.
    To ensure comparability between the treated firms and the control firms, we follow the
approach in Gormley and Matsa (2011) to construct cohorts of peer firms. A cohort consists
of all `treated' and `control' firms as of a specific calendar quarter. We form such cohorts
around every calendar quarter, in which at least one firm experiences a loss of market ex-
clusivity event. Around each quarter with such an event, we create groups of treated firms
(those that experience a loss) and control firms (those that do not experience a loss around
the same time), and analyze these firms in event time around the focal quarter where the
event for the treated firms takes place. For example, suppose two firms lose market exclu-
sivity in Q1:2002, which we refer to as the "event quarter" (t = 0) for the cohort of Q1:2002.
Then those two firms are the treated firms of that cohort, and we additionally form a set of
control firms for that cohort drawing from other pharmaceutical firms that do not experi-
ence loss of market exclusivity in that event quarter. Our analysis then compares how these
two groups of treated and control firms in the same cohort behave in event time over eight



                                              14
quarters before (t - 8) to eight quarters after (t + 8) the event quarter. We form similar
groups of treated and control firms around every other calendar quarter with at least one
loss-of-market-exclusivity event.
   To construct the set of firms within each cohort, we start with all firms in the pharmaceu-
tical SIC industry classification (SIC = 2834). As we described in the previous section, we
apply a set of data filters to the treated firms based on their size, age, and R&D activities,
to ensure that these are established pharmaceutical firms that are active in R&D. To ensure
comparability, we, therefore, apply symmetric filters to the set of control firms. Specifically,
from the set of possible control firms within the pharmaceutical sector, we drop firms that
have R&D expenses that are missing or zero, or that have revenues that are missing or zero.
We exclude firms with C.P.I-adjusted assets or quarterly revenues that are smaller than $1
billion or $100 million, respectively, and firms with age younger than 15 years (all charac-
teristics are measured as of the focal quarter). The purpose of these filters is to ensure that
the activities of established pharmaceuticals experiencing the loss of market exclusivity are
compared to similar peer firms that might be expected to display similar trends over time in
the absence of treatment. For example, we would not want to compare established pharma-
ceutical firms to biotechnology start-ups; the latter firms could have patterns of investment
that are quite different, even absent any loss-of-exclusivity events. We validate that this
methodology produces similar "pre-trends" between the treated and control firms, which
supports the parallel trends assumption.
   After pooling all event-time cohorts, we estimate the impact of the loss of market exclu-
sivity on revenue for the treated firms as follows:


         yi,q,c = 0 + 1 Lossi,c + 2 P ostq,c + 3 Lossi,c × P ostq,c + i,c + c,q +   i,q,c   (1)

   In Equation (1), yi,q,c is the dependent variable for firm i in event time q and cohort
c. The outcome variables we study include the effects on firm revenues, profitability, R&D,



                                              15
capital expenditures, payouts (dividends and repurchases), equity issuance, debt issuance,
and cash.
   Loss is an indicator for whether the firm i in cohort c is treated, i.e., whether it experiences
a loss of market exclusivity event in the focal quarter. Post is an indicator variable for
whether event quarter q is in the post-event period for cohort c, i.e., within the eight quarters
after the loss-of-exclusivity. The main coefficient of interest is 3 , which measures how the
treated firms alter their behavior after the loss of market exclusivity compared to control
firms.
   The variable i,c in Equation (1) represents firm-cohort fixed effects, and c,q represents
event-time-by-cohort fixed effects. The firm-cohort fixed effects control for any unobservable
firm-level characteristics that are time-invariant around the event; these characteristics are
only assumed to be constant within a cohort, and we allow them to vary for the same firm
across cohorts that represent different event quarters. The event-time-by-cohort fixed effects
control for any aggregate (e.g., macro- or industry-level effects) that affect all firms in the
same cohort over time. These two groups of fixed effects subsume the coefficients on 1
for Loss and 2 for Post, respectively. We cluster the standard errors across two separate
dimensions, at the firm level, and at the time (calendar-quarter) level.
   This analysis could be confounded if the control firms were to experience a loss of market
exclusivity at some time that is `close' to the event quarter, in which case they would also
effectively be treated for many of the quarters in the eight-quarter window around the focal
quarter. This, in turn, would have the effect of biasing down the measured impact of any
actual events. For example, suppose that the focal event quarter is Q1:2002, and that a
potential "control" firm did not experience a loss in that quarter, but did experience such
a loss of market exclusivity in the next quarter (Q2:2002). If this firm were included as a
control firm within the Q1:2002 focal quarter cohort, it would distort any difference between
the treated and control firms, since the control firm also lost significant revenues during the
post -period. To mitigate this concern, we remove control firms from the cohort if they also


                                               16
experience any loss-of-exclusivity events within the time window between quarter t - 8 to
t + 8.
       Occasionally, the same treated firm can also have multiple events within a short period.
If a firm has two events within 16 quarters of each other, which would result in overlapping
observations for the same treated firm, then the event for the drug that has the most signifi-
cant impact on firm revenue is included, while the event with the smaller impact is removed.
This firm is also excluded from being a control firm around the event quarter associated with
the loss of market exclusivity for the smaller-revenue drug.14 For example, suppose the same
firm has an event in Q1:2002 and in Q4:2002, but the Q1:2002 event is more significant.
Then we remove this firm from the cohort of Q4:2002 (i.e., it is included neither as a treated
firm nor as a control firm in that quarter), and further, it is not a control firm in any cohort
that lies within eight quarters after the latter event or within eight quarters before the earlier
event.
       Table 2 presents summary statistics for our panel of treated and control firms between
1996 and 2017. The distribution of book assets and firm revenue indicates that these firms
tend to be larger and more profitable than the typical firm in Compustat. This table also
reports the average value for several asset-scaled outcome variables that we will examine,
including revenues, net income, capital expenditures, R&D, dividends, repurchases, equity
issuance, debt issuance, and cash. All variables are defined in Table A.1 in the Appendix. In
general, the typical firm in our sample has substantial R&D expenditures, holds large cash
balances, and is highly profitable.
  14
    This filter reduces the number of events from 115 to 55; however, the dropped observations represent
the smaller and thus less significant events by construction.




                                                  17
4     Results

4.1     Pre-trends analysis

Before turning to our primary analysis, we first investigate whether there are any pre-trends
before the loss of market exclusivity that could have the potential to contaminate the main
results. In Panel A of Table 3, we regress the average quarterly changes for all of our outcome
variables from t - 4 to t - 1 on the indicator for loss of market exclusivity (LossOfExclusivity )
followed by generic entry for the firm in quarter t. This indicator variable is not statistically
significant in any of the regressions in Panel A. Crucially, this result shows that there are
no differences in trends across any of these variables before the loss of market exclusivity
between the treated and control firms.
    The finding of no differential trends, particularly in the financial policies, is particularly
noteworthy in this setting. This result implies that the treated firms do not seem to prepare
before the loss of market exclusivity in ways that can soften the impact of the loss-of-
exclusivity event. For example, the treated firms could have increased their cash reserves
before the loss of market exclusivity to ensure a buffer to weather the predictable negative
shock to revenues; but our findings suggest that they did not substantially do so.


4.2     Effects on revenues and profitability

Next, we estimate the impact of the loss of market exclusivity on revenues and profitability.
These results are reported in Table 4. In Model 1, we find that revenue scaled by lagged assets
is significantly lower. Quarterly revenue scaled by assets is 3.3 percentage points lower during
each quarter on average during the eight quarters following the loss of market exclusivity
events for the treated firms as compared to the control firms. Critically, this means that
scaled revenue declines by approximately 20 percent compared to its unconditional average
of 16.8% (as reported in Table 2). In Model 2, we examine the analogous specification for


                                               18
net income scaled by lagged assets. While the coefficient estimate is negative, the results are
not significant for the full sample.
   However, this test about the impact of the loss of market exclusivity may be of limited
statistical power because some of the drugs in our sample may represent only a small share
of a firm's total revenue. Even though revenues for a specific drug may decline, the overall
impact could be limited at the firm level if the drug represents only a small part of its
total business. To address this concern, we consider a more restrictive set of loss of market
exclusivity events. As in Table 3, we define an indicator as a loss of market exclusivity event
for a drug that generates more than 1 percent of the firm's total revenues.
   In Models 3 and 4, we show that focusing on these events, which excludes the relatively
less economically important events, further increases the coefficient estimates compared to
the results for the full sample of events (Models 1 and 2). The magnitude of the relevant
coefficient increases by about 20 percent for the revenue specification (Model 3) and remains
strongly significant, and the coefficient estimate more than doubles for the net income spec-
ification (Model 4) and is also statistically significant. The estimated coefficient in Model
4 suggests that net income declines by approximately 30 percent, on average, relative to
the unconditional mean in Table 1 during the eight quarters following the loss of market
exclusivity around these economically more important events.
   Collectively, these results on revenues and net incomes are not very surprising insofar
as when a drug loses market exclusivity, we would naturally expect a firm's revenues and
net income to drop. However, this table provides a sense of the magnitude of the "first
stage", that is, how large this drop is in economic terms. Moreover, this drop illustrates
how challenging lifecycle management is in the pharmaceutical industry. We can now turn
to comparing these magnitudes to the actions that firms take following these events in terms
of their investment and financial policies, which we analyze in the next subsections.




                                              19
4.3    Effects on R&D and investment policies

In Table 5, we estimate the impact of the loss of market exclusivity on firms' investment
decisions. We use Equation (1) with the following dependent variables: (1) capital expen-
ditures (CapEx) scaled by lagged assets, (2) research and development expenditures (R&D)
scaled by lagged assets, and (3) the sum of these two variables, which we label investment.
   First, we find that the impact of the loss of market exclusivity on capital expenditures
by itself is not statistically significant (Model 1). However, critically, we find a large and
negative effect on R&D (Model 2) around these events. The coefficient estimate indicates
that R&D spending declines by 0.6 percentage points (scaled by lagged assets). Compared
to the baseline level of R&D spending of 2.4 percent of lagged assets in Table 2, this change
implies roughly a 25 percent reduction in R&D spending. The third measure, total invest-
ment (Model 3), represents the sum of capital expenditures and R&D, and also displays a
significantly negative effect after losses of market exclusivity.
   In Models 4­6, we revisit this relation using the more restrictive set of loss of market
exclusivity events for drugs generating more than 1 percent of firm revenue. We find the
same statistical pattern for all three specifications, although the economic effects are now
generally larger; this is expected as these events are, on average, more important in economic
terms. These findings show that losing market exclusivity for an already-existing drug has
a negative effect on spending in support of long-term investment opportunities.
   This key result illustrates an essential role that revenues from assets in place have in
terms of supporting investments in R&D. The fact that we find relatively stronger effects for
R&D compared to capital expenditures is not particularly surprising because R&D is a much
larger and more volatile component of spending compared to capital expenditures among
the pharmaceutical firms in our sample. These differences between capital expenditures and
R&D may also be driven by the differences in the horizon until cash flows from these different
types of projects materialize. While building a plant to manufacture a drug that has already



                                               20
been approved could be considered a late-stage investment that will generate cash flow in
the near term, cutting R&D, by contrast, implies cutting the search for new opportunities
that will only affect cash flows in the more distant future.


4.4       Effects on financial policies

Table 6 shows how firms adjust payout policies when they experience a loss of market ex-
clusivity. The outcome variables include dividends (Model 1), repurchases (Model 2), and
total payout (Model 3), where the total payout is the sum of dividends and repurchases. As
before, all of these variables are scaled by lagged total assets.15 We exclude the economi-
cally less important events, and focus only on those drugs that represent at least 1% of firm
revenues.16
       Somewhat surprisingly, we find that dividends tend to slightly increase following these
events, despite lower revenues and income.17 On the other hand, we find that firms drastically
cut repurchases. This cut to repurchases is larger in total economic terms than the increase
in dividends, resulting in lower total payouts (as shown in Model 3).
       In Table 7, we next study how firms adjust their issuance of equity and debt securities
(Models 1­2), and the effect on cash balances (Model 3). One possible way for firms to
buffer any shock to investment would be to increase their use of external financing by issuing
new equity or debt. However, in Models 1 and 2, we do not find any statistically significant
responses regarding either increased equity or debt issuance.
       Firms could also seek to buffer some of the impacts on investment by saving less cash
or spending more of their internal stock of cash holdings. We test this in Model 3 of Table
7 and find a negative and statistically significant response whereby the affected firms are
significantly spending down their cash relative to the control firms. This effect is substantial
  15
     Our measure of share repurchases scaled by assets is defined as zero if the net of stock repurchases minus
sales is negative. We also study equity issuance separately in Table 7.
  16
     Results using all events are similar, but not tabulated for brevity.
  17
     In untabulated results, we find that the positive effect on dividends mainly tends to be larger among
the observations that represent a relatively smaller loss of market exclusivity, where it is plausible that firms
might be increasing dividends as a signal that they remain stable even in the presence of this shock.

                                                       21
in magnitude and shows that firms draw down their existing cash balances when faced with
a loss of market exclusivity. However, the previous results on lower R&D nevertheless show
that these reductions in both cash balances and share buybacks are not sufficient to buffer
the decline in investments fully.



5        The role of financial constraints

To the extent that financing frictions, i.e., costly external financing, drive the effects on
investment, we would expect these effects to be larger for firms that are more likely to be
subject to such frictions and thus less able to substitute the loss of internal cash flows with
other sources of financing. We explore this hypothesis in Table 8.
       Our proxy for the lack of financing frictions,(Unconstrained ) is whether a firm is among
the Top-10 percent of firms in terms of revenues within the Compustat universe, which
roughly corresponds with the set of S&P500 firms. We choose this proxy based on the
literature, which has established that smaller firms tend to be relatively more financially
constrained in having worse access to external financing than large firms (e.g., Hadlock and
Pierce (2010)). Other possible proxies for financing constraints that exist in the literature
tend to yield little cross-sectional variation within our sample; for example, virtually all of
the firms in our sample have investment-grade credit ratings, which is another commonly
used proxy (e.g., Campello, Graham, and Harvey, 2010). Similarly, firm age is a common
proxy for financial constraints that also yields little variation in our sample, as we require
both the treated and control firms to be at least 15 years old.
       To study the cross-sectional differences in these effects, we expand Equation (1) to include
a triple-difference with Unconstrained.18 The first two models of Table 8 focus on firm
investment policies while the remaining models focus on financial policies (payout, issuance,
  18
    Note that the Unconstrained variable itself and the double-interaction Unconstrained*Loss are absorbed
by the Firm*Cohort fixed effects; as before, Post and Loss are absorbed by the EventQuarter*Cohort and
Firm*Cohort fixed effects, respectively.




                                                   22
and cash). This table also focuses on the events for the losses of market exclusivity that
represent more than 1 percent of the firm's revenues.
   Models (1) and (2) suggest that the effects on R&D and total investment are significantly
larger for the smaller, and thus more financially constrained firms, while the coefficient on
the triple interaction shows that the effect for larger firms is significantly attenuated. For
example, the effect on R&D for smaller firms is -1.795 percent, but only -1.795 + 1.271 =
-0.524 for the largest firms. These results suggest that the largest firms can better buffer
investment effects from the adverse cash flow shocks.
   There are also differences across these groups regarding how they adjust their payout and
issuance policies. In Model 3, we see that the dividend increases we found in the previous
section is an effect that is limited to only the larger firms. This result suggests that our prior
finding on dividends (shown in Model 1 from Table 6) appears to be driven by larger firms,
whereas we do not observe any dividend increases on average among smaller firms around
these events.
   On the other hand, the relatively smaller firms are decreasing their equity issuance more
(Model 6) and significantly increasing their debt issuances more (Model 7) than larger firms.
By contrast, large firms do not change their issuance after these events. Finally, smaller
firms tend to draw down more of their cash than larger firms (Model 8).
   Overall, the results in Table 8 are consistent with a pecking-order hypothesis. Treated
firms suffer a large negative shock to internal cash flows. This is followed by adjustments
across multiple margins, including investment, payout, external financing, and internal cash
policies. Crucially, the adjustments in terms of payout, external financing, and internal cash,
when taken together, are still insufficient to buffer the shock to investment policies, which
a baseline model of capital budgeting would predict should be unaffected. Importantly, the
only exception is among larger firms that tend to be less financially constrained, and these
firms also appear to be better able to isolate their investments in R&D from these negative
shocks due to losses of market exclusively.


                                               23
6     Robustness tests

To supply additional support for our identification strategy, we run a series of placebo tests
in Tables 9 and 10.
    The first placebo test in Table 9 considers the impact of patent expirations that are not
followed by generic entry (we call these "non-critical patents"). As discussed earlier, firms
must list relevant patents for an approved drug in the FDA Orange Book. Given that these
patents are not formally screened, patents of marginal value sometimes get listed (Bulow
(2004); Hemphill and Sampat (2011, 2012)). The net effect of this regulatory anomaly is
that the expiration of some of the patents attached to an approved drug will not result in
generic entry (i.e., the loss of market exclusivity).
    In Table 9, we begin by redefining the event indicator to consider the impact of the
expiration of a (non-critical) patent that is not followed by generic entry. In the absence of
generic entry, the impact of these events on all aspects of firm performance that we have
discussed previously should be negligible. We find this in Model 1, where the estimated
coefficient on revenue is not statistically significant. Likewise, we find the same in Model
2; the effect on profitability is not statistically significant. These findings suggest that the
procedures for identifying the timing of patent expiration and loss of market exclusivity
do not artificially generate the statistically significant decline in revenue and profitability
observed in Table 4.
    Proceeding to the remaining models in Table 9, we find no significant relation between
the expiration of a non-critical patent and most of the variables measuring the effects on
firms' investment and financing decisions. The results in Models 3 and 4 are particularly
important. The relation between R&D (Model 3) and investments (Model 4) and non-critical
patent expiration without generic entry are both not statistically significant. This makes us
more confident in the significant impacts we previously found because of the loss of market
exclusively on R&D (Table 5, Model 5) and investments (Table 5, Model 6). Similarly, the


                                               24
effects for share repurchases, total payout, or cash holdings are not statistically significant
and again provide additional confidence in our main findings. On the other hand, the
significant result for dividends suggests that the positive and statistically significant result
in Table 6 should be interpreted with some caution.
    In Table 10, we employ a second placebo test that considers small-market drugs or those
for which a loss of market exclusivity event should have negligible effects on the focal firm.
The sample of placebo events is defined by the loss of market exclusivity for a drug that
generates less than 1 percent of firm revenue. For these events, we should thus not observe
substantial investment effects for the focal firms, or at least not large effects as these drugs
are quite small as a fraction of firm revenues, which means that firms should be able to buffer
these shocks internally. Except for Model 7 that estimates the impact on cash holdings, the
coefficient estimates are not statistically significant.
    In sum, these placebo results in Table 9 and Table 10 provide further support for our
identification strategy and core findings.



7     Conclusion

The expiration of a pharmaceutical drug's patent protection and the resulting loss of market
exclusivity can substantially negatively impact a drug maker's revenues and profitability.
However, because the timing of this change in the firm's cash flows is predetermined more
than a decade in advance, the event itself is predictable and contains little news about the
profitability of the firm's future projects. The traditional capital budgeting theory would
thus suggest that a firm's fundamental decisions about the long-term investment, such as
R&D spending, would be unrelated to this event.
    Our results are inconsistent with this fundamental prediction of traditional capital bud-
geting. We show that pharmaceutical firms' R&D declines by approximately 25 percent
during the eight quarters when their previous high-revenue drugs lose market exclusivity.



                                                25
Total investment, defined as the sum of capital expenditures and R&D spending, is also
significantly lower during the quarters following these events.
       Firms' financing decisions also indicate that firms employ other margins of adjustment.
We find that firms do significantly fewer share buybacks after these events and also consume
their stock of cash holdings. However, these actions appear to be insufficient in terms of
buffering the effect on investment. An exception is for the largest pharmaceutical firms
in the sample, which tend to be less financially constrained, and that also maintain their
investments in R&D at the same rate after these events. On average, debt issuances and
equity issuances do not change. Our paper speaks to the crucial role that a firm's existing
cash flows have for the development of future products, even when reductions in those cash
flows contain no news about the profitability of those future cash flows.
       We focused on chemical-based or small molecule drugs. This restriction was made be-
cause generic biologics or "biosimilars" were not present during our sample period; the first
biosimilar was not approved in the U.S. market until 2015. There are important distinctions
between these drugs and the chemical-based or small molecules drugs we considered in this
paper. First, biologic-based drugs receive 12 years of data exclusivity, as opposed to five
years for most chemical-based drugs.19 Importantly, the process that biosimilars take to get
approved is different from generics for chemical-based drugs. There is no equivalent Para-
graph IV pathway for biosimilars, so their only route of entry is equivalent to Paragraph
III entry or waiting until the loss of market exclusivity. Because of their nature, biosimilars
are required to undergo limited clinical testing, which dramatically increases their cost to
develop and limits the kinds of firms that can engage in this activity.
       Longer European experience with biosimilars (Morton, Stern, and Stern, 2018) suggests
that entry is much less frequent, occurs at a later point in the product lifecycle, and offers
a much smaller price discount relative to the innovator drug than has been the case for
generic entry in chemistry-based drug markets. This implies that the revenue shock that we
  19
    The section of the Affordable Care Act that details entry provisions for biologics is referred to as the
Biologics Products Competition and Innovation Act (BPCIA).


                                                    26
find in this paper, related to chemical-based drugs, may not be as stark or significant with
biologic-based drugs. This could create yet another incentive for pharmaceutical firms to
begin to rotate their focus from chemical- to biologic-based drugs (Branstetter et al., 2014).
While we are unable to comment on the welfare implications of such a shift, we can say that
it would alter the nature of innovation and dramatically increase the future cost of drugs
given their significant price differences.
   Finally, our work has significant implications for product lifecycle management. The
pharmaceutical industry is unique in that it has such a long development product lifecycle.
This should, theoretically, provide ample opportunity for firms to plan for these loss-of-
market-exclusivity events. Our evidence suggests that their efforts, whether they be from
internal or external activities, on average, are failing. This result is all the more surprising
given the active nature of external technology markets in the biopharmaceutical space. This
suggests that unanticipated frictions may exist in these markets. These results could also
suggest that clinical trials and FDA approval periods are more difficult to time. We leave
these questions for future research.




                                              27
References

Acemoglu, D., and J. Linn. 2004. Market size in innovation: Theory and evidence from the
  pharmaceutical industry. Quarterly Journal of Economics 199:1049­1090.

Amoresano, G. V. 2007. Branded drug reformulation: The next brand vs. generic antitrust
  battleground. Food and Drug Law Journal 62:249­56.

Baker, M., R. Ruback, and J. Wurgler. 2007. Behavioral Corporate Finance: A Survey.
  In E. Eckbo (ed.), The Handbook of Corporate Finance: Empirical Corporate Finance.
  Elsevier/North Holland.

Berndt, E. R., P. M. Danzon, and G. B. Kruse. 2007. Dynamic competition in pharma-
  ceuticals: Cross-national evidence from new drug diffusion. Managerial and Decision
  Economics 28:231­250.

Branstetter, L., C. Chatterjee, and M. J. Higgins. 2014. Starving (or Fattening) the Golden
  Goose?: Generic Entry and the Incentives for Early-Stage Pharmaceutical Innovation.
  Working Paper 20532, National Bureau of Economic Research. URL http://www.nber.
  org/papers/w20532.

Branstetter, L., C. Chatterjee, and M. J. Higgins. 2016. Regulation and welfare: Evidence
  from Paragraph IV generic entry in the pharmaceutical industry. The RAND Journal of
  Economics 47:857­890.

Bulow, J. 2004. The gaming of pharmaceutical oatents. Innovation Policy and the Economy
  4:145­187.

Campello, M., J. R. Graham, and C. R. Harvey. 2010. The real effects of financial constraints:
  Evidence from a financial crisis. Journal of financial Economics 97:470­487.




                                             28
Dubois, P., O. d. Mouzon, F. Scott-Morton, and P. Seabright. 2015. Market size and phar-
  maceutical innovation. The RAND Journal of Economics 46:844­871.

Ellison, G., and S. F. Ellison. 2011. Strategic entry deterrence and the behavior of pharma-
  ceutical incumbents prior to patent expiration. AEJ: Microeconomics 3:1­36.

Federal Trade Commission. 2002. Generic Drug Entry Prior to Patent Expiration: An FTC
  Study. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

Frank, R. G., and D. S. Salkever. 1997. Generic entry and the pricing of pharmaceuticals.
  Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 6:75­90.

Gormley, T. A., and D. A. Matsa. 2011. Growing out of trouble? Corporate responses to
  liability risk. The Review of Financial Studies 24:2781­2821.

Grabowski, H. G., and M. Kyle. 2007. Generic competition and market exclusivity periods
  in pharmaceuticals. Managerial and Decision Economics 28:491­502.

Hadlock, C. J., and J. R. Pierce. 2010. New evidence on measuring financial constraints:
  Moving beyond the KZ index. The Review of Financial Studies 23:1909­1940.

Hemphill, C. S., and B. N. Sampat. 2011. When do generics challenge drug patents? Journal
  of Empirical Legal Studies 8:613­649.

Hemphill, C. S., and B. N. Sampat. 2012. Evergreening, patent challenges, and effective
  market life in pharmaceuticals. Journal of Health Economics 31:327­39.

Higgins, M. J., and S. J. H. Graham. 2009. Balancing innovation and access: Patent chal-
  lenges tip the scales. Science 326:370­371.

IMS Institute for Healthcare Informatics. 2016. Price Declines After Branded Medicines Lose
  Exclusivity in the US. Tech. rep.




                                            29
Lemley, M. A., and C. Shapiro. 2005. Probabilistic patents. Journal of Economic Perspectives
  19:75­98.

Modigliani, F., and M. H. Miller. 1958. The cost of capital, corporation finance and the
  theory of investment. American Economic Review 48:261­297.

Morton, F., A. Stern, and S. Stern. 2018. The impact of the entry of biosimilars: Evidence
  from Europe. Review of Industrial Organization 53:73­210.

Mossinghoff, G. J. 1999. Overview of the Hatch-Waxman Act and its impact on the drug
  development process. Food and Drug Law Journal 54:187­94.

Murphy, S. 2017. Essays in Pharmaceutical Economics. Ph.D. thesis, MIT Dissertation:
  Chapter 2.

Myers, S., and N. Majluf. 1984. Corporate financing and investment decisions when firms
  have information that investors do not have. Journal of Financial Economics 13:187­217.

Palermo, V., M. J. Higgins, and M. Ceccagnoli. 2019. How reliable is the market for tech-
  nology? Review of Economics and Statistics 101:107­120.

Panattoni, L. E. 2011. The effect of Paragraph IV decisions and generic entry before patent
  expiration on brand pharmaceutical firms. Journal of Health Economics 30:126­145.

Prajapati, V., and H. Dureja. 2012. Product lifecycle management in pharmaceuticals.
  Journal of Medical Marketing: Device, Diagnostic and Pharmaceutical Marketing 12:150­
  158.

Reiffen, D., and M. R. Ward. 2005. Generic drug industry dynamics. Review of Economics
  and Statistics 87:37­49.

Stein, J. C. 1996. Rational capital budgeting in an irrational world. Journal of Business
  69:429­455.


                                            30
Voet, M. 2016. The Generic Challenge: Understanding Patents, FDA and Pharmaceutical
  Life-cycle Management. Universal-Publishers.




                                          31
Figure 1
This figure displays quarterly global revenue in millions of U.S. dollars for Lipitor from
2007 to 2017. This drug was manufactured and marketed by Pfizer and the loss of market
exclusivity occured at the end of November 2011.




                                           32
Figure 2
This figure plots the average quarterly sales as a fraction of each drug's maximum sales in
event time (quarters) around the loss of market exclusivity. The data includes loss of market
exclusivity events in the time period 2000 to 2010. The vertical line in the figure is at event
time (t = 0), which signifies the quarter when the loss of market exclusivity occurs.




                                              33
                                           Table 1
                                  Top 25 Drugs by U.S. Sales
This table lists the top 25 branded drugs by sales in our sample. We report U.S.-based sales
as reported in IMS MIDAS. Columns 2 and 3 report the name of branded drugs and the
company that holds the patent for the drugs, respectively. Column 4 reports the U.S. quarterly
sales in the quarter before the loss of market exclusivity; if the sales data in that quarter is not
available, we use the information as of the last available quarter before the loss of market exclusivity.

     Rank          Brand                   Company               U.S. Sales (quarterly, $ '000)
      (1)            (2)                       (3)                              (4)
        1        LIPITOR                   Pfizer                           1,859,901
        2        PLAVIX            Bristol-Myers Squibb                     1,569,903
        3      SEROQUEL                Astra Zeneca                         1,042,518
        4      SINGULAIR                   Merck                            1,034,608
        5      CYMBALTA                   Eli Lilly                          833,599
        6       ZYPREXA                   Eli Lilly                          749,349
        7       LEXAPRO              Forest Labratories                      726,017
        8        AMBIEN                    Sanofi                            618,902
        9       ARICEPT                    Pfizer                            469,089
       10      CELEBREX                    Pfizer                            433,257
       11      LEVAQUIN             Johnson & Johnson                        417,539
       12        ZOLOFT                    Pfizer                            414,424
       13     DIOVAN HCT                   Pfizer                            402,851
       14       GLEEVEC                   Novartis                           352,320
       15       VYTORIN                    Merck                             314,735
       16       GEODON                     Pfizer                            313,502
       17         ZOCOR                    Merck                             312,999
       18        LOTREL                   Novartis                           309,310
       19       PROVIGIL           Teva Pharmaceuticals                      290,544
       20      TAXOTERE                    Sanofi                            286,633
       21       ACIPHEX                     Eisai                            266,423
       22       FLONASE              GlaxoSmithKline                         239,249
       23        AVELOX                    Bayer                             207,686
       24        PROZAC                   Eli Lilly                          194,954
       25        BUSPAR            Bristol-Myers Squibb                      192,192




                                                     34
                                           Table 2
                                       Summary Statistics
This table provides quarterly panel summary statistics for our sample of pharmaceutical firms
over the period from 1996 to 2017. The sample consists of firms in Compustat that belong to
SIC code 2834, that have non-zero R&D, an age of at least 15 years, and C.P.I-adjusted assets
and quarterly revenues of at least $1 billion and $100 million, respectively. In Panel A, we report
statistics for assets and quarterly revenues. In Panel B, we report statistics for variables that
are scaled by lagged total assets. Table A.1 in the Appendix describes the definitions of all variables.

                                     Panel A: Assets and Revenues
Variable                     Mean    Std. dev.     p1       p25         p50      p75      p99         N
Assets                      34,444    41,051      1,089     3,727      18,933   49,985   168,244    2,754
Revenue                     5,101     5,586        122       601       3,127    7,663    23,316     2,751
                                     Panel B: Asset-scaled Variables
Variable                     Mean    Std. dev.     p1       p25         p50      p75      p99      No. Obs.
Revenue / Assets            16.89%    7.14%        5.11%   11.83%      15.65%   20.80%   36.85%     2,626
Net Income / Assets         2.16%     3.81%      -10.57%   0.99%       2.33%    3.65%    11.41%     2,623
CapEx / Assets              0.89%     0.70%        0.06%   0.42%       0.72%    1.18%     3.38%     2,562
R&D / Assets                 2.36%    2.10%        0.00%   1.07%       2.01%    3.01%    10.90%     2,628
Investment / Assets         3.25%     2.44%        0.35%   1.80%       2.76%    3.97%    12.77%     2,628
Dividends / Assets           0.78%    0.87%        0.00%   0.00%       0.45%    1.43%     3.85%     2,492
Repurchases / Assets        0.68%     1.31%        0.00%   0.00%       0.00%    0.75%     5.15%     2,408
Equity Issuance / Assets    0.54%     2.22%        0.00%   0.03%       0.17%    0.47%     5.63%     2,301
Debt Issuance / Assets       0.62%    5.01%       -9.39%   -0.52%      0.00%    0.33%    30.43%     2,628
Cash / Assets               19.55%    15.44%       1.13%   8.46%       15.66%   26.05%   68.48%     2,604




                                                   35
                                                                      Table 3
                                                                     Pre-trends
     This table reports tests of pre-trends for the outcome variables studied in the paper. The dependent variable is the average quarterly
     change over the four quarters from t-5 to t-1. The independent variable is an indicator for whether the firm experiences a loss of market
     exclusivity event at t=0. The regressions control for event time fixed effects. The numbers in parentheses are t-statistics, and standard
     errors are clustered at the cohort level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                                                                            Equity        Debt
                                CapEx /     R&D /      Investment /      Dividends /     Repurchases /                               Cash /
                                                                                                           Issuance /   Issuance /
                                Assets      Assets       Assets           Assets           Assets                                    Assets
                                                                                                             Assets       Assets
                                  (1)          (2)           (3)              (4)              (5)             (6)          (7)         (8)


     Loss of exclusivity         -0.004      -0.035        -0.473           -0.005            0.083          0.054        0.107       -0.0490
                                 (-0.29)     (-1.54)       (-1.47)          (-0.24)           (1.05)         (1.30)       (0.52)      (-1.49)

     Event time fixed effects     Yes         Yes            Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes          Yes         Yes




36
     R2                          0.047       0.029          0.052            0.053            0.092           0.044        0.055       0.033
     N                            714         729            723              699              671             669          729         729
                                   Table 4
   Firm Revenue and Profitability Following the Loss of Market Exclusivity
This table reports results from difference-in-differences tests of the effect of loss of market
exclusivity on firms' revenues and profit. Loss of exclusivity is an indicator of whether the firm
experiences a loss of market exclusivity from a drug's patent expiring, followed by generic entry.
Post is an indicator for the post-event period. We include observations between 8 quarters before
and 8 quarters after the focal quarter of each cohort (t=0), where "treated" firms in a cohort
experience a loss of market exclusivity in the focal quarter and "control" firms do not experience
such a loss. In Models 3 and 4, the independent variable is an indicator for a loss of exclusivity
event for a drug representing more than 1% of the firm's sales. The sample period is from 1996
to 2017. The numbers in parentheses are t-statistics. Standard errors are double clustered at the
firm and calendar-quarter levels. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1%
levels, respectively.

                                        Revenue /      Net income /    Revenue /    Net income /
Dependent variable
                                         Assets           Assets        Assets         Assets
                                            (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)


                                        -3.310***         -1.209
Loss of exclusivity* Post
                                          (-4.15)         (-1.04)

Loss of exclusivity with                                                -4.216***      -2.650**
firm's revenue >1% * Post                                                 (-4.90)       (-2.14)

Event Quarter*Cohort fixed effects         Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes
Firm*Cohort fixed effects                  Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes
R2                                        0.759           0.412           0.758         0.413
N                                         11888           11809           11640         11562




                                                  37
                                                            Table 5
                         Loss of Market Exclusivity and Investments in R&D and Capital Expenditures
     This table reports results from difference-in-differences tests of the effect of loss of market exclusivity on capital expenditures (CapEx),
     research and development expenditures (R&D), and the sum of CapEx and R&D (Investment). Loss of exclusivity is an indicator of
     whether the firm experiences a loss of market exclusivity from a drug's patent expiring, followed by generic entry. Post is an indicator
     for the post-event period. We include observations between 8 quarters before and 8 quarters after the focal quarter of each cohort (t=0),
     where "treated" firms in a cohort experience a loss of market exclusivity in the focal quarter and "control" firms do not experience
     such a loss. In Models 4­6, the independent variable is an indicator for a loss of exclusivity event for a drug representing more than
     1% of the firm's sales. The sample period is from 1996 to 2017. The numbers in parentheses are t-statistics. Standard errors are dou-
     ble clustered at the firm and calendar-quarter levels. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10, 5, and and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                                   CapEx /       R&D /       Investment       CapEx /       R&D /       Investment
     Dependent variable
                                                                    Assets       Assets       / Assets         Assets       Assets       / Assets




38
                                                                      (1)          (2)           (3)              (4)          (5)           (6)


                                                                    -0.083     -0.591***     -0.689***
     Loss of exclusivity* Post
                                                                    (-1.12)      (-3.07)       (-2.71)

                                                                                                                -0.113     -0.653***     -0.798***
     Loss of exclusivity with firm's revenue >1% * Post
                                                                                                                (-1.42)      (-2.92)       (-2.81)

     Event Quarter*Cohort fixed effects                              Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes
     Firm*Cohort fixed effects                                       Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes
     R2                                                             0.627        0.684          0.627           0.625        0.687         0.631
     N                                                              11606        11896          11896           11367        11647         11647
                                         Table 6
                          Loss of Market Exclusivity and Payout
This table reports results from difference-in-differences tests of the effect of loss of market exclu-
sivity on firms' payout policy. Loss of exclusivity is an indicator of whether the firm experiences
a loss of market exclusivity from a drug's patent expiring, followed by generic entry. We focus
on events for drugs representing more than 1% of the firm's sales. Post is an indicator for the
post-event period. We include observations between 8 quarters before and 8 quarters after the
focal quarter of each cohort (t=0), where "treated" firms in a cohort experience a loss of market
exclusivity in the focal quarter and "control" firms do not experience such a loss. Total payout is
the sum of dividends and repurchases. The sample period is from 1996 to 2017. The numbers in
parentheses are t-statistics. Standard errors are double clustered at the firm and calendar-quarter
levels. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1% levels.

                                           Payout policy
                                               Dividends /     Repurchases /    Total Payout /
                                                 Assets           Assets            Assets
                                                      (1)            (2)               (3)
     Loss of exclusivity with                     0.079*          -0.510**          -0.549**
     Firm's Revenue >1% * Post                    (1.93)           (-2.45)           (-2.10)

     Event Quarter*Cohort fixed effects             Yes             Yes               Yes
     Firm*Cohort fixed effects                      Yes             Yes               Yes
     R2                                            0.700           0.463             0.380
     N                                             11128           10618             10335




                                                 39
                                       Table 7
                  Loss of Market Exclusivity and Financial Decisions
This table reports results from difference-in-differences tests of the effect of loss of market exclu-
sivity on firms' financial decisions, including equity issuance, debt issuance, and cash balances.
Loss of exclusivity is an indicator of whether the firm experiences a loss of market exclusivity from
a drug's patent expiring, followed by generic entry. We focus on events for drugs representing
more than 1% of the firm's sales. Post is an indicator for the post-event period. We include
observations between 8 quarters before and 8 quarters after the focal quarter of each cohort (t=0),
where "treated" firms in a cohort experience a loss of market exclusivity in the focal quarter and
"control" firms do not experience such a loss. The sample period is from 1996 to 2017. The
numbers in parentheses are t-statistics. Standard errors are double clustered at the firm and
calendar-quarter levels. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1% levels.

                                         Issuance and cash
                                               Equity issuance /    Debt issuance /     Cash /
                                                    Assets              Assets          Assets
                                                       (1)                 (2)            (3)
     Loss of exclusivity with                         0.052               0.615         -4.889**
     Firm's Revenue >1% * Post                        (0.33)              (1.34)         (-2.43)

     Event Quarter*Cohort fixed effects                Yes                 Yes            Yes
     Firm*Cohort fixed effects                         Yes                 Yes            Yes
     R2                                               0.172               0.134          0.771
     N                                                10423               11647          11559




                                                 40
                                                                        Table 8
                                                           The Role of Financial Constraints
     This table reports results from triple-difference tests of the effect of loss of market exclusivity across firms with different levels of financial
     constraints. Loss of exclusivity with firm's revenue >1% is an indicator of whether the firm experiences a loss of market exclusivity from
     a drug's patent expiring, followed by generic entry for a drug that represents more than 1% of the firm's sales. Post is an indicator for
     the post-event period. We include observations between 8 quarters before and 8 quarters after the focal quarter of each cohort (t=0),
     where "treated" firms in a cohort experience a loss of market exclusivity in the focal quarter and "control" firms do not experience such
     a loss. Unconstrained is an indicator of whether the firm is in the top-10% of the Compustat universe in revenues. The sample period is
     from 1996 to 2017. The numbers in parentheses are t-statistics. Standard errors are double clustered at the firm and calendar-quarter
     levels. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1% levels.

                                                          Loss of market exclusivity with firm's revenue >1%
                                           R&D /      Investment /   Dividends /   Repurchases /   Total Payout /   Equity Issuance /   Debt issuance /   Cash /
     Dependent variable
                                           Assets        Assets        Assets         Assets           Assets            Assets             Assets        Assets




41
                                             (1)          (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)                (6)                (7)           (8)


     Loss of exclusivity with             -1.795***    -2.532***       -0.012         -0.316          -0.303           -0.571***           6.838***       -9.199**
     firm's revenue >1% * Post              (-4.66)      (-4.71)       (-0.72)        (-1.28)         (-1.30)            (-3.48)            (4.32)         (-2.01)

                                           -0.371       -0.305        0.138***        -0.143           0.013             -0.149             0.637         -3.668
     Unconstrained * Post
                                           (-1.57)      (-1.01)        (3.35)         (-0.99)          (0.09)            (-0.54)            (1.43)        (-1.12)

     Loss of exclusivity with             1.271***     1.866***        0.059*         -0.174          -0.139            0.689***           -6.582***       5.374
     firm's revenue >1% * Post             (4.29)       (4.42)         (1.79)         (-0.55)         (-0.44)            (3.60)              (-4.08)       (1.13)
     * Unconstrained
     Event Quarter*Cohort fixed effects     Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes            Yes
     Firm*Cohort fixed effects              Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes            Yes
     R2                                    0.688         0.631         0.702          0.463            0.477             0.172              0.135          0.772
     N                                     11647         11647         11128          10618            10335             10423              11647          11559
                                                                  Table 9
                                                       Placebo Test - No generic entry
     This table is similar to Tables 4­6, but instead of studying the effect of loss of market exclusivity where a generic comes in, we analyze
     the effect of patent expiration events that are not followed by generic entry. The numbers in parentheses are t-statistics. Standard
     errors are double clustered at the firm and calendar-quarter levels. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1% levels,
     respectively.


                                            Patent expiration with firm's revenue >1% without generic entry
                                          Revenue /   Net income /   R&D /     Investment /   Dividends /   Repurchases /   Total Payout /   Cash /
     Dependent variable
                                           Assets        Assets      Assets       Assets        Assets         Assets           Assets       Assets
                                             (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)            (5)            (6)             (7)          (8)


     Loss of exclusivity with              0.472         -3.366      -0.003       0.207         0.122**        -0.262          -0.329        -2.333
     firm's revenue >1% * Post             (0.41)        (-0.76)     (-0.01)      (0.53)         (2.21)        (-0.65)         (-0.70)       (-0.85)




42
     Event Quarter*Cohort fixed effects      Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes
     Firm*Cohort fixed effects               Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes
     R2                                     0.836        0.373       0.692        0.667          0.877          0.453           0.447        0.785
     N                                      8843         8797        8843         8843           8490           8164            7974         8793
                                                            Table 10
                            Placebo Test - Loss of market exclusivity with firm's revenue less than 1%
     This table is similar to Tables 4­6, but limits the analysis to only those loss-of-exclusivity events that represent less than 1% of the
     firm's revenues. The numbers in parentheses are t-statistics. Standard errors are double clustered at the firm and calendar-quarter
     levels. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10, 5, and 1% levels, respectively.


                                                      Loss of market exclusivity with firm's revenue <1%
                                          Revenue /    Net income /    R&D /     Investment /   Dividends /   Repurchases /   Total Payout /   Cash /
     Dependent variable
                                           Assets         Assets       Assets       Assets        Assets         Asset            Assets       Assets
                                             (1)            (2)          (3)         (4)            (5)            (6)             (7)           (8)


     Loss of exclusivity with              0.8473          2.1977      -0.1256     -0.0047        0.2090         -0.1912         -0.0339       4.2363**
     firm's revenue <1% * Post             (0.91)          (0.93)      (-0.49)     (-0.01)        (0.91)         (-0.58)         (-0.07)        (2.02)

     Event Quarter*Cohort fixed effects      Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes           Yes              Yes           Yes




43
     Firm*Cohort fixed effects               Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes           Yes              Yes           Yes
     R2                                     0.739          0.423        0.735       0.666          0.499         0.4810           0.449         0.768
     N                                      8480           8403         8483        8483           8106           7591            7376          8435
Appendix




                                          Figure A.1
                                     Regulatory Framework
This figure demonstrates the two types of protection conferred on new chemical-based or small-
molecule drugs by the Hatch-Waxman Act. When a new chemical-based drug is approved by the
FDA the first five-year period (seven years for orphan drugs and 5 1 2 years for pediatric drugs) carries
with it a regulatory protection called `data exclusivity' that runs concurrent with underlying patent
protection. Data exclusivity protects the underlying clinical data and provides monopoly protection
in the case that a drug's underlying patent term has expired. At the conclusion of data exclusivity,
a drug is protected only by its patents until they expire, a period termed `market exclusivity'. Upon
the loss of market exclusivity (A), Paragraph III generic entry may occur. Paragraph IV challenges
occur only during the market exclusivity period (B). If generic manufactures are successful in the
ensuing litigation, early generic entry may occur. As we note in the text, entry occurring at A is
well anticipated, however, early generic entry during B is unanticipated and probabilistic. We also
note that patents are generally applied for and granted well before a drug is approved by the FDA.




                                                   44
                                                   Table A.1
                                              Variable Definitions

                                                   Independent Variables
                                       An indicator variable whether a drug's patent expires and is followed by generic
 Loss of exclusivity
                                       entry within 6 months of expiration.
                                       An indicator variable whether a drug's patent expires and is followed by generic
 Loss of exclusivity greater than 1%   entry within 6 months of expiration, and the drug represents more
                                       than 1% of the firm's sales in the quarter before expiration.
 Post                                  An indicator for the post-event period.
                                                   Outcome Variables20
 Assets                                Compustat quarterly item, total assets
 Net income                            Compustat quarterly item, net income
 CapEx                                 Compustat quarterly item, capital expenditures
 R&D                                   Compustat quarterly item, research and development expense
 Investment                            Investment is defined as capital expenditures plus R&D expenses
 Dividends                             Compustat quarterly item, cash dividends
                                       Repurchases are defined as treasury stock minus lagged treasury stock,
 Repurchases                           or alternatively, purchase of common and preferred stock minus sale of
                                       common and preferred stock if a firm's treasury stock is zero or missing
 Total Payout                          Total payout is defined as dividends plus repurchases
 Equity Issuance                       Compustat quarterly item, sale of common and preferred stock
 Debt Issuance                         Long-term debt issuance minus long-term debt reduction minus current debt changes
 Cash                                  Compustat quarterly item, cash equivalents



19
     The outcome variables are scaled by lagged total assets one quarter before the loss of market exclusivity.




                                                            45
