THE ENDS OF 30 BIG DEPRESSIONS

          Martin Ellison
          Sang Seok Lee
     Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke
     WORKING PAPER 27586
                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           THE ENDS OF 30 BIG DEPRESSIONS

                                       Martin Ellison
                                       Sang Seok Lee
                                  Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke

                                     Working Paper 27586
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27586


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           July 2020, Revised October 2020




O'Rourke acknowledges the financial support of the ERC, under the European Union's Seventh
Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013), ERC grant agreement 249546. We are grateful to the
following for very helpful comments: Ben Bernanke, Barry Eichengreen, Benjamin Elsner, Rui
Esteves, Giovanni Federico, George Hall, Jean Imbs, Morgan Kelly, Dennis Novy, Angela
Redish, Gary Richardson, Alan Taylor, Gianni Toniolo, Hans-Joachim Voth, and seminar
participants in Bilkent University, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Turku School of
Economics, the School of Economics, University College Dublin, and the European Macro
History Online Seminar. Special appreciation goes to Alan Fernihough for his assistance in
preparing the data. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Martin Ellison, Sang Seok Lee, and Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Ends of 30 Big Depressions
Martin Ellison, Sang Seok Lee, and Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke
NBER Working Paper No. 27586
July 2020, Revised October 2020
JEL No. F33,N10

                                           ABSTRACT

How did countries recover from the Great Depression? In this paper we explore the argument that
leaving the gold standard helped by boosting inflationary expectations and lowering real interest
rates. We do so for a sample of 30 countries, using modern nowcasting methods and a new
dataset containing more than 230,000 monthly and quarterly observations for over 1,500
variables. In those cases where the departure from gold happened on clearly defined dates, it
seems clear that inflationary expectations rose in the wake of departure. IV regressions and
synthetic matching techniques suggest that the relationship is causal.


Martin Ellison                                    Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke
Department of Economics                           NYU Abu Dhabi, Saadiyat Campus
University of Oxford                              Social Science (A5), 1193
Manor Road Building                               P.O. Box 129188
Oxford                                            Abu Dhabi
OX1 2UQ                                           United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom                                    and NBER
martin.ellison@economics.ox.ac.uk                 kevin.orourke@nyu.edu

Sang Seok Lee
Bilkent University
Department of Economics
 06800, Ankara
Turkey
sang.lee@bilkent.edu.tr




A data is available at https://cepr.org/content/trade-depression
1         Introduction

What does it take to end a big depression? Maybe history can provide us with guidance.
In this paper we study the end of the Great Depression in 30 countries. Many authors,
notably Eichengreen and Sachs (1985), have suggested that leaving the gold standard was a
prerequisite for recovery: how true was this in general?1 And if going off gold and recovery
were linked to each other then what was the mechanism? Monetary loosening, in the form of
lower nominal interest rates? Beggar thy neighbour currency devaluations? Fiscal expansion,
as intellectual straitjackets were jettisoned along with the peg to gold? Or did going off gold
matter in some other way?

        The title of this paper is of course a tribute to Thomas Sargent's celebrated article on
the end of four central European hyperinflations in the aftermath of World War I. Just as
Sargent (1982) argued that changing expectations was central to halting hyperinflation, so
we argue that changing expectations was central to stopping the Great Depression.2 And
just as he argued that going back on gold, or pegging to the dollar, was essential to replacing
expectations of continuing hyperinflation with expectations of stable prices, so we argue that
leaving gold was essential to replacing expectations of continuing deflation with expectations
of stable or increasing prices. The result was a collapse in ex ante real interest rates, a
rebound in interest-rate-sensitive expenditure, and economic recovery. In both cases it took
a regime shift to change expectations: as Sargent stresses, a simple change in policies would
not have sufficed. Our paper offers a historical bookend to his argument: the monetary
institution that allowed individual countries to escape hyperinflation in the 1920s had to be
abandoned in the 1930s so that the world could escape the Depression. However, as we will
see the way in which countries abandoned the gold standard mattered for outcomes.

        We are not the first people to argue that going off gold mattered because it signalled
    1
     Campa (1990) extended the Eichengreen and Sachs argument from Europe, which was their focus, to
Latin America, and found that their argument held there as well. See also Bernanke and Carey (1996) and
Obstfeld and Taylor (2004), pp. 141-5.
   2
     Sargent argued that hyperinflation was stopped by changing fiscal and monetary policy regimes in such
a way that expectations were permanently changed: instead of expecting ever-increasing rates of inflation
agents now looked forward to a future of stable prices. This was accomplished by setting up independent
central banks, committed to maintaining convertibility vis-`a-vis the dollar or gold, and which would no
longer monetise government budget deficits.


                                                    1
to economic agents that the policy regime had shifted and that the era of deflation was
over. This paper is, however, the most comprehensive study to date on the topic, breaking
new ground not only in its country coverage but also in the methods used. Temin and
Wigmore (1990) made the case for the United States in a paper which cites Sargent in
theoretical support of their argument, and whose title also mirrors his. Temin reprised the
argument in his Lionel Robbins Lectures (Temin, 1989), and Romer (1992) took it one step
further by estimating US ex ante real interest rates using the single equation methods of
Mishkin (1981) and quarterly data. In her account, an autonomous inflow of gold from
Europe shifted US price expectations in an inflationary direction and enabled the economy
to recover. More recently, Eggertsson (2008) embedded the argument within a theoretically
well-specified dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model, while Jalil and Rua (2016) and
Binder (2016) provided empirical support for the argument using narrative evidence.3

       We focus on the links between going off gold, inflationary expectations, and real interest
rates, extending the argument along several dimensions. First, we provide empirical evi-
dence not just for the United States but for 30 countries.4 Second, rather than estimating
inflationary expectations and ex ante real interest rates using single equation techniques,
we use state-of-the art dynamic factor models to estimate real-time expectations of inflation
that take all the data available into account. Developed to assist decision-making in modern
central banks, dynamic factor models keep track of expectations by updating model forecasts
whenever there is news in new data releases. Our method for extracting inflation expecta-
tions from the data mirrors that currently employed to produce the New York Fed Staff
Nowcast. Third, we compare the separate contributions of nominal interest rate reductions
and changing inflationary expectations to changes in ex ante real interest rates. Fourth, we
base our analysis on an exhaustive new database which gathers together virtually all extant
monthly or quarterly time series for the countries concerned. The dataset has been made
available to other researchers via the internet.5 And fifth, we address issues of causality
   3
     Romer (2014) provides a nice review of the literature, explicitly linking it to current monetary policy in
Japan.
   4
     Shibamoto and Shizume (2014) and Chouliarakis and Gwiazdowski (2016) make similar arguments for
Japan and the UK, respectively. Shibamoto and Shizume use S-VAR techniques while Chouliarakis and
Gwiazdowski construct a DSGE model. On the UK, see also Crafts (2013).
   5
     https://cepr.org/content/interwar-high-frequency-data.



                                                      2
using instrumental variables and synthetic control methods.

       There is an extensive literature on historical inflationary expectations to which this paper
contributes.6 This includes several papers on the Great Depression, although most of those
focussed on the question of whether or not the deflation of the downturn was expected,
rather than on the role of expectations during the recovery.7 The papers which are closest to
us in spirit are Dorval and Smith (2015), Hamilton et al. (2016), Albers (2018), and Daniel
and Steege (2020). Dorval and Smith calculate expected and unexpected inflation in over
20 countries during the interwar period. They use univariate methods, and their interest is
in the relationship between inflation and output growth. Hamilton et al. estimate ex ante
real interest rates for 15 countries between 1858 and 2014. They use annual data and single
equation methods, and do not have our focus on the Depression. Albers independently
collected data from the same interwar data sources that we use. He extracted about 1,150
time series from the sources, and used these to derive monthly economic activity indices
for 28 countries. We have collected in excess of 1,500 time series, and use these to trace
the links between going off gold, inflationary expectations, ex ante real interest rates, and
economic recovery. Like us, Daniel and Steege use a dynamic factor model to calculate
expected inflation in Germany. They conclude that the German recovery was not due to an
increase in inflationary expectations.8 The New York Fed model that we use is a more recent
variant of this class of models; more importantly we look at the experiences of 30 countries,
not just one.

       In Section 2 we introduce the data and document our sources. Section 3 explains the
methodology used to estimate real-time inflation expectations and ex ante real interest rates.
Section 4 discusses the surprisingly tricky issue of when to date countries' departure from
gold. Sections 5 and 6 explore the relationships between going off gold, inflationary ex-
pectations, and economic recovery. Section 7 uses IV regressions and synthetic matching
techniques to argue that these relationships were causal. A final section concludes.
   6
     For an outstandingly useful survey see Binder (2016).
   7
     See for example Dominguez et al. (1988), Hamilton (1992), Cecchetti (1992), Evans and Wachtel (1993),
Klug et al. (2005), Romer and Romer (2013), Binder (2016), and Saleuddin and Coffman (2018).
   8
     See also Voth (1999).




                                                    3
2         Data

The principal data sources for our study are the International Abstract of Economic Statistics
and the Statistisches Handbuch Der Weltwirtschaft. These provide detailed and comprehen-
sive information on a large number of economic indicators in many countries, at monthly and
quarterly frequencies from January 1919 to December 1936. The indicators include a wide
range of economic and financial data, such as prices and quantities at both the aggregate and
the industry level, volumes and values of aggregate and disaggregated international trade,
prices and quantities in financial markets, and measures of labour market conditions.

        The 30 countries in our dataset are Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, British
India, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Dutch Indies, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Japan, Lithuania, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Peru,
Poland, Romania, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United
States. We omit Spain because it did not return to the Gold Standard after World War I.9
The paucity of data for Greece, Latvia, Norway and Yugoslavia precludes their inclusion in
our study.

        We complement our principal data sources by extracting statistics from the monthly
Federal Reserve Bulletin, the NBER Macrohistory Database, and the Statistical Yearbook of
the League of Nations, meaning that our dataset ultimately combines five distinct sources.
In total we have data on more than 1, 500 variables; our final dataset comprises over 230, 000
observations.

        Given our paper's emphasis on the role of ex ante real interest rates, we draw particular
attention to our preferred measures of the nominal interest rate, aggregate price level and
aggregate output. For the nominal interest rate, we follow Romer (1992) in using three to six
month market interest rates wherever possible, with the central bank discount rate acting as
a proxy for countries where market rates are unavailable. For the aggregate price index, we
focus on the wholesale price index as it is the most commonly available measure across our
    9
    See Choudhri and Kochin (1980). Spain did not return to the Gold Standard after World War I because
of serious political protest. Spanish experience during the Great Depression is discussed in Albers (2018).
Spain is included in the Online Appendix for completeness.




                                                    4
sample of countries. For those few countries where the wholesale price index is unavailable
or of limited use, we select either a cost of living index or the wholesale price of a key product
or commodity. Aggregate output is measured by the index of total production or its variant
whenever feasible; otherwise it is proxied by the quantity of a key product or commodity
produced. Full details of the measures used for each country appear in Online Appendix A.

       Camacho et al. (2015) argue that it is better to seasonally adjust each data series before
estimating a factor model and we follow their approach. Most of the output data we use
is already seasonally adjusted and there is unlikely to be significant seasonal variation in
nominal interest rates, but our price series are not commonly adjusted for seasonality. To
circumvent the problem, we use year-on-year changes in price levels and apply statistical
tests to check that the resulting series are free of residual seasonality. As a further check,
we also test and confirm that there is no seasonal variation in our real-time estimates of the
ex ante real interest rate.10



3        Methodology

The ex ante real interest rate is defined by the Fisher equation as the difference between the
nominal interest rate and the expected rate of inflation. To keep track of the ex ante real
interest rate, we therefore need an estimate of inflation expectations that is updated in real-
time as new macroeconomic data are released. Fortunately for us, the real-time estimation of
inflation expectations is a core input to decision-making in modern monetary policy-making.
Central banks worldwide have therefore developed sophisticated nowcasting and forecasting
techniques that we can apply retrospectively to our data. In essence, our estimate of the ex
ante real interest rate is that which a modern central bank would have made had they been
exposed to the flow of information released from January 1919 to December 1936.

       We adopt the nowcasting methodology of Ba´
                                                nbura et al. (2010) and Ba´
                                                                          nbura and Mod-
  10
    For example, we test for seasonality by applying the X-13ARIMA-SEATS procedure to our year-on-year
measures of inflation. The procedure is employed as standard by the US Census Bureau and subsumes
practically all known methods of seasonal adjustment. It finds no evidence of residual seasonal variation in
our inflation or ex ante real interest rate measures for France, Germany, UK and US.




                                                     5
ugno (2014) that is currently used to construct the New York Fed Staff Nowcast.11 The
version we employ is documented in Bok et al. (2018). The method builds on the machinery
of dynamic factor models, which views movements in observed data as driven by a limited
number of latent factors. This conceptual reduction allows us to analyse our large and
complex dataset in a statistically consistent and tractable manner. In particular, we can
identify the impact of new data releases on real-time inflation expectations, which is crucial
for tracking movements in the ex ante real interest rate. The method is conveniently able
to handle data with different sample lengths, publication delays, reporting frequencies and
missing observations. Historical data is replete with such problems, so adopting the nowcast-
ing methodology improves upon earlier historical studies based on more traditional factor
models.12 Our choice of methodology permits a systematic, unified and efficient treatment
of all the available data.

       In our dynamic factor model, the large set of variables observed for each country is
related to a small number of country-specific latent factors and idiosyncratic components.
The number of variables to be explained ranges from a minimum of n = 10 in Brazil to a
maximum of n = 50 in Canada. These are related to r dynamic factors. To be specific,
              j
observations yi,t of variable i in country j and period t are explained by country-specific
                j               j                                   j
latent factors f1 ,t , . . . , fr,t and an idiosyncratic component ei,t :


                                                 r
                             j
                            yi,t   =   µj
                                        i   +         j    j      j
                                                      i,k fk,t + ei,t       for i = 1, . . . n       (1)
                                                k=1



       The observed variables are related to the dynamic factors through the estimated factor
loadings, j             j
          i,1 , . . . , i,t , with the idiosyncratic component capturing sources of variation un-

related to the factors. The latent factors and the idiosyncratic components are assumed to
follow autoregressive processes:

                                    j     j j
                                   fk,t = k fk,t-1 + uj
                                                      k,t               for k = 1, . . . r           (2)

                                   ej     j j        j
                                    i,t = i ei,t-1 + i,t            for i = 1, . . . n               (3)
  11
       The New York Fed Staff Nowcast is available at https://www.newyorkfed.org/research/policy/nowcast.
  12
       Ritschl et al. (2016) and Albers (2018) are two examples.



                                                               6
where uj       j                                                            2      2
       k,t and i,t are i.i.d. normal variables with zero mean and variances uj and j .
                                                                                              k         i


       Equations (1)-(3) form a state space model in which (1) is the measurement equation and
(2)-(3) are state transition equations. The system is estimated using the Kalman filter and
maximum-likelihood methods. Forecasts for key variables are constructed from forecasts of
the latent factors and idiosyncratic components by applying the appropriate factor loadings.
Our results are robust to suitable alternative specifications with different numbers of dynamic
factors or lags in the autoregressive processes.

       A dynamic factor model is estimated separately for each country. We are able to identify
four latent factors in most of the countries in our sample. A global factor affects all variables
that are observed, whereas three additional factors are specific to variables observed in real,
financial and labour markets respectively.13 Following the model specification in Bok et al.
(2018), we do not have a separate factor specific to nominal variables, which means that
inflation expectations are exclusively accounted for by the global factor. For a few countries
we do not have enough data to identify a separate labour market factor, in which case we
estimate a model with three latent factors and allow what labour market data we have to
be affected by the real and global factors. Where necessary, all data series are transformed
to ensure the stationarity required to estimate a dynamic factor model. Stationarity is
inspected visually and checked formally whenever possible. The specification of the model
estimated for each country is provided in Online Appendix A.

       Our focus on the real-time updating of inflation expectations means that we need to
identify and control for the dates at which new information is released. The principal data
sources are not helpful in this respect, but the Federal Reserve Bulletin is published monthly
and so allows us to check the delay with which each variable is reported. We use evidence from
Bulletins published between January 1919 and December 1936 to estimate the release date
for each type of variable, and apply the same structure to all countries. Broadly speaking,
prices, sales, logistics/transportation and financial quantities are released with a delay of two
months; production, labour and international trade with a delay of three months. Financial
  13
    The labelling of the factor that affects all variables as "global" is taken from Bok et al. (2018). For the
avoidance of doubt, we reiterate that we estimate a separate dynamic factor model for each country. Our
global factor is "global" in the sense of affecting all the variables in a country, but it is not global in the
sense of being estimated from developments in the global economy.


                                                      7
prices are observed without delay. Results are robust to alternative assumptions regarding
release delays.14

      The dynamic factor models are estimated using data from the period before the Great
Depression. For countries with sufficiently long time series, we use data up to October 1928,
one year before the Great Depression began in the United States. For the rest, we use data
up to October 1929. This ensures that we are making valid out-of-sample forecasts for the
period after the Great Depression. To achieve predictive stability, we make some judgement
calls that exclude variables especially susceptible to extreme swings or structural breaks.
Full details are given in Online Appendix A. As we will see below, the results are consistent
with the established narrative about how big depressions ended in well-studied countries.
This serves as a proof of concept for our empirical approach, validating our analysis of the
many countries whose interwar economic experiences have been relatively less studied.

      Forecasts from the dynamic factor model depend on the latent factors whose estimates
evolve as new information becomes available. Updates to the forecasts are driven by changes
in these estimates, which in turn depend on the amount of news in each new release and
the importance of that news to the variables of interest that are being forecasted. The
dynamic factor model methodology calculates these automatically, and allows us to track
how forecasts are updated as new information is released.



4       Dating departures from the gold standard

To explore whether or not leaving the gold standard helped boost inflationary expectations,
we need to know when countries left the gold standard. But what exactly does that mean?
Full adherence to the gold standard involved a domestic monetary rule (maintaining the
convertibility of local currency into gold at a fixed price); no exchange controls (so that, in
particular, gold could flow freely into and out of the country); and (as an automatic conse-
quence of the previous two commitments) a fixed exchange rate vis a
                                                                  ` vis other countries on
the gold standard. By implication, leaving the gold standard could involve an official sus-
 14
      Details available upon request.



                                              8
pension of convertibility; the imposition of exchange controls or restrictions on international
gold shipments; or depreciation or devaluation against either gold or other currencies on gold.
The League of Nations (1937) published data on all three dimensions of the phenomenon
which have been widely reproduced: Table I gives the League's data for countries we are in-
terested in. It also gives five sets of judgements regarding exactly when each country should
be regarded as having left the gold standard: the authors in question being Brown (1940);15
Kemmerer's (1954) testimony to the US Senate; Officer's (2008) widely-cited encyclopaedia
article on the gold standard; Obstfeld and Taylor (2003); and Wolf (2008).

      For our purpose the key issue is: what constituted a regime change sufficient that it would
change inflationary expectations? De jure suspension, or de facto devaluation, seem more
obvious candidates than exchange controls: countries could and often did impose exchange
controls while maintaining the link between the money supply and gold reserves. Indeed, one
motive for imposing exchange controls was precisely to prevent gold outflows that threatened
to destroy this link: it is not surprising, therefore, that Mitchener and Wandschneider (2015,
p. 189) find that "countries imposing exchange controls did not actively pursue expansionary
monetary policy after abandoning gold. An examination of discount rate policy of exchange-
control countries suggests that, while they did not follow France and continue to raise rates
after imposing controls, they also did not pursue a discount rate strategy similar to the U.S.,
a country which floated and then aggressively pursued expansionary monetary policy."


                                      TABLE I ABOUT HERE


      Similarly, in discussing Germany's decision to impose foreign exchange controls in July
1931, Knut Borchardt (1984, p. 475) writes that "If one regards the guarantee of convertibility
for capital transactions as an essential feature of the gold standard, then Germany left the
gold standard in July 1931. On the other hand, for contemporaries we have to notice that
only leaving the parity against gold seemed to be the real breaking of the rules of the gold
standard. At least this is the way our sources regard it. Till long after July 1931, and thus
after the introduction of the "Devisenbewirtschaftung" the question was asked, whether
Germany would or should leave the gold standard. This could only mean leaving the parity
 15
      Brown relied on the September 1933 issue of the Bank of Nova Scotia's Monthly Review.

                                                    9
in favour of floating." For this reason, we privilege suspension or devaluation when timing
the departure of countries from the gold standard.

       Our task is straightforward when countries left the gold standard without imposing ex-
change controls, or when they imposed exchange controls at the same time, or after, deval-
uation or suspension. This is the case for Belgium, British India, Denmark, the Dutch East
Indies, Finland, France, Japan, the Netherlands, Peru, Sweden, Switzerland, and the UK.
For each of these 12 countries there is one unambiguous date of departure. Canada devalued
in September 1931 and officially suspended the following month: the Economist commented
that the latter decision was "simply the conferring of legal recognition to a previous fait
accompli ".16 South Africa was forced to suspend convertibility in December 1932 and the
following month the pound reached parity with sterling (Drummond, 1981, pp. 61-4, 95­6).
In both cases we take the earlier of the two months as the date of departure. The New
Zealand experience was more ambiguous, but Online Appendix C argues that its real depar-
ture from gold was unambiguously September 1931, when the UK left. These 15 countries
for whom there is one unambiguous departure date are collectively referred to as Group A.

       Four of our countries imposed exchange controls without ever formally abandoning the
gold standard or devaluing (Group B). Germany and Hungary both imposed exchange con-
trols in July 1931 but the official parities remained unchanged throughout our period (League
of Nations, 1937). Authors such as Bernanke and James (1991) and Obstfeld and Taylor
(2003) date these countries' abandonment of the gold standard to this moment, but it is
important to note that observers at the time, like Brown (1940), regarded these countries
as still being pegged to gold, and that efforts to reduce wages and prices in an attempt
to regain competitiveness continued in Germany after the imposition of exchange controls
(Brown, 1940, pp. 1214-5; Eichengreen and Temin, 2000, p. 203).17 In Bulgaria, the govern-
ment dismissed the possibility of going off gold, but was forced to impose exchange controls:
in October 1931 the Bulgarian National Bank was given a monopoly on all foreign exchange
transactions (Tooze and Ivanov, 2011, p. 41).18 Similarly, Lithuania imposed exchange con-
  16
    "Canada and Gold." Economist, 24 Oct. 1931, p. 752.
  17
    Obstfeld and Taylor follow Brown (1940, p. 1198) in choosing August 1931 for Hungary.
 18
    The League of Nations (1937) merely gives "1918" as the date of the imposition of exchange controls in
Bulgaria, which is not very informative. Both Kemmerer (1954) and Officer (2008) date Bulgaria's departure


                                                   10
trols in October 1935 while maintaining the link with gold (League of Nations, 1937).

   For the rest of our sample the abandonment of the gold standard took place in stages. A
third group of countries (Group C) first imposed exchange controls and then unambiguously
suspended convertibility, devalued or depreciated. Given our prioritization of devaluation or
suspension over exchange controls, Chile is taken to leave in April 1932 when it suspended
the gold standard rather than in July 1931 when it imposed exchange controls; Estonia is
taken to leave in June 1933 rather than November 1931; Poland is taken to leave in October
1936, when it devalued, rather than in April when it imposed exchange controls (Bernanke
and James, 1991, p. 37; Wolf, 2007); and Romania is taken to leave in July 1935, when it
devalued, rather than May 1932.19 In March 1933 the newly elected President Roosevelt
imposed restrictions on foreign exchange transactions and gold exports, but it was only the
following month that the dollar was devalued and, in the eyes of most commentators, taken
off gold (Eichengreen, 1992, pp. 328-32; League of Nations, 1937). Therefore, the US is taken
to leave in April 1933.

   Group D consists of countries where the timing of devaluation or suspension is ambiguous,
or where a country left the gold standard more than once. Argentina is a good example of
the latter. The Argentinian paper peso depreciated relative to gold in November 1929,
but at the time this was not perceived as a break with the gold standard: on December
14 the Economist was still describing the country's exchange rate system as being based
on gold.20 Three days later, however, the Casa de Conversi´
                                                          on, which was responsible for
converting paper currency into gold and vice versa, was unexpectedly closed: we follow
other scholars in dating Argentina's original departure to December 1929 (see for example
Smith, 1934, p. 433; Brown, 1940, p. 883; Eichengreen, 1992, p. 237). However, in December
1931 Argentina pegged its currency to the US dollar and French franc, both of which were
tied to gold. This in turn eventually led to a second suspension of the gold standard, in
November 1933 (when the currency was devalued and a bill was introduced in parliament
that would lead to the creation of a new central bank and a fiat money system: Brown,
from the gold standard to 1931.
   19
      In cases like Italy where suspension or devaluation preceded exchange controls we naturally take the
earlier date, but this involves less of a judgement call on our part.
   20
      "Finance and Banking." Argentine Supplement. Economist, 14 Dec. 1929, p. 7+.



                                                   11
1940, pp. 1168; Gerchunoff and Machinea, 2015). Table I thus lists two dates for Argentina:
December 1929 and November 1933. The table also lists two possible departure dates for
the five other countries in Group D (Australia, Austria, Brazil, Czechoslovakia and Italy):
interested readers are referred to Online Appendix C for a full discussion of each case.

    In summary, there are four categories of countries. First, there are 15 countries that
suspended the gold standard and/or devalued, unambiguously, at a clearly defined date, and
did so either without (or before) imposing capital controls (Group A). These are Belgium,
British India, Canada, Denmark, the Dutch Indies, Finland, France, Japan, the Netherlands,
New Zealand, Peru, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, and the UK. Second, there are the
four countries that imposed exchange controls but maintained the formal link with gold
(Bulgaria, Germany, Hungary and Lithuania) (Group B). Third, there are five countries
that first imposed exchange controls, and then broke the link with gold at clearly defined
dates: Chile, Estonia, Poland, Romania, and the USA (Group C). And finally there are six
countries (Argentina, Australia, Austria, Brazil, Czechoslovakia and Italy) that clearly left
the gold standard, but where the timing of the departure is ambiguous (Group D). In the
following section we look at movements in inflationary expectations and real interest rates
in each of these four groups.



5     Inflationary expectations and real interest rates by
      country group

This section traces the evolution of expected inflation and ex ante real interest rates after
countries left the gold standard. In visually inspecting the figures, we are implicitly assuming
that the decision to leave the gold standard was exogenous and unanticipated in each country.
We offer two defences of this approach, both drawn from Bernanke (1995). First, a country's
decision whether or not to leave the gold standard was heavily influenced by political factors
and beliefs that were already formed in the 1920s, with little weight placed on contemporary
macroeconomic conditions. Second, if there is an endogeneity bias it is likely to go against
us, by dampening rather than magnifying the reaction of expectations to leaving the gold


                                              12
standard. If departure was anticipated or endogenous to macroeconomic conditions then
expectations should have moved before the country actually left the gold standard, with
only a muted response on the date of departure.21

       Figure I plots expected inflation (the dash-dotted red line; on the right axis) and real
interest rates (the solid blue line; on the left axis) for each of the countries in Group A: these
all left the gold standard on clearly defined dates.22 The date of departure from the gold
standard is indicated in each case by a green vertical dotted line. While it is more difficult
to see for countries that left the gold standard in 1936 (i.e. the Dutch Indies, France, the
Netherlands, and Switzerland), which is when our data end, it seems clear that leaving
the gold standard was followed by an almost ubiquitous increase in expected inflation and
a decline in real interest rates. Indeed, in many countries ­ Belgium, Canada, Denmark,
the Dutch Indies, Finland, New Zealand, Peru, South Africa, and Switzerland ­ expected
inflation had actually been flat or declining, and real interest rates flat or rising, prior to
departure, so leaving gold coincided with a turning point in expectations. In the UK case
inflationary expectations were very volatile for some time following the departure from gold
(which makes the figure difficult to read) but they eventually increased; September 1931
was more clearly a turning point for UK real interest rates. Leaving gold was less obviously
a turning point for inflationary expectations in India, Japan, and Sweden, since they had
already been on an upward trajectory, but a priori that does not invalidate our argument
since other forces may have been at work in those countries raising inflationary expectations.


                                    FIGURE I ABOUT HERE


       Figure II plots inflationary expectations and real interest rates for the four countries in
Group B. Recall that these imposed exchange controls on well-defined dates (indicated by
black vertical dashed lines) but never formally suspended the link with gold. In Germany
real interest rates declined sharply after July 1931, but inflationary expectations remained
highly volatile thereafter: the accession of Hitler to power in January 1933 (indicated by the
cyan vertical dash-dotted line) seems to have been more important in permanently shifting
  21
    Similar reasoning underpins the analysis in Sargent (1982).
  22
    Only the expected inflation rate is available for Canada, for which we do not have suitable nominal
interest rate data. The same is true for Brazil, discussed later.

                                                  13
expectations. This is unsurprising. Eichengreen and Temin (2000, p. 205) comment that
"whatever else might be said about it, no one could mistake the rhetoric of the Nazis for
the rhetoric of the gold standard" and contemporaries took the same view. In 1932 the
Commercial Counsellor of the British Embassy in Berlin described the Nazis' programme as
"consisting chiefly of departure from the gold standard and ejection of all Jews": according
to Borchardt (1984, p. 497) sticking to gold was "understood as a kind of bulwark against
Hitler". In Bulgaria and Hungary inflationary expectations had already been on an upward
trajectory, and real interest rates on a downward trajectory, prior to the imposition of
exchange controls: if anything, the imposition of exchange controls in Hungary may have
temporarily arrested this process. In Lithuania inflationary expectations rose, and real
interest rates fell, following the imposition of capital controls in October 1935. Overall, it is
unclear that imposing exchange controls had the consistent positive impact on inflationary
expectations that seems to have been associated with devaluation or suspension.


                                 FIGURE II ABOUT HERE


   That impression is reinforced by Figure III, which considers those countries that first
imposed exchange controls and later devalued. Once again suspension or devaluation is
indicated by a vertical green dotted line, while exchange controls are indicated by the black
dashed line. In the US case it is difficult to disentangle the two events since they occurred
in successive months: consistent with the argument of Temin and Wigmore inflationary
expectations clearly rose, and real interest rates fell, following this policy shift. Yield curve
evidence confirms this finding (see Online Appendix D). Perhaps capital controls coincided
with a turnaround in Chilean interest rates, and they did not interrupt declines in real interest
rates, and rises in inflationary expectations, underway in the other three countries, but Chile
aside there is no evidence of the systematic reversal of expectations evident in Figure I. There
does seem to have been a dramatic shift in expectations in Estonia following that country's
departure from gold, but in Poland, and to a lesser extent Romania, breaking the link
with gold seems to have had little or no impact: perhaps the signal provided by suspension
or devaluation was muted in countries that were already withdrawing from international
financial markets.

                                               14
                                   FIGURE III ABOUT HERE

       Finally, Figure IV gives the results for those countries where the timing of departure is
genuinely ambiguous (Table I). Once again capital controls are indicated by black dashed
lines, and candidate dates are indicated by green dotted lines. Other dates mentioned in the
text, or Online Appendix C, are plotted in cyan and magenta dash-dotted lines. In Argentina
the 1929 departure had no impact on expectations; the imposition of exchange controls in
October 1931, and the second departure in November 1933, clearly did. In Australia both
the devaluation of January 1931, and sterling's departure from gold in September 1931, were
followed by a rise in inflationary expectations and a decline in the real interest rate, but it
was the latter date that marked the real turning point, as in the case of New Zealand. In the
Austrian case there was a major reversal of expectations in December 1931, two months after
our first candidate departure date, and a second, smaller reversal in April 1933. October
1930, rather than December 1929, seems to have been the turning point in the Brazilian case.
Given that our data end in 1936, it is hard to see whether October 1936 was a real turning
point in Czechoslovakia, but in any event inflationary expectations rose after that date (and
continued to rise in February 1934). Non-Italian scholars rarely mention July 1935, but our
results suggest that this may have marked the real rupture with the gold standard in Italy.23

                                   FIGURE IV ABOUT HERE

       In summary, the impact of leaving the gold standard depended on how countries did
so. Where leaving gold involved devaluation or suspension, expected inflation rose and real
interest rates fell. But where it involved capital controls, there was no systematic effect on
either variable.



6        Cross-country comparisons

We now turn to a more systematic investigation of the links between departure from the
gold standard, real interests, and economic recovery. The aim in this section is to make
  23
    In July 1935 the 40% reserve requirement regarding paper money was abolished, allowing the government
to monetize a greater portion of its budget deficits. See the discussion in Online Appendix C.

                                                   15
cross-country comparisons that are as clean as possible, so we take a conservative approach
and only compare those countries that belong to our Group A, i.e. the countries that
unambiguously left the gold standard on a single clearly-defined date.

       Table II reports the change in the real interest rate after each of our Group A countries
left the gold standard.24 The first two column give the date at which they left and the
number of months subsequent to departure that real interest rates kept falling. We establish
the latter using a simplified version of the famous Bry-Boschan method (see Harding and
Pagan, 2002) to identify the first trough in the real interest rate subsequent to the country
in question leaving gold.25 Taking Belgium as an example, the algorithm identifies the first
post-departure real interest rate trough as occurring in May 1936 and we conclude that the
real interest rate was falling for 14 months after Belgium left the gold standard in March
1935. Subsequent columns report post-departure declines in the real interest rate, taking
the average rate in the three months prior to departure as a reference point. In the Belgian
case the reference point is thus the average real interest rate between December 1934 and
February 1935. The table shows that real interest rates fell in Belgium by 0.6 percentage
points between then and March 1935, by 7.5 percentage points within a quarter, by 10
percentage points within 6 months, and by 13.5 percentage points within a year. For Belgium
there is no information on the change in the real interest rate two years out because they left
the gold standard so late in the period for which we have data, but by the afore-mentioned
trough in May 1936 the real interest rate had declined by 14.5 percentage points.26


                                       TABLE II ABOUT HERE


       In most countries the real interest rate fell for several months after leaving the gold
standard, albeit with the duration and magnitude of the fall differing across countries. One
quarter out it had fallen in all but four of our 14 Group A countries, the exceptions being
  24
     The following discussion omits Canada, for whom we do not have nominal interest rate data.
  25
     As a consistency check, we verified that the results of the dating procedure align with the visual evidence
in Online Appendix B. For some countries it is not possible to identify the first trough because of missing
data: this is true of countries which left the gold standard very late in the decade (France, the Dutch Indies,
the Netherlands, and Switzerland).
  26
     For those countries for which we are unable to date the first trough, we report the change from the
three months before the gold standard suspension to the end of the sample period (Dutch Indies, France,
the Netherlands, and Switzerland).

                                                      16
British India, Denmark, Sweden, and the UK. It is striking that all four exceptions left
gold right at the start, in September 1931. Eichengreen (1992, p. 292-3) notes that the
early devaluers were reluctant to engage in expansionary open-market operations despite the
fact that they had quit gold: sterling area money supplies remained essentially unchanged
during 1932. In order to "release their golden fetters, it was necessary for policymakers
to abandon not only the gold standard's institutions but also the gold standard's ethos."
This monetary conservatism might help to explain sluggishly changing expectations; more
speculatively, agents may have been initially uncertain about the impact of leaving gold in
the first countries to attempt this.

   The stacked bar plot in Figure V decomposes the change in the real interest rate in the
final column of Table II into that part due to falling nominal interest rates, and that part
due to rising inflationary expectations. The countries are presented chronologically in order
of the date at which they left the gold standard, British India first and Switzerland last.
The green striped bars indicate the contribution from changes in the nominal interest rate,
positive for a rise and negative for a fall. The red filled bars show the contribution from
changes in expected inflation, positive for a fall and negative for a rise.


                                 FIGURE V ABOUT HERE


   The red filled bars dominate the green striped bars in Figure V. The evidence is thus
overwhelmingly in favour of falling real interest rates being driven more by rising inflationary
expectations than by falling nominal interest rates. Nominal interest rates did not fall
much after countries left the gold standard, and even rose in some countries. By contrast,
inflationary expectations increased everywhere, and by enough that the sum of the stacked
bars is always negative: the real interest rate fell in every country after leaving the gold
standard. There are only two countries for which real interest rates fell more because of falling
nominal rates than because of rising inflationary expectations: South Africa and British
India. Real interest rates on average fell by 8.5% in the period between the abandonment
of gold and the first subsequent real interest rate trough: 7.3% of this was due to rising
inflationary expectations.


                                               17
      Table III reports the change in real output and total trade after each of our Group A
countries left the gold standard.27 As can be seen, both variables rose strongly following the
abandonment of gold: on average output was 6.9% higher after one quarter, 12.3% higher
after six months, 6.0% higher after a year, and 21.3% higher after two years. Two years out
output had risen in all countries for which we have data. Total trade also rose strongly.


                                       TABLE III ABOUT HERE



7       Causality

The previous sections concluded that leaving the gold standard by devaluing or suspending
convertibility was accompanied by an increase in expected inflation, a reduction in the real
interest rate, and a recovery in real activity. Whilst indicative, the results so far do not
identify the causal effect of leaving, a shortcoming shared by much of the existing litera-
ture on the interwar gold standard. In this section we address causality via two different
but complementary approaches: instrumental variables (IV) regressions, and the synthetic
control matching methods of Abadie and Gardeazabal (2003) and Abadie et al. (2010).



7.1       IV regression

Did leaving the gold standard cause a fall in the real interest rate? Eichengreen and Sachs
(1985) argue that a country's allegiance to the gold standard in the 1930s was heavily influ-
enced by their experiences in the 1920s, a suggestion confirmed by Wandschneider (2008).
While a country's experience in the 1920s had a direct effect on the probability of leaving
the gold standard, it should have had no direct effect on what happened to the real interest
rate after leaving: economic conditions in the 1920s should thus be a valid instrument in an
IV regression (Eichengreen and Irwin, 2010).

      We estimate IV regressions for a sample of 12 European countries (Austria, Czechoslo-
vakia, Estonia, Italy, Poland, Romania, Belgium, Denmark, France, the Netherlands, Swe-
 27
      Missing countries in Table III are due to the lack of output data.


                                                      18
den, and the UK) for which we have sufficient data from the period in the 1920s before
they returned to gold.28 The dependent variable is the change in the average ex ante real
interest rate between 1930 and 1935; the independent variable is the average gold value of
the currency in 1935 relative to that in 1930, normalised to 100. As instruments, we use the
change in the average inflation and central bank discount rates that occurred in the 1920s,
between the year before a country returned to the gold standard and the year afterwards.
The idea is that countries which saw larger disinflation/deflation and financial easing after
returning to gold in 1920s would have been more reluctant to abandon gold in the 1930s.

       The results are shown in Table IV. The one-step 2SLS and iterated GMM IV estimates
indicate that devaluations in the exchange rate led to lower ex ante real interest rates in
the sample countries, and the coefficients are larger than the OLS estimate.29 A coefficient
of the order of 0.15 implies that a 30% depreciation on leaving the gold standard (which is
close to the average fall in the gold value of currencies that had left by 1935) lowered the ex
ante real interest rate by 0.15 × 30 = 4.5, i.e. 450 basis points. This is consistent with Table
II.


                                      TABLE IV ABOUT HERE



7.2       Five synthetic control matching counterfactuals

The synthetic control matching method divides countries into two groups, those in the treat-
ment group who receive the treatment and those in a control group who do not. Each country
in the treatment group is matched to a synthetic counterpart, constructed by taking a suit-
ably weighted average of the pool of countries in the control group. The weights are chosen
so that economic conditions in the synthetic counterpart reflect those in the treatment coun-
try as closely as possible in the period before it is treated. The behaviour of a country's
  28
     The dates on which countries returned to gold are taken from Bernanke and James (1991). The first
was Sweden in April 1924, the last was Romania which completed its return to gold in February 1929.
  29
     "Cause" in an IV sense. The Hausmann Test suggests that the OLS estimates are inconsistent against
2SLS. The Sargan Test for 2SLS does not reject the null that all instruments are valid, although it is unlikely
that there is conditional homoskedasticity in our cross-country panel. The J test does not reject the null
that the GMM model is valid.



                                                      19
synthetic counterpart in the period after treatment acts as our counterfactual.30

       In our case the treatment group is all the countries that had unambiguously left the gold
standard by December 1931 (Australia, British India, Bulgaria, Denmark, Finland, Japan,
New Zealand, Sweden and UK) and the control group is those countries that were still
unambiguously on the gold standard in the middle of 1932 (Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Dutch
Indies, France, Italy, Netherlands, Poland, Romania, Switzerland and US). The treatment
and control groups are drawn from countries in Group A and those countries in other groups
that, whilst not having one clearly-defined date on which they left the gold standard, were
unambiguously either early or late leavers. The economic conditions in the treated countries
that the synthetic counterparts are constructed to reproduce are population size, GDP per
capita in 1930, average inflation between January 1929 and August 1931, and the behaviour
of the ex ante real interest rate before the country left the gold standard.31 Minimising the
quadratic distance from these variables defines the weights with which control countries are
combined to produce the synthetic counterparts. The precise detail of how we apply the
synthetic control matching method is in Online Appendix C.

       The decision to restrict our analysis to countries that left the gold standard before De-
cember 1931 or after the middle of 1932 facilitates a clean dichotomy between the treatment
and control groups. It puts clear blue water between the departure dates of early and late
leavers, and is designed to minimise the likelihood that our estimates are contaminated by
anticipatory effects that might occur if the early departure of treatment group countries
raised expectations of control group countries also leaving the gold standard.32 We see no
  30
      The method is similar in spirit to Choudhri and Kochin (1980), whose comparative study of European
countries during the Great Depression uses Spain as a control because it did not return to the gold standard
after World War I. The synthetic control matching method is more general because it allows all untreated
countries to act as potential controls.
   31
      Data on population size and GDP per capita are taken from the Maddison Project Database at the
Groningen Growth and Development Centre: https://www.rug.nl/ggdc/historicaldevelopment/maddison/.
We obtain almost identical results using the Broadberry and Klein (2012) estimates of population size and
GDP per capita that account for changes in national boundaries in Europe.
   32
      Our decision to omit countries that left the gold standard after December 1931 but before the middle of
1932 can be interpreted as a crude implementation of the "donut" regression discontinuity design advocated
by Almond and Doyle (2011) and Barreca et al. (2011). They argue that observations close to the discon-
tinuity boundary should be discounted because they may have disproportionate effects on the regression
results. Our treatment and control group countries form a suitable donut, being neither too close to nor too
far from the assumed discontinuity.




                                                     20
evidence of such effects in our control group countries, which all maintained a strong commit-
ment to the gold standard until at least the end of 1932. In any event any anticipatory effect
would likely bias our estimates downwards, in the same way as would spillover or general
equilibrium effects, by understating the impact that leaving had on the treatment countries
relative to their synthetic counterparts.33

       The method produces satisfactory synthetic counterparts for Australia, Denmark, Fin-
land, New Zealand and Sweden. For other countries in the treatment group, there is no
weighted average of control group countries that comes close to reproducing the economic
conditions that prevailed before leaving the gold standard. Table V presents the weights
assigned to control countries when constructing the synthetic counterpart for real interest
rates in our five countries. Reading the second column, we see that Australia's synthetic
counterpart is a weighted average of Czechoslovakia, Netherlands, Poland, Romania and
Switzerland. The weight on all other control group countries is negligible.


                                      TABLE V ABOUT HERE


       The results are in Figure VI. In each case the blue solid line is for the country of interest
and the red dashed line is for its synthetic counterpart. Our success in constructing appro-
priate synthetic counterparts is apparent in the proximity of the blue and red lines in the
period before leaving the gold standard, which is marked as before with a green vertical dot-
ted line. The proximity of the solid blue and red dashed lines is by design: we relinquished
other countries in the treatment group precisely because we were unable to construct syn-
thetic counterparts that matched the behaviour of real interest rates before leaving. Our
counterfactuals begin after the green vertical line marking when the countries left the gold
standard. These tell a consistent story about what would have happened to real interest
rates and inflation if the five countries had not left the gold standard when they did.34 Real
interest rates would have remained elevated for at least 12 months and inflation would have
  33
     We also verified that our estimates are not overly influenced by observations in the periods immediately
preceding a country's departure from the gold standard. Details available on request.
  34
     The economic conditions in Australia and New Zealand before they left the gold standard differed from
those in the control countries to such an extent that it was not possible to construct satisfactory synthetic
counterparts for anything other than real interest rates.



                                                     21
picked up by less than it did. Leaving the gold standard caused a fall in real interest rates
and a turnaround in inflation in these countries.


                                 FIGURE VI ABOUT HERE



8     Conclusions

Fifteen of our thirty countries unambiguously left the gold standard by devaluing or suspend-
ing convertibility on clearly defined dates. Our results confirm that in all fifteen leaving gold
was associated with an increase in inflationary expectations and a decline in real interest
rates. Although the timing is less clear, leaving gold also seems to have had similar effects
in several other countries, including Argentina, Australia, Austria, Estonia, Italy, and the
United States ­ the country about which the argument was first made. In contrast, leaving
the gold standard by imposing exchange controls did not have a systematic impact on either
variable.

    Abandoning the institution that had helped to stabilize inflationary expectations in the
1920s was thus an important precursor to recovery in many countries in the 1930s. But
leaving the gold standard was not the only thing that countries did during this period, and
inflationary expectations may have increased for different reasons as well. In Germany, for
example, Hitler's ascension to power seems to have been the crucial watershed. We hope
that future research will deal more comprehensively with the causes and consequences of
such shifts in expectations during the 1930s.




                                                22
References
Abadie, A., Diamond, A. and Hainmueller, J. (2010). Synthetic Control Methods for Com-
      parative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California's Tobacco Control Program.
      Journal of the American Statistical Association, 105 (490), 493­505.
Abadie, A. and Gardeazabal, J. (2003). The Economic Costs of Conflict: A Case Study of
      the Basque Country. American Economic Review, 93 (1), 113­132.
Albers, T. N. H. (2018). The Prelude and Global Impact of the Great Depression: Evidence
      from a New Macroeconomic Dataset. Explorations in Economic History, 70 (100),
      150­163.
Almond, D. and Doyle, J. J. (2011). After Midnight: A Regression Discontinuity Design in
      Length of Postpartum Hospital Stays. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
      3 (3), 1­34.
Ba´
  nbura, M. and Modugno, M. (2014). Maximum Likelihood Estimation Of Factor Models
      On Datasets With Arbitrary Pattern Of Missing Data. Journal of Applied Economet-
      rics, 29 (1), 133­160.
Ba´
  nbura, M., Giannone, D. and Reichlin, L. (2010). Nowcasting (Working Papers ECARES
      No. 2010-021). Universite Libre de Bruxelles.
Barreca, A., Guldi, M., Lindo, J. and Waddell, G. R. (2011). Saving Babies? Revisiting the
      Effect of Very Low Birth Weight Classification. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
      126 (4), 2117­2123.
Bernanke, B. S. (1995). The Macroeconomics of the Great Depression: A Comparative Ap-
      proach. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 27 (1), 1­28.
Bernanke, B. S. and Carey, K. (1996). Nominal Wage Stickiness and Aggregate Supply in
      the Great Depression. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111 (3), 853­883.
Bernanke, B. S. and James, H. (1991). The Gold Standard, Deflation, and Financial Crisis
      in the Great Depression: An International Comparison. In R. G. Hubbard (Ed.),
      Financial markets and financial crises (pp. 33­68). University of Chicago Press.
Binder, C. C. (2016). Estimation of Historical Inflation Expectations. Explorations in Eco-
      nomic History, 61 (100), 1­31.



                                            23
Bok, B., Caratelli, D., Giannone, D., Sbordone, A. M. and Tambalotti, A. (2018). Macroe-
       conomic Nowcasting and Forecasting with Big Data. Annual Review of Economics,
       10 (1), 615­643.
Borchardt, K. (1984). Could and Should Germany Have Followed Great Britain in Leaving
       the Gold Standard? Journal of European Economic History, 13 (1), 471­497.
Broadberry, S. and Klein, A. (2012). Aggregate and Per Capita GDP in Europe, 1870­2000:
       Continental, Regional and National Data with Changing Boundaries. Scandinavian
       Economic History Review, 60 (1), 79­107.
Brown, W. A. J. (1940). The International Gold Standard Reinterpreted, 1914-1934. New
       York: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Camacho, M., Lovcha, Y. and Perez Quiros, G. (2015). Can We Use Seasonally Adjusted
       Variables in Dynamic Factor Models? Studies in Nonlinear Dynamics & Economet-
       rics, 19 (3), 377­391.
Campa, J. M. (1990). Exchange Rates and Economic Recovery in the 1930s: An Extension
       to Latin America. The Journal of Economic History, 50 (3), 677­682.
Cecchetti, S. G. (1992). Prices during the Great Depression: Was the Deflation of 1930-1932
       Really Unanticipated? American Economic Review, 82 (1), 141­156.
Choudhri, E. U. and Kochin, L. A. (1980). The Exchange Rate and the International Trans-
       mission of Business Cycle Disturbances: Some Evidence from the Great Depression.
       Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 12 (4), 565­574.
Chouliarakis, G. and Gwiazdowski, T. (2016). Regime Change and Recovery in 1930s Britain
       (Mimeo).
Crafts, N. (2013). Returning to Growth: Policy Lessons from History. Fiscal Studies, 34 (2),
       255­282.
Daniel, V. and Steege, L. T. (2020). Inflation Expectations and the Recovery from the Great
       Depression in Germany. Explorations in Economic History, 75.
Dominguez, K. M., Fair, R. C. and Shapiro, M. D. (1988). Forecasting the Depression:
       Harvard versus Yale. American Economic Review, 78 (4), 595­612.
Dorval, B. and Smith, G. W. (2015). Interwar Inflation, Unexpected Inflation, and Output
       Growth. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 47 (8), 1599­1615.


                                            24
Drummond, I. M. (1981). The Floating Pound and the Sterling Area. Cambridge University
       Press.
Eggertsson, G. B. (2008). Great Expectations and the End of the Depression. American
       Economic Review, 98 (4), 1476­1516.
Eichengreen, B. (1992). Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, 1919-
       1939. New York: Oxford University Press.
Eichengreen, B. and Irwin, D. (2010). The Slide to Protectionism in the Great Depression:
       Who Succumbed and Why? The Journal of Economic History, 70 (4), 871­897.
Eichengreen, B. and Sachs, J. (1985). Exchange Rates and Economic Recovery in the 1930s.
       The Journal of Economic History, 45 (4), 925­946.
Eichengreen, B. and Temin, P. (2000). The Gold Standard and the Great Depression. Con-
       temporary European History, 9 (2), 183­207.
Evans, M. and Wachtel, P. (1993). Were Price Changes During the Great Depression An-
       ticipated?: Evidence from Nominal Interest Rates. Journal of Monetary Economics,
       32 (1), 3­34.
Gerchunoff, P. and Machinea, J. L. (2015). Going through the Labyrinth: The Political
       Economy of Argentina's Abandonment of the Gold Standard (1929-1933). CEPAL
       Review, 117, 103­120.
Hamilton, J. D. (1992). Was the Deflation during the Great Depression Anticipated? Evi-
       dence from the Commodity Futures Market. American Economic Review, 82 (1), 157­
       178.
Hamilton, J. D., Harris, E. S., Hatzius, J. and West, K. D. (2016). The Equilibrium Real
       Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future. IMF Economic Review, 64 (4), 660­707.
Harding, D. and Pagan, A. (2002). Dissecting the Cycle: A Methodological Investigation.
       Journal of Monetary Economics, 49 (2), 365­381.
Jalil, A. J. and Rua, G. (2016). Inflation Expectations and Recovery in Spring 1933. Explo-
       rations in Economic History, 62 (100), 26­50.
Kemmerer, D. L. (1954). Statement. Hearings on the Gold Reserve Act Amendments, U.S.
       Senate 83rd Congress, Second Session, 293­302.




                                             25
Klug, A., Landon-Lane, J. S. and White, E. N. (2005). How Could Everyone Have Been
       So Wrong? Forecasting the Great Depression with the Railroads. Explorations in
       Economic History, 42 (1), 27­55.
League of Nations, Economic Intelligence Service. (1937). World Economic, Survey. Sixth
       Year. 1936/37. Geneva: League of Nations.
Mishkin, F. S. (1981). The Real Interest Rate: An Empirical Investigation. Carnegie-Rochester
       Conference Series on Public Policy, 15 (1), 151­200.
Mitchener, K. J. and Wandschneider, K. (2015). Capital Controls and Recovery from the
       Financial Crisis of the 1930s. Journal of International Economics, 95 (2), 188­201.
Obstfeld, M. and Taylor, A. M. (2003). Sovereign risk, credibility and the gold standard:
       1870­1913 versus 1925­31. The Economic Journal, 113 (487), 241­275.
Obstfeld, M. and Taylor, A. M. (2004). Global Capital Markets: Integration, Crisis, and
       Growth. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Officer, L. H. (2008). Gold Standard [https://eh.net/encyclopedia/gold-standard/]. In W.
       R. (Ed.), EH.Net Encyclopedia.
Ritschl, A., Sarferaz, S. and Uebele, M. (2016). The U.S. Business Cycle, 1867-2006: A
       Dynamic Factor Approach. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 98 (1), 159­172.
Romer, C. D. (1992). What Ended the Great Depression? The Journal of Economic History,
       52 (4), 757­784.
Romer, C. D. (2014). It Takes a Regime Shift: Recent Developments in Japanese Monetary
       Policy through the Lens of the Great Depression. NBER Macroeconomics Annual,
       28 (1), 383­400.
Romer, C. D. and Romer, D. H. (2013). The Missing Transmission Mechanism in the Mon-
       etary Explanation of the Great Depression. American Economic Review, 103 (3), 66­
       72.
Saleuddin, R. and Coffman, D. (2018). Can Inflation Expectations Be Measured Using Com-
       modity Futures Prices? Structural Change and Economic Dynamics, 45 (100), 37­48.
Sargent, T. J. (1982). The Ends of Four Big Inflations. In R. Hall (Ed.), Inflation: Causes
       and Effects (pp. 41­98). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.




                                             26
Shibamoto, M. and Shizume, M. (2014). Exchange Rate Adjustment, Monetary Policy and
      Fiscal Stimulus in Japan's Escape from the Great Depression. Explorations in Eco-
      nomic History, 53 (100), 1­18.
Smith, L. (1934). The Suspension of the Gold Standard in Raw Material Exporting Countries.
      The American Economic Review, 24 (3), 430­449.
Temin, P. (1989). Lessons from the Great Depression. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Temin, P. and Wigmore, B. A. (1990). The End of One Big Deflation. Explorations in
      Economic History, 27 (4), 483­502.
Tooze, A. and Ivanov, M. (2011). Disciplining the `Black Sheep of the Balkans': Financial
      Supervision and Sovereignty in Bulgaria, 1902-38. The Economic History Review,
      64 (1), 30­51.
Voth, H.-J. (1999). Inflationary Expectations and Uncertainty during the Great Depression
      in Germany (mimeo).
Wandschneider, K. (2008). The Stability of the Interwar Gold Exchange Standard: Did
      Politics Matter? The Journal of Economic History, 68 (1), 151­181.
Wolf, N. (2007). Should I Stay or Should I Go? Understanding Poland's Adherence to Gold,
      1928-19361. Historical Social Research / Historische Sozialforschung, 32, 351­368.
Wolf, N. (2008). Scylla and Charybdis. Explaining Europe's Exit from Gold, January 1928­De-
      cember 1936. Explorations in Economic History, 45 (4), 383­401.




                                           27
                            League of Nations (1937)                  Brown Kemmerer Officer OT Wolf               Our coding
                                      Depreciation
                   Official                 or       Introduction
                            Exchange                                                                               Departure Exchange
Country          suspension            devaluation of a new gold          Departure from gold              Group
                             control                                                                               from gold control
                   of gold            in relation to    parity
                                           gold
                                                                                                                   Dec-29 &
Argentina          Dec-29    Oct-31      Nov-29                     Nov-29 1929 1929 Dec-29                 D
                                                                                                                    Nov-33
                                                                                                                   Jan-31 &
Australia          Dec-29                Mar-30                     Mar-30 1929 1930 Jan-30                 D
                                                                                                                    Sep-31
                                        Sep-31 &                                                                   Oct-31 &
Austria            Apr-33    Oct-31                    Apr-34       Oct-31 1931 1931 Oct-31 Sep-31          D
                                         Apr-34                                                                     Apr-33
                            Mar-35 &
Belgium            Mar-35                Mar-35        Mar-35              1935 1935 Mar-35                 A       Mar-35
                             Apr-35
                                                                                                                   Dec-29 &
Brazil                       May-31      Dec-29        Dec-29       Dec-29 1930 1929 Dec-29                 D
                                                                                                                    Oct-30
British India      Sep-31                Sep-31                     Sep-31 1931   1931 Sep-31               A       Sep-31
Bulgaria                      1918                                         1931   1931                      B        N/A        Oct-31
Canada             Oct-31                Sep-31                     Sep-31 1931   1931 Jul-31               A       Sep-31
Chile              Apr-31    Jul-31      Apr-32                     Apr-32 1932   1931 Jul-31               C       Apr-32
                                        Feb-34 &      Feb-34 &                                                     Feb-34 &
Czechoslovakia               Oct-31                                        1931 1931              Sep-31    D
                                         Oct-36        Oct-36                                                       Oct-36
Denmark            Sep-31    Nov-31      Sep-31                     Sep-31 1931   1931   Sep-31             A       Sep-31
Dutch Indies       Sep-36                Sep-36                            1936   1936                      A       Sep-36
Estonia            Jun-33    Nov-31      Jun-33                            1931   1931                      C       Jun-33
Finland            Oct-31                Oct-31                     Oct-31 1931   1931   Oct-31             A       Oct-31
France                                   Sep-36        Oct-36              1936   1936   Sep-36 Sep-36      A       Sep-36
Germany                      Jul-31                                        1931   1931   Jul-31 Jul-31      B        N/A        Jul-31
Hungary                      Jul-31                                        1931   1931   Aug-31 Jul-31      B        N/A        Jul-31
                                        Mar-34 &                                                                   Jul-35 &
Italy                        May-34                    Oct-36              1934 1934 Dec-34 May-34          D
                                         Oct-36                                                                     Oct-36
Japan              Dec-31    Jul-32      Dec-31                     Dec-31 1931 1931 Dec-31                 A       Dec-31
Lithuania                    Oct-35                                                                         B        N/A        Oct-35
Netherlands        Sep-36                Sep-36                            1936   1936                      A       Sep-36
New Zealand        Sep-31                Apr-30                     Apr-30 1931   1930 Apr-30               A       Sep-31
Peru               May-32                May-32                     May-32 1932   1932                      A       May-32
Poland                       Apr-36                                        1936   1936        Apr-36        C       Oct-36
Romania                      May-32      Jul-35                            1932   1932                      C       Jul-35
South Africa       Dec-32                Jan-33                     Jan-33 1931   1933 Jan-33               A       Dec-32
Sweden             Sep-31                Sep-31                     Sep-31 1931   1931 Sep-31 Sep-31        A       Sep-31
Switzerland                              Sep-36        Sep-36              1936   1936                      A       Sep-36
UK                 Sep-31                Sep-31                     Sep-31 1931   1931                      A       Sep-31
                            Mar-33 &
US                 Apr-33                Apr-33        Jan-34       Apr-33 1933 1933 Apr-33                 C       Apr-33
                             Nov-34

                Table I: Dates of principal measures affecting adherence to gold standard


Sources: League of Nations (1937, p. 16), Brown (1940, p. 1075), Kemmerer (1954), Officer (2008), Obstfeld
and Taylor (2003), Wolf (2008). For our coding, see text.




                                                             28
                                                                  Cumulative change in
                                                           real interest rate upon or after

Country             Departure      Time to     departure      one         two          one    trough
                    from gold      trough                   quarter     quarters       year
                    standard       (in
                                   months)

Belgium             Mar-35         14          -0.6         -7.5        -10.0      -13.5      -14.5
British India       Sep-31         10          1.2          1.2         -1.8       -1.1       -3.0
Denmark             Sep-31         43          2.4          1.9         -1.0       -4.4       -12.5
Dutch Indies        Sep-36         -           -0.2         -0.9        -          -          -0.9
Finland             Oct-31         13          3.1          -1.1        -6.5       -7.5       -8.8
France              Sep-36         -           -13.7        -18.5       -          -          -18.5
Japan               Dec-31         21          0.5          -3.1        -2.7       -11.2      -16.0
Netherlands         Sep-36         -           -3.4         -7.6        -          -          -7.6
New Zealand         Sep-31         35          0.0          -1.9        -2.1       -4.2       -8.3
Peru                May-32         13          -0.6         -1.3        -1.5       -2.3       -2.7
South Africa        Dec-32         15          -0.3         -1.3        -1.8       -2.5       -3.1
Sweden              Sep-31         14          0.9          1.5         -1.2       -5.8       -9.6
Switzerland         Sep-36         -           0.4          -2.8        -          -          -2.8
UK                  Sep-31         33          -1.2         1.0         5.4        1.7        -6.5

Average             -              21.1        -0.8         -2.9        -2.3       -5.1       -8.2

              Table II: Change in real interest rate after leaving the gold standard


Source: see text.




                                                29
                                                           Cumulative change in                                     Cumulative change in
                                                          real output upon or after                               total trade upon or after

     Country             Departure from   departure     one           two          one         two    departure     one       two          one         two
                         gold standard                quarter       quarters       year       years               quarter   quarters       year       years

     Belgium             Mar-35           0.5         5.1          10.0        21.5       -           2.5         29.1      26.8       56.5       -
     British India       Sep-31           -           -            -           -          -           -7.9        7.4       2.8        3.2        -13.5
     Canada              Sep-31           4.2         -8.8         -11.8       -17.5      3.4         -7.4        -4.7      -0.1       -19.3      1.8
     Denmark             Sep-31           -           -            -           -          -           2.8         5.5       -12.9      -14.1      6.9
     Dutch Indies        Sep-36           4.7         -1.1         -           -          -           7.2         56.3      -          -          -
     Finland             Oct-31           -4.4        17.6         25.3        15.4       33.0        -2.9        -42.8     -33.2      12.4       25.2
     France              Sep-36           -3.1        2.0          -           -          -           3.4         57.6      -          -          -




30
     Japan               Dec-31           3.9         -2.3         -1.0        8.0        15.7        10.7        53.0      23.7       88.8       103.4
     Netherlands         Sep-36           6.6         6.9          -           -          -           11.3        40.2      -          -          -
     New Zealand         Sep-31           -           -            -           -          -           -9.0        23.9      35.1       -7.5       13.4
     Peru                May-32           -           -            -           -          -           -6.5        33.4      18.8       49.2       121.8
     South Africa        Dec-32           1.2         9.1          25.7        10.8       31.5        -7.3        53.3      32.7       45.4       55.1
     Sweden              Sep-31           28.9        19.0         39.2        7.0        38.2        4.8         16.7      -31.9      -14.3      -0.8
     Switzerland         Sep-36           12.1        32.0         -           -          -           8.2         72.2      -          -          -
     UK                  Sep-31           -3.8        -3.3         -1.5        -3.3       5.7         -0.7        0.3       -13.1      -18.2      -8.4
     Average             -                4.6         6.9          12.3        6.0        21.3        0.6         26.8      4.4        16.6       30.5

                   Table III: Changes in real output and total trade (exports plus imports) after leaving the gold standard


     Source: see text.
                             OLS            2SLS           GMM
        Constant             -12.002 ***    -19.951 **     -18.427 **
                             (-3.490)       (-2.539)       (-3.045)
        Exchange Rate        0.074 *        0.174 *        0.152 **
                             (1.860)        (1.842)        (2.131)
        R2                   0.240          0.239          J test: p = 0.428
        N                    12             12             12
         *** p   0.01,   ** 0.01   <p   0.05, * 0.05 < p   0.1
         t-statics are in parentheses. Robust standard errors are used.

                 Table IV: Instrumental variables regressions


Note: The dependent variable is the change in the ex ante real interest rate (1930 to
1935). 2SLS and GMM use the change in average inflation and central bank discount
rates after returning to the gold standard in 1920s as instruments for the change in
exchange rate (1930 to 1935). Iterated GMM is used.




                                            31
                    Australia   Denmark      Finland   New Zealand   Sweden

  Belgium                                    0.096
  Czechoslovakia    0.077                    0.242     0.255         0.025
  Italy                                      0.338     0.217
  Netherlands       0.083       0.101        0.016                   0.932
  Poland            0.278
  Romania           0.134       0.327        0.111     0.086         0.043
  Switzerland       0.428       0.572        0.197     0.441

Table V: Weights used to construct synthetic counterparts for real interest
rates


Source: see text.




                                        32
Figure I: Real interest rates (solid blue) and expected inflation (dash-dotted red), Group A
                                            33
Figure II: Real interest rates (solid blue) and expected inflation (dash-dotted red), Group B
Source : see text.




                                             34
Figure III: Real interest rates (solid blue) and expected inflation (dash-dotted red), Group
C
Source : see text.




                                            35
Figure IV: Real interest rates (solid blue) and expected inflation (dash-dotted red), Group
D
Source : see text.




                                            36
    Figure V: Decomposition of fall in real interest rate after leaving the gold standard
Note : countries are arranged left to right in order of the date they left the gold standard
(British India first, Switzerland last).
Source: see text.




                                              37
Figure VI: Actual and counterfactual (synthetic) real interest rates and inflation in five early
leavers
Source: see text.




                                              38
Online Appendices

A     Model specifications and data sources
This appendix contains model specifications and data sources for our sample countries. The
data sources are labelled as follows:


    Source                                          Editors
    FRB      Federal Reserve Bulletin (FRASER)
    IA       International Abstract of Economic     Edited by J. Tinbergen (Volume 1) and
             Statistics (Two Volumes)               J.B.D. Derksen (Volume 2)
    SHW      Statistisches Handbuch Der
             Weltwirtschaft (Two Volumes)
    NBER     NBER Macrohistory Database


    The table below, which largely follows Bok et al.'s specification for the New York Fed
nowcasting model, shows how variables under each category are assigned to the latent factors
in our dynamic factor models:



 Category                                Global       Real          Financial    Labour
                                         Factor       Factor        Factor       Factor
 Housing and Construction                x            x
 International Trade                     x            x
 Labour                                  x                                       x
 Money, Banking, and Finance             x                          x
 Prices                                  x
 Production                              x            x
 Retail and Consumption                  x            x
 Transport                               x            x


    As discussed in Section 3, for countries which lack suitable labour data, we use the
dynamic factor model without the labour factor block. In this case, available labour variables
are assumed to be driven by the global and real factors whenever possible.
    In what follows, we provide information about the model specification and the data
sources as well as the sample period used for estimation of the model parameters for each
country studied in the paper. We also include the release delay convention for each variable
included in the model as discussed in Section 3.



                                             39
A.1    Argentina (Estimation sample 1925:01-1929:10)

                                                                                 Release Delay
Series Name                                  Category                                            Source
                                                                                 (in Month)
Building Permits (in Buenos Aires)           Housing and Construction                  2         SHW
Total Exports                                International Trade                       3         SHW
Total Imports                                International Trade                       3         SHW
All Banks - Advances                         Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
All Banks - Balances of Receivables and      Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
  Liabilities vis-a-vis Foreign Countries
All Banks - Deposits                         Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
All Banks - Bills of Exchange                Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
All Banks - Savings                          Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
All Banks - Securities                       Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Banco de la Nacion - Bills of Exchange and   Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
  Advances
Banco de la Nacion - Deposits                Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Notes in Circulation                         Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Gold Stock                                   Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Clearings                                    Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Gold Value of the Currency                   Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Bank Discount Rate of Banco de la Nacion     Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
  (Promissory Notes)
Stock Exchange - Share Turnover              Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Stock Exchange - Turnover of Fixed-income    Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
  Securities
Bankruptcies                                 Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Total                Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Agricultural and     Prices                                    2         SHW
  Forestry Products
Wholesale Price Index - Non-agricultural     Prices                                    2         SHW
  Products
Wholesale Price Index - Skins                Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Wool                 Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Meat                 Prices                                    2         SHW
Cattle Slaughtering                          Production                                3         SHW
Turnover of Land Sales (in Buenos Aires)     Retail and Consumption                    2         SHW
Turnover in Department Stores (in Buenos     Retail and Consumption                    2         SHW
  Aires)
Railways - Freights Carried                  Transport                                 2         SHW




                                                 40
A.2    Australia (Estimation sample 1925:01-1929:10)

                                                                                 Release Delay
Series Name                                  Category                                            Source
                                                                                 (in Month)
Construction Activity in Sydney (Without     Housing and Construction                  2         SHW
  City) - Approved Buildings
Total Exports                                International Trade                       3         SHW
Total Imports                                International Trade                       3         SHW
Unemployed Union Members - Number            Labour                                    3         SHW
Unemployed Union Members - Percent           Labour                                    3         SHW
Weekly Average Wages (in 12 Industries)      Labour                                    2         SHW
Commonwealth Bank of Australia - Notes       Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
  in Circulation
Commonwealth Bank of Australia - Gold        Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Commonwealth Bank of Australia -             Money, Banking, and Finance               0         SHW
  Discount Rate
Gold Value of the Currency                   Money, Banking, and Finance               0         SHW
Clearings                                    Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Cost of Living - Total                       Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Total                Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Agricultural         Prices                                    2         SHW
  Products
Wholesale Price Index - Dairy Products       Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Meat                 Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Wool                 Prices                                    2         SHW
Butter Production                            Production                                3         SHW
Observable Wheat Stocks                      Production                                3         SHW
Maritime Shipping - Inbound Traffic          Transport                                 2         SHW
State Railways - Freights Carried            Transport                                 2         SHW



A.3    Austria (Estimation sample 1919:01-1928:10)

                                                                                 Release Delay
Series Name                                  Category                                            Source
                                                                                 (in Month)
Total Exports                                International Trade                       3         SHW
Total Imports                                International Trade                       3         SHW
Unemployed - Registered                      Labour                                    3         SHW
Number of Unemployed Relieved - Austria      Labour                                    3         IA
Labour Exchange - Vacancies Filled           Labour                                    3         IA
Austrian National Bank - Notes in            Money, Banking, and Finance               2         IA
  Circulation and Demand Deposits
Austrian National Bank - Foreign Exchange    Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         IA
Austrian National Bank - Gold                Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Gold Value of the Currency                   Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Austrian National Bank - Official Discount   Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         IA
  Rate
Monthly Money Rate                           Money, Banking, and Finance               0         SHW
Stock Exchange - Stock Prices                Money, Banking, and Finance               0         SHW

                                                41
Stock Exchange - Total Value of Turnover     Money, Banking, and Finance               2         IA
Payment Difficulties - Initiated             Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
  Compensation Procedures
Payment Difficulties - Opened Bankruptcies   Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Cost of Living - Total (Vienna)              Prices                                    2         SHW
Retail Prices - Total                        Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Total                Prices                                    2         IA
Wholesale Price Index - Food                 Prices                                    2         IA
Wholesale Price Index - Industrial Goods     Prices                                    2         IA
Order Backlog - Cotton-spinning Mills        Retail and Consumption                    2         SHW
Order Backlog - Iron Industry                Retail and Consumption                    2         SHW
Turnovers - Production Goods                 Retail and Consumption                    2         SHW
Turnovers - Consumption Goods                Retail and Consumption                    2         SHW
Index of General Business                    Production                                3         SHW
Production - Crude Steel                     Production                                3         NAI
Production - Electricity                     Production                                3         SHW
Production - Coal                            Production                                3         IA
Railways - Freight Car Provision             Transport                                 2         SHW



A.4    Belgium (Estimation sample 1919:01-1928:10)

                                                                                 Release Delay
Series Name                                  Category                                            Source
                                                                                 (in Month)
Exports Value                                International Trade                       3         IA
Imports Value                                International Trade                       3         IA
Wholly Unemployed                            Labour                                    3         IA
Unemployment on Part Time                    Labour                                    3         IA
Days Lost by Insured Workers                 Labour                                    3         IA
Proportion of Applicants to Vacancies        Labour                                    3         IA
Gold Value of the Currency                   Money, Banking, and       Finance         0         SHW
CGER Savings                                 Money, Banking, and       Finance         2         SHW
National Bank of Belgium - Discount Rate     Money, Banking, and       Finance         0         SHW
Call Money Rate                              Money, Banking, and       Finance         0         SHW
Private Discount Rate (Commercial Paper)     Money, Banking, and       Finance         0         IA
Issues - Shares of Belgian Stock Companies   Money, Banking, and       Finance         2         SHW
National Bank of Belgium - Advances to       Money, Banking, and       Finance         2         SHW
   the State
National Bank of Belgium - Notes in          Money, Banking, and Finance               2         IA
   Circulation
National Bank of Belgium - Gold              Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         IA
Mortgages Registered                         Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         IA
Postal Cheques Total Turnover                Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         IA
Stock Exchange - Share Prices                Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Bankruptcies                                 Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Unpaid Bills of Exchange                     Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Cost of Living - Total                       Prices                                    2         IA
Cost of Living - Food                        Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Total                Prices                                    2         IA

                                                42
Retail Prices - Total                       Prices                                    2         IA
Sensitive Goods Price Index                 Prices                                    2         SHW
Tax Receipts Total                          Retail and Consumption                    2         IA
Production - Total                          Production                                3         SHW
Railways - Freights Carried                 Transport                                 2         SHW



A.5    Brazil (Estimation sample 1925:01-1929:10)

                                                                                Release Delay
Series Name                                 Category                                            Source
                                                                                (in Month)
Total Exports                               International Trade                       3         SHW
Total Imports                               International Trade                       3         SHW
Banco do Brasil - Advances                  Money, Banking, and       Finance         2         SHW
Banco do Brasil - Deposits                  Money, Banking, and       Finance         2         SHW
Banco do Brasil - Bills of Exchange         Money, Banking, and       Finance         2         SHW
Banco do Brasil - Foreign Exchange          Money, Banking, and       Finance         2         SHW
Banco do Brasil - Stabilization Fund        Money, Banking, and       Finance         2         SHW
Gold Value of the Currency                  Money, Banking, and       Finance         0         SHW
Notes in Circulation                        Money, Banking, and       Finance         2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Coffee (in New      Prices                                    2         SHW
  York)



A.6    British India (Estimation sample 1925:01-1929:10)

                                                                                Release Delay
Series Name                                 Category                                            Source
                                                                                (in Month)
Total Exports                               International Trade                       3         SHW
Total Imports                               International Trade                       3         SHW
Gold Value of the Currency                  Money, Banking, and Finance               0         SHW
Bonds of British Government, Colonies,      Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
   Etc.
Gold Stock                                  Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Notes in Circulation                        Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Central Bank of India - Discount Rate       Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Issues - Securities                         Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Stock Exchange - Value of Five Indian       Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
   Railway Bonds (in London)
Cost of Living - Total (in Bombay)          Prices                                    2         SHW
Cost of Living - Clothing (in Bombay)       Prices                                    2         SHW
Cost of Living - Food (in Bombay)           Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Total (in Bombay)   Prices                                    2         SHW
Production - Cotton Fabrics                 Production                                3         SHW
Production - Cotton Yarn                    Production                                3         SHW
Sea Freight Index                           Transport                                 2         SHW




                                               43
A.7    Bulgaria (Estimation Sample: 1925:01-1929:10)

                                                                          Release Delay
Series Name                             Category                                          Source
                                                                          (in Month)
Total Exports                           International Trade                     3         SHW
Total Imports                           International Trade                     3         SHW
Employed Workers and Employees          Labour                                  3         SHW
Bulgarian National Bank - Notes in      Money, Banking, and Finance             2         SHW
  Circulation
Bulgarian National Bank - Bills of      Money, Banking, and Finance             2         SHW
  Exchange and Advances
Bulgarian National Bank - Deposits      Money, Banking, and Finance             2         SHW
Bulgarian National Bank - Foreign       Money, Banking, and Finance             2         SHW
  Exchange
Bulgarian National Bank - Gold          Money, Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Average Market Discount Rate            Money, Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Gold Value of the Currency              Money, Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Clearings                               Money, Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Protested Bills of Exchange             Money, Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Cost of Living - Total                  Prices                                  2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Total           Prices                                  2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Corn            Prices                                  2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Wheat           Prices                                  2         SHW
Production - Coal                       Production                              3         SHW
Shipping - Inbound                      Transport                               2         SHW



A.8    Canada (Estimation Sample: 1919:01-1928:10)

                                                                          Release Delay
Series Name                             Category                                          Source
                                                                          (in Month)
Construction Contracts Awarded          Housing and Construction                2         IA
Building Permits                        Housing and Construction                2         IA
Production - Construction Industry      Housing and Construction                2         SHW
Total Exports                           International Trade                     3         IA
Total Imports                           International Trade                     3         IA
Index of Employment                     Labour                                  3         IA
Unemployment in Trade Unions            Labour                                  3         IA
Employment - Applications               Labour                                  3         IA
Employment - Placements                 Labour                                  3         IA
Employment - Vacancies                  Labour                                  3         IA
Strikes - Days Lost                     Labour                                  3         IA
Strikes - Disputes in Existence         Labour                                  3         IA
Strikes - Number of Employees           Labour                                  3         IA
Bank Debits                             Money, Banking, and Finance             2         IA
Chartered Banks - Commercial Loans      Money, Banking, and Finance             2         IA
Chartered Banks - Call Loans - Canada   Money, Banking, and Finance             2         IA


                                           44
Chartered Banks - Call Loans - Elsewhere     Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         IA
Chartered Banks - Short-term Deposits        Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         IA
Chartered Banks - Long-term Deposits         Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         IA
Chartered Banks - Total Securities           Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         IA
Gold Value of the Currency                   Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Clearings                                    Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Notes in Circulation                         Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Stock Exchange - Number of Shares Sold       Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         IA
Stock Exchange - Share Prices - Common       Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         IA
  Stocks
Stock Exchange - Share Prices - Preferred    Money, Banking, and Finance               0         IA
  Stocks
Stock Exchange - Share Prices - Banking      Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         IA
Stock Exchange - Share Prices - Industrial   Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         IA
Stock Exchange - Share Prices - Mining       Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Stock Exchange - Share Prices - Iron and     Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         IA
  Steel
Stock Exchange - Share Prices - Utilities    Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         IA
Stock Exchange - Share Turnover              Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Bankruptcies - Number                        Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         IA
Bankruptcies - Liabilities                   Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         IA
Retail Cost Per Week of Family Budget -      Prices                                    2         IA
  Cost of Living
Wholesale Price Index - Total                Prices                                    2         IA
Wholesale Price Index - Raw Materials        Prices                                    2         IA
Wholesale Price Index - Finished Goods       Prices                                    2         IA
Wholesale Price Index - Non-ferrous Metals   Prices                                    2         IA
Wholesale Price Index - Food and Tobacco     Prices                                    2         IA
Sales of Agricultural Products - Cattle      Retail and Consumption                    2         SHW
Sales of Agricultural Products - Grain       Retail and Consumption                    2         SHW
Production - Total                           Production                                3         SHW
Production - Steel Ingots and Castings       Production                                3         IA
Production - Newsprint                       Production                                3         IA
Production - Pig Iron                        Production                                3         IA
Production - Coal                            Production                                3         IA
Railways - Car Loadings                      Transport                                 2         IA
Railways - Freight Ton Miles                 Transport                                 2         IA
Railways - Operating Revenues                Transport                                 2         IA



A.9    Chile (Estimation Sample: 1925:01-1929:10)

                                                                                 Release Delay
Series Name                                  Category                                            Source
                                                                                 (in Month)
Construction Activity - Building Permits     Housing and Construction                  2         SHW
Total Exports                                International Trade                       3         SHW
Total Imports                                International Trade                       3         SHW
Employed Workers in Copper Mining            Labour                                    3         SHW
Average Daily Wage                           Labour                                    2         SHW


                                                45
Central Bank - Credit Abroad                 Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Central Bank - Notes in Circulation          Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Central Bank - Deposits                      Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Central Bank - Gold                          Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Central Bank - Rediscounts of Credit Banks   Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Central Bank - Discount Rate                 Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Credit Banks - Bills of Exchange and         Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
  Advances
Credit Banks - Deposits                      Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Gold Value of the Currency                   Money, Banking, and Finance               0         SHW
Stock Exchange - Mortgage Pfandbriefe        Money, Banking, and Finance               0         SHW
  Rate
Stock Exchange - Share Prices                Money, Banking, and Finance               0         SHW
Protested Bills of Exchange                  Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Copper,              Prices                                    2         SHW
  Electrolytes (in New York)
Production - Copper                          Production                                3         SHW
Department Store Sales (in Santiago)         Retail and Consumption                    2         SHW
Maritime Shipping                            Transport                                 2         SHW
Railways - Freights Carried                  Transport                                 2         SHW



A.10     Czechoslovakia (Estimation Sample: 1919:01-1928:10)

                                                                                 Release Delay
Series Name                                  Category                                            Source
                                                                                 (in Month)
Total Exports                                International Trade                       3         IA
Total Imports                                International Trade                       3         IA
Average Hourly Wage Rates of Industry        Labour                                    2         SHW
Unemployed Jobseekers                        Labour                                    3         SHW
Czechoslovak National Bank - Notes in        Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
  Circulation
Czechoslovak National Bank - Deposits        Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Czechoslovak National Bank - Gold            Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Czechoslovak National Bank - Official        Money, Banking, and Finance               0         IA
  Discount Rate
Market Discount Rate                         Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Clearings                                    Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Giro Turnover                                Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Turnover of the Postal Savings Bank          Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         IA +
                                                                                                 SHW
Stock Exchange - Bond Prices                 Money, Banking, and Finance               0         SHW
Stock Exchange - Share Prices - Industrial   Money, Banking, and Finance               0         SHW
  and Transportation
Liquidations                                 Money, Banking, and Finance               2         IA
Bankruptcies                                 Money, Banking, and Finance               2         IA
Wholesale Price Index - Total                Prices                                    2         IA
Wholesale Price Index - Food and Fodder      Prices                                    2         IA
Wholesale Price Index - Industrial Goods     Prices                                    2         IA


                                                46
Production - Total                         Production                              3         SHW
Production - Coke                          Production                              3         SHW
Railways - Car Loadings in International   Transport                               2         IA
  Traffic



A.11     Denmark (Estimation Sample: 1925:01-1929:10)

                                                                             Release Delay
Series Name                                Category                                          Source
                                                                             (in Month)
Total Exports                              International Trade                     3         SHW
Total Imports                              International Trade                     3         SHW
Hourly Earnings of Workers                 Labour                                  3         SHW
Unemployed Union Members - Number          Labour                                  3         SHW
Unemployed Union Members - Percent         Labour                                  3         SHW
Central Bank of Denmark - Notes in         Money, Banking, and Finance             2         SHW
  Circulation
Central Bank of Denmark - Bills of         Money, Banking, and Finance             2         SHW
  Exchange and Advances
Central Bank of Denmark - Gold             Money, Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Central Bank of Denmark - Discount Rate    Money, Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Credit Banks - Advances                    Money, Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Credit Banks - Bills of Exchange           Money, Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Gold Value of the Currency                 Money, Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Clearings                                  Money, Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Stock Exchange - Bond Prices               Money, Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Stock Exchange - Share Prices              Money, Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Total Foreclosures                         Money, Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Agriculture Foreclosures                   Money, Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Cost of Living - Total                     Prices                                  2         SHW
Cost of Living - Clothing                  Prices                                  2         SHW
Cost of Living - Food                      Prices                                  2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Total              Prices                                  2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Import Goods       Prices                                  2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Animal Feed        Prices                                  2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Fertilizer         Prices                                  2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Butter             Prices                                  2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Heifers and Oxen   Prices                                  2         SHW
Pig Slaughtering                           Production                              3         SHW
Sea Freight Rate                           Transport                               2         SHW



A.12     Dutch Indies (Estimation Sample: 1925:01-1929:10)

                                                                             Release Delay
Series Name                                Category                                          Source
                                                                             (in Month)
Total Exports                              International Trade                     3         SHW
Total Imports                              International Trade                     3         SHW

                                               47
Java Bank - Notes in Circulation          Money, Banking, and Finance             2         SHW
Java Bank - Bills of Exchange and         Money, Banking, and Finance             2         SHW
  Advances
Java Bank - Deposits                      Money, Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Java Bank - Foreign Exchange              Money, Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Java Bank - Gold                          Money, Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Java Bank - Discount Rate                 Money, Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Mortgage Institutions - Loans             Money, Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Mortgage Institutions - Repayments        Money, Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Clearings                                 Money, Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Post Office Savings - Payments            Money, Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Post Office Savings - Proceeds            Money, Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Stock Exchange - Share Prices             Money, Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Cost of Living - Total                    Prices                                  2         SHW
Cost of Living - Food for Non-Europeans   Prices                                  2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Total             Prices                                  2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Export Goods      Prices                                  2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Import Goods      Prices                                  2         SHW
Production - Hard Coal                    Production                              3         SHW
Shipping - With Europe                    Transport                               2         SHW
Shipping - With US                        Transport                               2         SHW
Railways - Freight Revenue                Transport                               2         SHW



A.13     Estonia (Estimation Sample: 1925:01-1929:10)

                                                                            Release Delay
Series Name                               Category                                          Source
                                                                            (in Month)
Total Exports                             International Trade                     3         SHW
Total Exports                             International Trade                     3         SHW
Employed Workers                          Labour                                  3         SHW
Unemployed                                Labour                                  3         SHW
Bank of Estonia - Notes in Circulation    Money, Banking, and Finance             2         SHW
Bank of Estonia - Bills of Exchange and   Money, Banking, and Finance             2         SHW
  Advances
Bank of Estonia - Gold                    Money, Banking, and Finance             2         SHW
Bank of Estonia - Discount Rate           Money, Banking, and Finance             0         SHW
Gold Value of the Currency                Money, Banking, and Finance             0         SHW
Cost of Living - Total (in Tallinn)       Prices                                  2         SHW
Cost of Living - Food (in Tallinn)        Prices                                  2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Total             Prices                                  2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Export Goods      Prices                                  2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Import Goods      Prices                                  2         SHW
Production - Oil Shale                    Production                              3         SHW
Railways - Freights Carried               Transport                               2         SHW




                                             48
A.14     Finland (Estimation Sample: 1925:01-1929:10)

                                                                                  Release Delay
Series Name                                   Category                                            Source
                                                                                  (in Month)
Total Exports                                 International Trade                       3         SHW
Total Imports                                 International Trade                       3         SHW
Unemployed - Partial Disclosure               Labour                                    3         SHW
Bank of Finland - Notes in Circulation        Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Bank of Finland - Bills of Exchange and       Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
  Advances
Bank of Finland - Discount Rate               Money, Banking, and Finance               0         SHW
Credit Banks - Bills of Exchange and          Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
  Advances
Gold Value of the Currency                    Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Clearings                                     Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Stock Exchange - Share Prices (in Helsinki)   Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Stock Exchange - Share Turnover (in           Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
  Helsinki)
Bankruptcies - Total                          Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Protested Bills of Exchange - Value           Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Cost of Living - Total                        Prices                                    2         SHW
Cost of Living - Food                         Prices                                    2         SHW
Cost of Living - Clothing                     Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Total                 Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Export Goods          Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Import Goods          Prices                                    2         SHW
Production - Export Industries                Production                                3         SHW
Wholesale Turnover                            Retail and Consumption                    2         SHW
Maritime Shipping                             Transport                                 2         SHW
State Railways - Freights Carried             Transport                                 2         SHW



A.15     France (Estimation Sample: 1919:01-1928:10)

                                                                                  Release Delay
Series Name                                   Category                                            Source
                                                                                  (in Month)
Activity in Building Construction             Housing and Construction                  2         IA
Total Exports (Quantity)                      International Trade                       3         IA
Total Exports (Value)                         International Trade                       3         IA
Total Imports (Quantity)                      International Trade                       3         IA
Total Imports (Value)                         International Trade                       3         IA
Unemployed on Benefits                        Labour                                    3         SHW
Coefficient of Placement Index                Labour                                    3         NBER
Unsettled Job Applications                    Labour                                    3         SHW
Bank of France - Advances to the State        Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Bank of France - Gold and Silver Cash and     Money, Banking, and Finance               2         IA
  Bullion
Bank of France - Notes in Circulation         Money, Banking, and Finance               2         IA
Bank of France - Discounts                    Money, Banking, and Finance               2         IA

                                                 49
Commercial Banks - Acceptances                 Money,   Banking,   and   Finance   2   SHW
Commercial Banks - Advances                    Money,   Banking,   and   Finance   2   SHW
Commercial Banks - Credits                     Money,   Banking,   and   Finance   2   SHW
Commercial Banks - Cash                        Money,   Banking,   and   Finance   2   SHW
4 Banking Institutions Deposits                Money,   Banking,   and   Finance   2   IA
Commercial Banks - Bills of Exchange           Money,   Banking,   and   Finance   2   SHW
  Discounted
Deposits of Private Banks at Caisse des        Money, Banking, and Finance         2   IA
  Depots
Gold Price of 1000 Francs (at the Paris        Money, Banking, and Finance         0   IA
  Exchange)
Bank of France - Official Discount Rate        Money,   Banking,   and   Finance   0   IA
Private Discount Rate                          Money,   Banking,   and   Finance   0   SHW
Private Prime Paper Rate                       Money,   Banking,   and   Finance   0   IA
Collateral Loan Rate                           Money,   Banking,   and   Finance   0   IA
Returns of Paris Bankers Clearing House        Money,   Banking,   and   Finance   2   IA
Bankruptcies                                   Money,   Banking,   and   Finance   2   SHW
Stock Exchange - Price of Banking Stocks       Money,   Banking,   and   Finance   0   IA
  (4 Commercial Banks)
Stock Exchange - Price of Variable             Money, Banking, and Finance         0   IA
  Dividend Stocks (300 Domestic)
Stock Exchange - Price of Metallurgical        Money, Banking, and Finance         0   IA
  Stocks (13 Companies)
Taxable Exchange Operations                    Money, Banking, and Finance         2   IA
Capital Issuances - Variable Dividend          Money, Banking, and Finance         2   IA
  Existing
Capital Issuances - Variable Dividend New      Money, Banking, and Finance         2   IA
Cost of Living (Paris)                         Prices                              2   IA
Retail Price (Paris)                           Prices                              2   IA
Wholesale Price Index - Total                  Prices                              2   IA
Wholesale Price Index - Food                   Prices                              2   IA
Wholesale Price Index - Industrial Materials   Prices                              2   IA
Receipts of Post Telegraphs and Telephones     Retail and Consumption              2   IA
Orders - Cotton Spinning                       Retail and Consumption              2   IA
Orders - Cotton Weaving (Pieces Per            Retail and Consumption              2   IA
  Loom)
Yield of Entertainment Tax (Paris)             Retail and Consumption              2   IA
Turnover of Internal Commerce                  Retail and Consumption              2   IA
Production - Total                             Production                          3   IA
Production - Coal                              Production                          3   IA
Production - Pig Iron                          Production                          3   IA
Production - Steel                             Production                          3   IA
Railways - Daily Carloads                      Transport                           2   IA
Railways - Weekly Receipts                     Transport                           2   IA
Shipping - Tonnage Cleared                     Transport                           2   IA




                                                  50
A.16     Germany (Estimation Sample: 1924:01-1929:10)

                                                                                 Release Delay
Series Name                                  Category                                            Source
                                                                                 (in Month)
Urban Construction Activity                  Housing and Construction                  2         SHW
Total Exports                                International Trade                       3         IA
Total Imports                                International Trade                       3         IA
Unemployed - Main Beneficiary in             Labour                                    3         SHW
   Unemployment Insurance
Male Applicants Per Hundred Positions        Labour                                    3         NBER
Hourly Wages                                 Labour                                    2         SHW
Major Banks - Acceptances                    Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         3         SHW
Major Banks - Accounts Payable               Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         3         SHW
Major Banks - Accounts Receivable            Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         3         SHW
Major Banks - Cash and Bank Balance          Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         3         SHW
Major Banks - Bills of Exchange              Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         3         SHW
Major Banks - Advances on Goods              Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         3         SHW
Major Banks - Reports and Lombards           Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         3         SHW
Major Banks - Securities and Syndicate       Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         3         SHW
   Participations
Reichsbank - Gold and Foreign Exchange       Money, Banking, and Finance               2         IA
   Holding
Debt Rate of Banks                           Money, Banking, and Finance               0         SHW
Merchandise Bill Rate                        Money, Banking, and Finance               0         SHW
Loan Rate of Banks                           Money, Banking, and Finance               0         SHW
Prime Banker's Acceptance Rate               Money, Banking, and Finance               0         SHW
Reichsbank - Official Rate                   Money, Banking, and Finance               0         IA
Issues - Domestic Fixed-income Securities    Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Issues - Domestic Shares                     Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Reichsbank - Clearings                       Money, Banking, and Finance               2         IA
Reichsbank - Transfers                       Money, Banking, and Finance               2         IA
Reichsbank - Giro Transactions               Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Money in Circulation                         Money, Banking, and Finance               2         IA
Postal Cheque Payments                       Money, Banking, and Finance               2         IA
Stock Prices - Mining and Heavy Industries   Money, Banking, and Finance               0         IA
Stock Prices - Trade and Transport           Money, Banking, and Finance               0         IA
Bankruptcies                                 Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Composition Proceedings                      Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Number of New Firms Established              Money, Banking, and Finance               2         NBER
Cost of Living - Total                       Prices                                    2         IA
Cost of Living - Food                        Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Total                Prices                                    2         IA
Wholesale Price Index - Agricultural         Prices                                    2         IA
Retail Sales - Total                         Retail and Consumption                    2         SHW
Production - Total                           Production                                3         SHW
Tonnage of Vessels under Construction        Production                                3         NBER
Freight Rates - River                        Transport                                 2         SHW
Freight Rates - Maritime                     Transport                                 2         SHW
Railways - Waggon Loadings (Per Working      Transport                                 2         IA
   Day)

                                                51
Railways - Revenue Ton-Kilometres          Transport                                 2         NBER



A.17     Hungary (Estimation Sample: 1921:01-1929:10)

                                                                               Release Delay
Series Name                                Category                                            Source
                                                                               (in Month)
Total Exports                              International Trade                       3         IA
Total Imports                              International Trade                       3         IA
Job Seekers                                Labour                                    3         SHW
Unemployed Union Members - Number          Labour                                    3         SHW
Unemployed Union Members - Percent         Labour                                    3         SHW
Gold Value of the Currency                 Money, Banking, and Finance               0         SHW
Hungarian National Bank - Notes in         Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
  Circulation
Hungarian National Bank - Bills of         Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
  Exchange and Advances
Hungarian National Bank - Foreign          Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
  Exchange
Hungarian National Bank - Gold             Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Hungarian National Bank - Discount Rate    Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         IA
Prime Commercial Paper Rate                Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         IA
Day to Day Rate                            Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         IA
Clearings                                  Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Stock Exchange - Share Prices              Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Bankruptcies - Number                      Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         IA
Compositions - Number                      Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         IA
Cost of Living - Total                     Prices                                    2         SHW
Cost of Living - Clothing                  Prices                                    2         SHW
Cost of Living - Food                      Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Total              Prices                                    2         IA
Wholesale Price Index - Agricultural and   Prices                                    2         SHW
  Food Products
Wholesale Price Index - Industrial         Prices                                    2         SHW
  Materials and Products
Production - Total                         Production                                3         SHW
Production - Cotton Goods and Finish       Production                                3         SHW
Postage - Letters                          Retail and Consumption                    2         IA
Postage - Telephone Calls                  Retail and Consumption                    2         IA
State Railways - Freights Carried          Transport                                 2         IA



A.18     Italy (Estimation Sample: 1925:01-1929:10)

                                                                               Release Delay
Series Name                                Category                                            Source
                                                                               (in Month)
Total Exports                              International Trade                       3         SHW
Total Imports                              International Trade                       3         SHW


                                               52
Unemployed - Total                            Labour                                    3         SHW
Unemployed - Insured                          Labour                                    3         SHW
Short-time Workers                            Labour                                    3         SHW
Bank of Italy - Notes in Circulation          Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Bank of Italy - Foreign Exchange              Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Bank of Italy - Gold                          Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Gold Value of the Currency                    Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Bank of Italy - Discount Rate                 Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Market Discount Rate in Milan                 Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Stock Exchange - Share Prices                 Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Stock Exchange - Share Sales                  Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Bankruptcies                                  Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Protested Bills of Exchange                   Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Total                 Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Finished Goods        Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Semi-finished         Prices                                    2         SHW
  Goods
Electricity Industry - Power Consumption      Retail and Consumption                    3         SHW
Production - Crude Steel                      Production                                3         SHW
Production - Pig Iron                         Production                                3         SHW
Railways - Freights Carried                   Transport                                 2         SHW
Shipping - Sea Freight - Incoming Goods       Transport                                 2         SHW
Shipping - Sea Freight - Outgoing Goods       Transport                                 2         SHW



A.19     Japan (Estimation Sample: 1919:01-1929:10)

                                                                                  Release Delay
Series Name                                   Category                                            Source
                                                                                  (in Month)
Total Exports - Including Colonies            International Trade                       3         IA
Total Imports - Including Colonies            International Trade                       3         IA
Wage Rates - Industrial Workers               Labour                                    2         SHW
Employment - Industrial                       Labour                                    3         SHW
Bank of Japan - Notes in Circulation (Daily   Money, Banking, and Finance               2         IA
  Average)
Bank of Japan - Gold                          Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Bank of Japan - Advances (Daily Average)      Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         IA
Bank of Japan - Discount Rate                 Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Call Money Rate                               Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Market Discount Rate (Average of Lowest,      Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         IA
  Tokyo)
Stock Exchange - Average Price of 50          Money, Banking, and Finance               0         IA
  Industrial Shares
Gold Value of the Currency                    Money, Banking, and Finance               0         SHW
Clearing Banks - Bills of Exchange and        Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
  Advances
Commercial Banks - Advances                   Money, Banking, and Finance               2         IA
Clearings                                     Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Cost of Living - Total (in Tokyo)             Prices                                    2         SHW


                                                 53
Cost of Living - Clothing (in Tokyo)        Prices                                  2         SHW
Cost of Living - Food (in Tokyo)            Prices                                  2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Total               Prices                                  2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Cotton Yarn         Prices                                  2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Raw Silk (in        Prices                                  2         SHW
  Tokyo)
Inventory - Raw Silk Warehouse              Retail and Consumption                  2         SHW
Production - Total                          Production                              3         SHW
Production - Textile Industry - Total       Production                              3         SHW
Production - Cotton Fabrics                 Production                              3         SHW
Production - Cotton Yarn                    Production                              3         SHW
Production - Raw Silk                       Production                              3         SHW
Railways - Freights Carried                 Transport                               2         SHW



A.20     Lithuania (Estimation Sample: 1925:01-1929:10)

                                                                              Release Delay
Series Name                                 Category                                          Source
                                                                              (in Month)
Total Exports                               International Trade                     3         SHW
Total Imports                               International Trade                     3         SHW
Bank of Lithuania - Notes in Circulation    Money, Banking, and Finance             2         SHW
Bank of Lithuania - Bills of Exchange and   Money, Banking, and Finance             2         SHW
  Advances
Bank of Lithuania - Gold                    Money, Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Bank of Lithuania - Discount Rate           Money, Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Gold Value of the Currency                  Money, Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Protested Bills of Exchange                 Money, Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Cost of Living - Total                      Prices                                  2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Total               Prices                                  2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Flax                Prices                                  2         SHW
Railways - Freights Carried                 Transport                               2         SHW



A.21     Netherlands (Estimation Sample: 1919:01-1928:10)

                                                                              Release Delay
Series Name                                 Category                                          Source
                                                                              (in Month)
Construction Activity - Completion          Housing and Construction                2         SHW
Total Exports                               International Trade                     3         SHW
Total Imports                               International Trade                     3         SHW
Unemployment - Total Job Seekers            Labour                                  3         SHW
Unemployment - Insured Workers              Labour                                  3         SHW
Unemployment - Lost Workdays                Labour                                  3         SHW
Netherlands Bank - Notes in Circulation     Money, Banking, and Finance             2         SHW
Netherlands Bank - Foreign Currency         Money, Banking, and Finance             2         SHW
Netherlands Bank - Gold                     Money, Banking, and Finance             2         SHW
Netherlands Bank - Discount Rate            Money, Banking, and Finance             0         SHW

                                                54
Private Discount Rate                      Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Collateral Loan Rate                       Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Issues - Domestic Shares                   Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Stock Exchange - Domestic Share Prices     Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Bankruptcies                               Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Cost of Living - Total (Amsterdam)         Prices                                    2         IA
Cost of Living - Food (Amsterdam)          Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Total              Prices                                    2         IA +
                                                                                               SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Food               Prices                                    2         IA +
                                                                                               SHW
Production - Coal                          Production                                3         IA



A.22     New Zealand (Estimation Sample: 1925:01-1929:10)

                                                                               Release Delay
Series Name                                Category                                            Source
                                                                               (in Month)
Construction Activity - Building Permits   Housing and Construction                  2         SHW
Total Exports                              International Trade                       3         SHW
Total Imports                              International Trade                       3         SHW
Weekly Wages - Total                       Labour                                    3         SHW
Unemployed                                 Labour                                    3         SHW
Notes in Circulation                       Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Credit Banks - Bills of Exchange and       Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
  Advances
Credit Banks - Gold                        Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Gold Value of the Currency                 Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Bank Discount Rate                         Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Stock Exchange - Share Prices              Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Bankruptcies                               Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Cost of Living - Total                     Prices                                    2         SHW
Cost of Living - Food                      Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Total              Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Exporting Goods    Prices                                    2         SHW
  Total
Wholesale Price Index - Exporting Dairy    Prices                                    2         SHW
  Products
Wholesale Price Index - Exporting Meat     Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Exporting Wool     Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Importing Goods    Prices                                    2         SHW
  Total
Butter - Consignments                      Retail and   Consumption                  2         SHW
Butter - Stocks                            Retail and   Consumption                  2         SHW
Cheese - Consignments                      Retail and   Consumption                  2         SHW
Cheese - Stocks                            Retail and   Consumption                  2         SHW
Maritime Shipping - Inbound Traffic        Transport                                 2         SHW




                                               55
A.23     Peru (Estimation Sample: 1925:01-1929:10)

                                                                                 Release Delay
Series Name                                  Category                                            Source
                                                                                 (in Month)
Total Exports                                International Trade                       3         SHW
Total Imports                                International Trade                       3         SHW
Central Bank - Notes in Circulation          Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Central Bank - Bills of Exchange and         Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
  Advances
Central Bank - Deposits                      Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Central Bank - Gold and Foreign Exchange     Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Central Bank - Discount Rate                 Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Gold Value of the Currency                   Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Cost of Living - Total                       Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Total                Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Building Materials   Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Import Goods         Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Food                 Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Metals               Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Textiles             Prices                                    2         SHW



A.24     Poland (Estimation Sample: 1925:01-1929:10)

                                                                                 Release Delay
Series Name                                  Category                                            Source
                                                                                 (in Month)
Construction                                 Housing and Construction                  2         SHW
Total Exports                                International Trade                       3         SHW
Total Imports                                International Trade                       3         SHW
Registered Unemployed                        Labour                                    3         SHW
Employed Workers                             Labour                                    3         SHW
Bank of Poland - Notes in Circulation        Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Bank of Poland - Foreign Exchange            Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Bank of Poland - Gold                        Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Gold Value of the Currency                   Money, Banking, and Finance               0         SHW
Bank of Poland - Discount Rate               Money, Banking, and Finance               0         SHW
Discount Rate of Joint-Stock Banks           Money, Banking, and Finance               0         SHW
Clearings                                    Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Postal Check Turnover                        Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Savings - Deposits                           Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Stock Exchange - Share Prices                Money, Banking, and Finance               0         SHW
Issues - New Stocks                          Money, Banking, and Finance               2         IA
Bankruptcies                                 Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Cost of Living - Total                       Prices                                    2         SHW
Cost of Living - Food                        Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Total                Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Agricultural         Prices                                    2         SHW
   Products


                                                56
Production - Total                          Production                            3         SHW
Production - Chemical Industry              Production                            3         SHW
Production - Hard Coal                      Production                            3         SHW
Production - Consumer Goods                 Production                            3         SHW
Railways - Freight Car Traffic              Transport                             2         SHW



A.25     Romania (Estimation Sample: 1925:01-1929:10)

                                                                            Release Delay
Series Name                                 Category                                        Source
                                                                            (in Month)
Total Exports                               International Trade                   3         SHW
Total Imports                               International Trade                   3         SHW
Unemployed - Seasonal Workers               Labour                                3         SHW
Unemployed - Total                          Labour                                3         SHW
Savings Banks - Savings (in Bucharest)      Money, Banking, and   Finance         2         SHW
Gold Value of the Currency                  Money, Banking, and   Finance         0         SHW
Private Discount Rate                       Money, Banking, and   Finance         0         SHW
National Bank of Romania - Discount Rate    Money, Banking, and   Finance         0         SHW
National Bank of Romania - Notes in         Money, Banking, and   Finance         2         SHW
  Circulation
National Bank of Romania - Bills of         Money, Banking, and Finance           2         SHW
  Exchange and Advances
National Bank of Romania - Demand           Money, Banking, and Finance           2         SHW
  Deposits
National Bank of Romania - Gold             Money, Banking, and Finance           2         SHW
Clearings (in Bucharest)                    Money, Banking, and Finance           2         SHW
Stock Exchange - Fixed-income Securities    Money, Banking, and Finance           0         SHW
  Prices
Stock Exchange - Share Prices               Money, Banking, and Finance           0         SHW
Approved Moratoria                          Money, Banking, and Finance           2         SHW
Opened Bankruptcies                         Money, Banking, and Finance           2         SHW
Protested Bills of Exchange                 Money, Banking, and Finance           2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Kerosene            Prices                                2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Benzine             Prices                                2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Heavy Fuel          Prices                                2         SHW
Production - Oil                            Production                            3         SHW
Consumption - Cement                        Retail and Consumption                2         SHW



A.26     South Africa (Estimation Sample: 1925:01-1929:10)

                                                                            Release Delay
Series Name                                 Category                                        Source
                                                                            (in Month)
Construction Activity - Residential         Housing and Construction              2         SHW
  Buildings Commenced
Total Exports Including Gold Bullions and   International Trade                   3         SHW
  Coins


                                                57
Total Imports                                  International Trade                       3         SHW
Employed in Mining - Gold Mining,              Labour                                    3         SHW
  Indigenous and Other Coloured
Employed in Mining - Total Mining,             Labour                                    3         SHW
  Indigenous and Other Coloured
Agricultural Credit Banks - Advances           Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Credit Banks - Bills of Exchange and           Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
  Advances
Credit Banks - Long-term Deposits              Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Gold Value of the Currency                     Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Clearings                                      Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Postal Savings Banks - Deposits                Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
South African Reserve Bank - Discount          Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
  Rate
South African Reserve Bank - Notes in          Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
  Circulation
South African Reserve Bank - Gold              Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Bankruptcies                                   Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Cost of Living - Total                         Prices                                    2         SHW
Cost of Living - Food                          Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Export Prices for      Prices                                    2         SHW
  Agricultural Products
Production - Hard Coal                         Production                                3         SHW
Production - Gold                              Production                                3         SHW
Railways - Freights Carried - Total            Transport                                 2         SHW
  Excluding Coal
Railways - Freights Carried - Coal             Transport                                 2         SHW



A.27     Spain (Estimation Sample: 1919:01-1929:10)

                                                                                   Release Delay
Series Name                                    Category                                            Source
                                                                                   (in Month)
Bank of Spain - Notes in Circulation           Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
Bank of Spain - Bills of Exchange and          Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
  Advances
Bank of Spain - Deposits                       Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Bank of Spain - Foreign Exchange               Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Bank of Spain - Gold                           Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Bank of Spain - Discount Rate                  Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         IA
Gold Value of the Currency                     Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Clearings                                      Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Stock Exchange - Fixed Interest Security       Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         IA
  Prices (in Barcelona)
Stock Exchange - Stock Prices                  Money, Banking, and Finance               0         IA
Cost of Living - Total (in Madrid)             Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Total (in              Prices                                    2         IA +
  Barcelona)                                                                                       SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Food                   Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Industrial Materials   Prices                                    2         SHW

                                                   58
Production   -   Coal and Lignite            Production                            3         IA
Production   -   Copper Ore                  Production                            3         IA
Production   -   Iron Ore                    Production                            3         IA
Production   -   Lead Ore                    Production                            3         IA
Production   -   Pig Iron                    Production                            3         IA
Production   -   Steel                       Production                            3         IA



A.28     Sweden (Estimation Sample: 1919:01-1929:10)

                                                                             Release Delay
Series Name                                  Category                                        Source
                                                                             (in Month)
Total Exports                                International Trade                   3         IA
Total Imports                                International Trade                   3         IA
Unemployed - Support Seekers                 Labour                                3         SHW
Unemployed - Union Members - Number          Labour                                3         SHW
Unemployed - Union Members - Percent         Labour                                3         IA
Credit Banks - Domestic Bills of Exchange    Money, Banking, and   Finance         2         SHW
Credit Banks - Advances                      Money, Banking, and   Finance         2         IA
Yield on Inconvertible State Bonds           Money, Banking, and   Finance         0         IA
Riksbank - Discount Rate                     Money, Banking, and   Finance         0         IA
Riksbank - Clearings                         Money, Banking, and   Finance         2         SHW
Riksbank - Notes in Circulation              Money, Banking, and   Finance         2         IA
Riksbank - Bills of Exchange and Advances    Money, Banking, and   Finance         2         SHW
Riksbank - Foreign Exchange                  Money, Banking, and   Finance         2         SHW
Riksbank - Gold                              Money, Banking, and   Finance         2         IA
Stock Exchange - Share Prices - All Shares   Money, Banking, and   Finance         0         IA
Stock Exchange - Turnover - Total            Money, Banking, and   Finance         2         IA
Bankruptcies                                 Money, Banking, and   Finance         2         IA +
                                                                                             SHW
Cost of Living - Total                       Prices                                2         IA
Wholesale Price Index - Total (Board of      Prices                                2         IA
  Trade)
Wholesale Price Index - Raw Materials        Prices                                2         IA
Wholesale Price Index - Semi-finished        Prices                                2         IA
  Goods
Wholesale Price Index - Finished Goods       Prices                                2         IA
Wholesale Price Index - Consumer Goods       Prices                                2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Production Goods     Prices                                2         SHW
Production - Total                           Production                            3         SHW
Production - Production Goods Industries     Production                            3         SHW
Production - Consumer Goods Industries       Production                            3         SHW
Production - Crude Steel                     Production                            3         SHW
Production - Rolling Mill Products           Production                            3         SHW
Production - Pig Iron                        Production                            3         SHW
Shipping - Inbound                           Transport                             2         IA
Shipping - Outbound                          Transport                             2         IA
Railways - Freights Carried                  Transport                             2         SHW



                                                 59
A.29     Switzerland (Estimation Sample: 1925:01-1929:10)

                                                                                   Release Delay
Series Name                                    Category                                            Source
                                                                                   (in Month)
Total Exports                                  International Trade                       3         SHW
Total Imports                                  International Trade                       3         SHW
Average Employment Level                       Labour                                    3         SHW
Short-time Workers                             Labour                                    3         SHW
Unemployed                                     Labour                                    3         SHW
Cantonal Banks - Current Accounts              Money, Banking, and Finance               2         SHW
  Payable
Swiss National Bank - Discount Rate            Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Private Discount Rate                          Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Stock Exchange - Share Prices                  Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW
Swiss National Bank - Notes in Circulation     Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Swiss National Bank - Gold Currency            Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Swiss National Bank - Gold                     Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Composition Agreements                         Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Cost of Living - Total                         Prices                                    2         SHW
Cost of Living - Food                          Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Total                  Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Feed and Fertilizers   Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Food                   Prices                                    2         SHW
Wholesale Price Index - Raw and Auxiliary      Prices                                    2         SHW
  Materials
Hallmarking of Watch Cases                     Production                                3         SHW



A.30     United Kingdom (Estimation Sample: 1919:01-1928:10)

                                                                                   Release Delay
Series Name                                    Category                                            Source
                                                                                   (in Month)
Estimated Cost of Buildings for Which          Housing and Construction                  2         IA
  Plans Were Passed - 146 Cities
Total Imports (Including Miscellaneous)        International Trade                       3         IA
Total Exports (Including Miscellaneous)        International Trade                       3         IA
Total Insured Persons Unemployed - Male        Labour                                    3         IA
Total Insured Persons Unemployed - Female      Labour                                    3         IA
Percentage of Insured Persons Unemployed       Labour                                    3         IA
  - Male and Female
Security Price Index - London                  Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         NBER
British Railway Common Shares Index            Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         NBER
Three Months Rate                              Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         IA
Day to Day Rate                                Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         IA
Bank of England - Minimum Discount Rate        Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         NBER
Yield on Consols                               Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         NBER
Gold Value of the Currency                     Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         0         SHW


                                                   60
Outstanding Treasury Bills                    Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         IA
Nine Clearing Banks - Advances                Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         IA
Nine Clearing Banks - Deposits                Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         IA
Nine Clearing Banks - Discounts               Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         IA
Nine Clearing Banks - Investments             Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         IA
Nine Clearing Banks - Cash to Deposits        Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         IA
Bank Clearings - London (London Bankers       Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         IA
  Clearing House)
Bank of England - Notes in Circulation        Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         IA
Bank of England - Gold                        Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Bank of England - Government Securities       Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Bank of England - Other Securities            Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
New Capital Issues                            Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         IA
Bankruptcies                                  Money,   Banking,   and   Finance         2         SHW
Retail Prices - Cost of Living (Ministry of   Prices                                    2         IA
  Labour)
Retail Prices - Food (Ministry of Labour)     Prices                                    2         IA
Wholesale Price Index - Total (Board of       Prices                                    2         IA
  Trade)
Wholesale Price Index Board of Trade -        Prices                                    2         IA
  Food
Production - Coal                             Production                                3         IA
Shipbuilding - Tonnage Commenced              Production                                3         IA
Index of Business Activity                    Retail and Consumption                    3         NBER
Index of Consumption of Raw Cotton            Retail and Consumption                    2         IA
Railways - Receipts - All Goods               Transport                                 2         IA
Railways - Weight of Freight Transported -    Transport                                 2         IA
  General Merchandise
Railways - Weight of Freight Transported -    Transport                                 2         IA
  Fuel
Shipping - Entered                            Transport                                 2         IA
Shipping - Cleared                            Transport                                 2         IA
Shipping - Index of Time Chartered Rates      Transport                                 2         IA
Shipping - Index of Freight Rates             Transport                                 2         IA



A.31     United States (Estimation Sample: 1919:01-1928:10)

                                                                                  Release Delay
Series Name                                   Category                                            Source
                                                                                  (in Month)
Construction Contracts                        Housing and Construction                  2         IA
Building Permits                              Housing and Construction                  2         IA
Merchandise Imports                           International Trade                       3         IA
Merchandise Exports                           International Trade                       3         IA
Employment Index 1929 Revision                Labour                                    3         FRB
Employment Index 1934 Revision                Labour                                    3         FRB
Employment Index 1936 Revision                Labour                                    3         FRB
Payroll Index 1929 Revision                   Labour                                    3         FRB
Payroll Index 1934 Revision                   Labour                                    3         FRB


                                                  61
   Payroll Index 1936 Revision                  Labour                                   3          FRB
   Prime Commercial Paper Rate                  Money, Banking, and Finance              0          IA
   Bank Rate on Customer Loans - Leading        Money, Banking, and Finance              0          NBER
     Cities
   Banker's Acceptance Rate for New York        Money,   Banking,   and   Finance        0          NBER
   New York Fed - Discount Rate                 Money,   Banking,   and   Finance        0          NBER
   Yield on Long-term US Bonds                  Money,   Banking,   and   Finance        1          NBER
   Gold Stock                                   Money,   Banking,   and   Finance        2          IA
   Money in Circulation                         Money,   Banking,   and   Finance        2          IA
   Federal Reserve System Reporting Member      Money,   Banking,   and   Finance        2          IA
     Banks - Loans on Securities
   Federal Reserve System Reporting Member      Money, Banking, and Finance              2          IA
     Banks - All Other Loans
   Federal Reserve System Reporting Member      Money, Banking, and Finance              2          IA
     Banks - Investments
   Combined Federal Reserve Banks - Bills       Money, Banking, and Finance              2          IA
     Discounted
   Combined Federal Reserve Banks - Bills       Money, Banking, and Finance              2          IA
     Bought in Open Market
   Volume of Commercial Paper Outstanding       Money, Banking, and Finance              2          IA
   Business Failures                            Money, Banking, and Finance              2          IA
   Average Stock Price - Industrials            Money, Banking, and Finance              0          NBER
   Average Stock Price - Railroads              Money, Banking, and Finance              0          NBER
   Wholesale Price Index (PPI)                  Prices                                   2          IA
   Raw Materials Price Index                    Prices                                   2          IA
   Semi Manufactured Goods Price Index          Prices                                   2          IA
   Finished Goods Price Index                   Prices                                   2          IA
   Industrial Production                        Production                               3          FRB
   Department Store Sales                       Retail and Consumption                   2          IA
   Total Freight Car Loadings                   Transport                                2          IA
   Revenue Per Freight Ton-Mile                 Transport                                2          NBER

  The labour variables from the 1936 revision are used for estimation. Using the previous editions of the
variables instead does not alter the results.




                                                    62
B     Illustrations of key variables
Here, we plot key macroeconomic and financial variables to illustrate the evolution of eco-
nomic conditions in our sample countries. The first row contains ex ante real interest rate(s),
nominal interest rate(s), and expected year-on-year inflation rate, the second row price level,
money supply, and output (or its proxy), the third row exports, imports, and trade balance,
and the last row stock price, clearing, and bankruptcies. The entries are omitted if the cor-
responding variables are not available (with the resulting shifts in the locations of the rest of
the variables if appropriate). For detailed information regarding the key event date(s) (the
vertical line(s) on the figures below; the green vertical dotted line gives our dating of the
end of the gold standard regime), refer to Section 4.




                                    Figure B.1: Argentina
December 1929 ­ suspension of the currency board.
October 1931 ­ exchange control.
November 1933 ­ devaluation and currency reforms.




                                               63
                                    Figure B.2: Australia
December 1929 ­ official suspension of the gold standard.
March 1930 ­ devaluation (corresponding to the magenta vertical dash-dotted line).
January 1931 ­ devaluation.
September 1931 ­ UK suspension of the gold standard.




                                     Figure B.3: Austria
October 1931 ­ devaluation.
April 1933 ­ devaluation.


                                              64
                                     Figure B.4: Belgium
March 1935 ­ official suspension of the gold standard, devaluation, and exchange control.




                                       Figure B.5: Brazil
December 1929 ­ devaluation.
May 1930 ­ suspension of gold shipments.
October 1930 ­ suspension of the redemption of notes into gold.




                                               65
                                   Figure B.6: British India
September 1931 ­ UK suspension of the gold standard and devaluation.




                                     Figure B.7: Bulgaria
October 1931 ­ exchange control.




                                              66
                                      Figure B.8: Canada
September 1931 ­ devaluation.




                                        Figure B.9: Chile
July 1931 ­ exchange control.
April 1932 ­ official suspension of the gold standard and devaluation.




                                                67
                                   Figure B.10: Czechoslovakia
October 1931 ­ exchange control.
February 1934 ­ devaluation.
October 1936 ­ devaluation.




                                     Figure B.11: Denmark
September 1931 ­ official suspension of the gold standard and devaluation.




                                               68
                                  Figure B.12: Dutch Indies
September 1936 ­ Dutch suspension of the gold standard.




                                     Figure B.13: Estonia
November 1931 ­ exchange control.
June 1933 ­ official suspension of the gold standard and devaluation.




                                               69
                                     Figure B.14: Finland
October 1931 ­ official suspension of the gold standard and devaluation.




                                      Figure B.15: France
September 1936 ­ devaluation.




                                               70
                                     Figure B.16: Germany
July 1931 ­ exchange control.
January 1933 ­ Adolf Hitler's rise to power.




                                     Figure B.17: Hungary
July 1931 ­ exchange control.




                                               71
                                      Figure B.18: Italy
March 1934 ­ devaluation.
July 1935 ­ abolition of the 40% reserve requirement for paper money.
October 1936 ­ devaluation.




                                      Figure B.19: Japan
December 1931 ­ official suspension of the gold standard and devaluation.




                                               72
                                    Figure B.20: Lithuania
October 1935 ­ exchange control.




                                   Figure B.21: Netherlands
September 1936 ­ official suspension of the gold standard and devaluation.




                                               73
                                  Figure B.22: New Zealand
September 1931 ­ official suspension of the gold standard.




                                       Figure B.23: Peru
May 1932 ­ official suspension of the gold standard and devaluation.




                                               74
                                 Figure B.24: Poland
April 1936 ­ exchange control.
October 1936 ­ devaluation.




                                 Figure B.25: Romania
May 1932 ­ exchange control.
July 1935 ­ devaluation.




                                         75
                                  Figure B.26: South Africa
December 1932 ­ official suspension of the gold standard.




                                      Figure B.27: Spain
May 1931 ­ exchange control.
Spain did not return to the gold standard after World War I. The data set is incomplete due to
the Civil War that started in July 1936.




                                               76
                                     Figure B.28: Sweden
September 1931 ­ official suspension of the gold standard and devaluation.




                                   Figure B.29: Switzerland
September 1936 ­ devaluation.




                                               77
                                Figure B.30: United Kingdom
September 1931 ­ official suspension of the gold standard and devaluation.




                                  Figure B.31: United States
CP - prime commercial paper rate (blue solid); BA - New York banker's acceptance rate (red
dash-dotted).
March 1933 ­ exchange control (corresponding to the black vertical dashed line).
April 1933 ­ official suspension of the gold standard and devaluation.



                                               78
C        Dating the departure from the gold standard for
         Group D countries
In Australia and New Zealand private banks managed the exchange rate, which was quoted
as a premium or a discount vis `   a vis sterling; Drummond (1981, p. 100) comments that
people in the two countries tended to assume that a pound was a pound wherever it had
been issued, and that while prior to 1925 "the premiums and discounts had sometimes been
sizable", "this had appeared unnatural." Faced with chronic balance of payments problems,
in December 1929 the Australian government introduced legislation allowing it, operating in
conjunction with the Commonwealth Bank, to require that other banks disclose their gold
holdings; to require that gold be exchanged for Australian notes; and to ban the export
of gold. The League of Nations (1937, p. 16) regarded this as an official suspension of
the gold standard, but that was not how the government viewed it. The following month,
faced with further gold losses, the Bank exercised its right to requisition gold holdings, and
Schedvin (1988, p. 125) writes that "There is little doubt that the gold standard was, in fact,
abandoned" then ­ but the authorities had chosen this option, rather than the alternative
of banning gold exports, precisely because the latter would have been seen as unequivocally
abandoning the gold peg. Schedvin argues that trying to keep the "myth" of gold standard
adherence alive made sense, and that the myth persisted until mid-1930 (p. 126).
    The Australian pound had been slipping in value relative to sterling since October 1929
but as mentioned earlier there was nothing unusual about this. By April 1930 it was 6%
below par and there was a further modest devaluation in October to 9 below par. But it
was the abrupt movement to 30 below par in January 1931 (Figure C.1) that in the eyes of
most commentators marked the real devaluation (Eichengreen, 1992, pp. 235-6; Schedvin,
1988, pp. 164-8). Writing on January 10, The Economist commented approvingly that "now
that a more nearly "true" exchange rate has been established, the normal economic forces
should come into play."35 It seems reasonable to date Australia's departure to this date,
although it should be noted that the exchange rate remained pegged against sterling at a
new lower rate for the best part of a year. Indeed, in February the newly elected Premier
of New South Wales urged "the abandonment of the gold standard", a course of action that
was opposed by the Chairman of the Commonwealth Bank in the following month (Brown,
1940, pp. 877-8). One could therefore also argue that it was sterling's departure from gold in
September that marked the real rupture in the Australian case: Table I lists both January
and September 1931 as potential departure dates.
 35
      "Australian Exchange Developments." Economist, 10 Jan. 1931, p. 59+.




                                                   79
                   Figure C.1: Currencies' gold value (percentage of parity)

    Turning to New Zealand, the country's pound gradually slipped against sterling in the
early years of the depression, reaching a rate of £NZ110 to £stg100 by early 1931. The
League of Nations lists a devaluation or depreciation as occurring in April 1930, and both
Brown, and Obstfeld and Taylor, date New Zealand's departure to that month. But the
depreciation was viewed by the banks as undesirable and, hopefully, temporary: it was also
relatively minor as Figure C.1 indicates. During 1932 there were growing calls for devaluation
against sterling, however, and the government finally acceded to these calls in January 1933
(Fleming, 1997; Singleton, 2003). By that time, however, sterling itself had abandoned gold:
we therefore favour dating New Zealand's departure to September 1931, when the UK left,
and Figure C.1 strongly suggests that this did indeed mark the real break with gold.36
    Dating Brazil's departure is tricky. By the end of 1929 it had become very difficult
for investors to obtain gold in exchange for currency: gold and foreign exchange reserves
were being preserved "for the sake of appearances" (Brown, 1940, p.897; Eichengreen, 1992,
p. 238). As Table I shows several authors date Brazil's departure from gold to December
1929. However, a bigger rupture seems to have been the suspension of gold shipments in
May 1930: this coincided with the beginning of a sharp slide in the value of the milreis
that continued into the following year (Eichengreen, 1992, p. 239; Figure C.1). In October
1930 the government suspended the redemption of notes into gold, and Smith (1934, p. 442)
comments that with this "the actual working of the gold standard in Brazil came to an end."
According to Brown (1940, p. 897), by the stage a new revolutionary government came to
power in late October Brazil had "practically completed a transition to what was in effect,
  36
    September 1931 is also when the League of Nations considered New Zealand to have officially suspended
the link with gold, and Kemmerer (1954) also favours a 1931 departure.

                                                   80
if not in form, a single government note issue and a pure paper standard." In November the
Caixa de Estabilizacao, whose function had been to convert paper currency into gold, was
abolished: the Economist commented that "The exchange of notes for gold is, therefore, in
suspense and the currency position as a whole is obscure."37 A good case could be made
for several dates: we favour October 1930, but include December 1929 as another possible
candidate in light of the existing literature.
   When Austria imposed exchange controls in October 1931 the schilling was trading at
a 10-15% discount on informal markets; by November the discount had risen to over 34%,
a dramatic shift. By this stage, according to the official history of the Austrian Central
Bank, "Policy makers did not, in actual fact, truly consider reinstating the gold parity of the
schilling." When in March 1933 the government decreed that "all liabilities in gold or foreign
exchange had to be settled at the intrinsic value prevailing at the contract date," this was
merely an acknowledgment "that the schilling had been devalued" (Jobst and Kernbauer,
2016, pp. 180, 183; Eichengreen, 1992, p. 269). It thus seems reasonable to date Austria's
departure to October 1931, as do both Brown, and Obstfeld and Taylor, although a case
could also be made for the September 1931 date favoured by Wolf (2008), by which time
black market rates were already diverging from parity.
    On the other hand, at the end of October 1931 the Economist was reporting that the
Austrian government regarded the schilling as being "perfectly stable" and that it was there-
fore refusing to prohibit "gold clauses" in commercial invoicing (specifying that payments
be made in terms of gold) since in any event such clauses were "of purely theoretical signif-
icance."38 In April 1933, however, the Central Bank permitted the sale in private clearing
of "all incoming foreign currencies (not only those derived from the export trade, as hereto-
fore)". The Economist commented that "The foreign exchange regulations, in fact, in so
far as they apply to the compulsory exchange rate of the schilling, have been withdrawn,
and it is now publicly known that the schilling has dropped by 30 to 32 per cent." The
Austrian public, it noted, was following these developments "with anxiety."39 The League of
Nations (1937) dated Austria's official suspension of the gold standard to this month, and it
seems that the official recognition of what had become de facto reality, combined with the
abandonment of the remaining legislative props to the gold standard, may have mattered
for expectations. We therefore consider two potential departure dates for Austria: October
1931 and April 1933.
    Czechoslovakia imposed exchange controls in October 1931, and then devalued against
gold in both February 1934 and October 1936. We consider both of these dates, although
Eichengreen notes that the first devaluation "was not used as an occasion to expand domestic
credit" (Eichengreen, 1992, p. 365). Finally, Italy is listed by the League of Nations as
having depreciated or devalued in March 1934, and two months later exchange controls
were introduced. In May 1935 the Sovrintendenza allo scambio delle valute was created,
for the purpose of managing foreign exchange.40 A greater turning point, in terms of what
matters to us, arguably came in July 1935 when the 40% reserve requirement regarding
 37
    "Brazil." Commercial History and Review of 1930. Economist, 14 Feb. 1931, p. 32+.
 38
    "Austria." Economist, 31 Oct. 1931, p. 807+.
 39
    "Austria." Economist, 22 Apr. 1933, p. 862+.
 40
    We are grateful to Gianni Toniolo for pointing this out to us.


                                                 81
paper money was abolished, allowing the government to monetize a greater portion of its
budget deficits. In Luigi Einaudi's view the shift meant that the future of the lira would
no longer be determined by gold reserves, since these could now be replaced by government
paper, but by the supply of and demand for the currency. The lira remained overvalued,
however, and the gold standard was definitively abandoned in October 1936 (Toniolo, 1980,
pp. 290, 293­5; Fratianni and Spinelli, 1997, pp. 153-4). We consider both July 1935 and
October 1936 as candidate dates.




                                           82
D      Yield curve evidence from the US and UK
The travails of President Roosevelt in 1933 place the United States in our Group C of
countries that abandoned the gold standard in stages.41 Our estimated dynamic factor model
nevertheless identifies a clear turnaround in expected inflation and the ex ante real interest
rate in April and May 1933.42 In this section we fact-check this result against evidence from
US bond markets. It is well-known that bond term premia have predictive power for future
economic activity, so if expectations of future inflation were really revised upwards in 1933
then we would expect to see that also reflected in bond term premia.43 The results are shown
in Figure D.1. We measure the bond term premium as the difference between the yield to
maturity on 10 and 3-year zero coupon government bonds, as estimated for the US by Hall
and Sargent (2011).




                        Figure D.1: Term premium and output in the US

    The trends in the US bond term premium in Figure D.1 are consistent with our dynamic
factor model estimates and our narrative that leaving the gold standard was instrumental
in shifting expectations. The term premium narrowed with the deflationary expectations of
1932 and early 1933, only starting to widen from April 1933 onwards as bond markets priced
in increased expectations of future inflation. There is a temporary reversal in the bond term
premium at the beginning of 1934, but the broad picture that emerges is one of a V-shaped
evolution in both the bond term premium and output, with the bottom of the V occurring
around the time the US left the gold standard.
    The corresponding analysis for the UK is in Figure D.2, which plots the term premium
implied by estimates of the yields on 3 and 10-year zero coupon government bonds from El-
lison and Scott (2020). The bond term premium narrowed in the run up to the UK leaving
the gold standard in September 1931, as it did in the US before their departure in April
  41
     Edwards (2018) provides an entertaining narrative account of events at this time.
  42
     See Figures 2 and 6.
  43
     Bond term premia have predictive power for future economic activity under the expectations hypothesis
of the term structure of interest rates, where long rates are a function of current and future expected short
rates. If expectations of future inflation and output are revised upwards then the term premia on long bonds
should increase, as bond market participants expect that the yield on short bonds will rise in the future as
the monetary authority responds to inflationary pressures. See Estrella and Mishkin (1997) for more on this
argument.


                                                     83
1933. However, the post-departure experience of the UK was notably different. The UK
term premium remained relatively compressed until the Lausanne Conference in July 1932
and the cancellation of the Young Plan in August 1932, at which point it widened dramat-
ically.44 The evidence from the term premium therefore matches that from our dynamic
factor model estimates in Figure 4, which describe a period of volatility occurring before
a pronounced increase in expected inflation. Neither our dynamic factor model nor bond
markets suggest that leaving the gold standard had an immediate and unambiguous impact
on UK expectations.




                         Figure D.2: Term premium and output in the UK




 44
      Ellison et al. (2019) discuss the Lausanne Conference and the Young Plan from a UK perspective.


                                                    84
E     Synthetic matching for constructing counterfactual
      outcomes
This appendix briefly explains how synthetic control works and then provides the additional
detail regarding the construction of counterfactual outcomes in Section 7. For more infor-
mation on the methodology, see the latest survey by Abadie (2019).
     The synthetic control method, which generalises the baseline diff-in-diff treatment evalu-
ation method to allow for the time-varying unobservable component, constructs a synthetic
treatment unit that was not treated (i.e., counterfactual) using a pool of control units and
compares the outcome of the actually treated to that of the synthetic counterpart to infer the
causal effect of the treatment. There are two weights employed in the estimation procedure,
one for the control units (denoted by w) and the other for the control variables (denoted by
v ). The criterion function for w is obtained by first taking the quadratic distance of the value
of each control variable for the treatment unit to the weighted average (by w) of the values of
the same control variable across the control units, and then taking the weighted average (by
v ) of these across the control variables. Minimising this determines w for a given v . v is in
turn obtained by minimising the sum of the quadratic distance of the value of the dependent
variable for the treatment unit to the weighted average (by w) of the values of the dependent
variable across the control units, for a given w. Iterating on these minimisation routines un-
til convergence produces the optimal w and v . Finally, taking the weighted average of the
control units with the optimal w delivers the synthetic treatment unit. Naturally, we focus
on w here as this informs the data-driven affinity of the control units to the treatment unit.
It is important that only pre-treatment values of the control and dependent variables are
used for estimation to satisfy the identifying assumption.
    In our study, we use the synthetic control method to estimate what would have happened
in our sample countries if they had not left the gold standard when they actually did. The
data limitation constrains us to consider only the Sterling area countries whose departures
from the gold standard occurred before the end of 1931. For the countries that departed the
gold standard at a later time, we do not have enough control group countries to construct
satisfactory synthetic counterparts. Of the Sterling area countries, we were able to produce
successful synthetic counterparts for Australia, Denmark, Finland, New Zealand, and Swe-
den. Here, we take the UK departure from the gold standard in September 1931 as the
timing of the treatment for these countries. This choice allows us to control for the anticipa-
tion effect of the UK departure on Finland (which left in October 1931) (see Abadie, 2019)
whose departure was almost certainly triggered by the former. Using the actual departure
date for Finland does not change the result.
    Now, we present relevant information that was omitted from Section 7 in the interest of
space. First, we demonstrate how well the synthetic countries approximate the treatment
countries in terms of the control variables. For each treatment country, we use the most
parsimonious model specification possible to produce the synthetic counterpart. First, we
give the results for ex ante real interest rate which is based on the country weights (w above)
in Table V. Population, GDP per capita, and inflation are useful for matching the slope and
the curvature of real interest rate, and lagged real interest rate (relative to the treatment


                                               85
date) for matching the level. For the latter, we choose the dates that allow us to match the
pre-treatment path of real interest rate as well as possible. Note that "Pop" in the table
stands for population and "GDP" per capita GDP.


 Australia                          Denmark                          Finland
 Control       Actual   Synthetic   Control     Actual   Synthetic   Control     Actual   Synthetic
 Log Pop       6.81     6.98        Log Pop     6.55     6.82        Log Pop     6.54     7.18
 1930                               1930                             1930
 Log GDP       3.67     3.54        Log GDP     3.73     3.56        Log GDP     3.43     3.52
 1930                               1930                             1930
 Ave Y-o-Y     -7.43    -12.47      Real Int.   9.76     10.46       Ave Y-o-Y   -6.65    -12.29
 Inf.                               11-29                            Inf.
 Real Int.     7.53     7.40        Real Int.   11.56    10.84       Real Int.   9.14     9.53
 03-29                              05-30                            08-29
 Real Int.     8.17     7.96        Real Int.   11.96    12.30       Real Int.   9.54     9.76
 05-30                              09-30                            11-29
 Real Int.     8.97     8.79        Real Int.   12.52    11.39       Real Int.   11.71    11.71
 10-30                              05-31                            11-30
 Real Int.     7.32     8.76                                         Real Int.   12.88    12.64
 04-31                                                               02-31

 New Zealand                        Sweden
 Control       Actual   Synthetic   Control     Actual   Synthetic
 Log Pop       6.17     7.02        Log Pop     6.79     6.92
 1930                               1930
 Log GDP       3.70     3.58        Log GDP     3.63     3.71
 1930                               1930
 Ave Y-o-Y     -3.91    -11.31      Real Int.   11.94    11.59
 Inf.                               09-29
 Real Int.     8.60     9.05        Real Int.   15.21    13.61
 08-29                              04-30
 Real Int.     9.49     9.17        Real Int.   17.18    16.10
 01-30                              11-30
 Real Int.     10.79    11.48       Real Int.   13.48    14.60
 03-31                              04-31
 Real Int.     11.66    11.28
 07-31



    Broadly speaking, the synthetic treatment countries closely resemble the treatment coun-
tries in terms of the selected control variables. The data idiosyncracy does make the New
Zealand case more challenging than others, but we still obtain a reasonable match as also
seen in Figure VI.
    Next, we present the results for realised year-on-year inflation. Due to the data charac-
teristics, we were able to match only the three Nordic countries successfully this time. The
table below compares the actual and synthetic treatment countries in terms of the selected
control variables.

                                                86
 Denmark                               Finland                             Sweden
 Control         Actual    Synthetic   Control       Actual   Synthetic    Control      Actual   Synthetic
 Log Pop         6.55      6.78        Log Pop       6.54     7.03         Log Pop      6.79     7.05
 1930                                  1930                                1930
 Log GDP         3.73      3.75        Log GDP       3.43     3.55         Log GDP      3.63     3.57
 1930                                  1930                                1930
 Inf. 02-29      4.61      -0.55       Inf. 03-29    -2.91    -1.57        Inf. 05-29   -7.89    -5.06
 Inf. 10-29      -0.67     -1.81       Inf. 10-29    -4.95    -6.45        Inf. 10-29   -4.83    -6.42
 Inf. 02-30      -11.95    -9.29       Inf. 03-30    -8.00    -11.56       Inf. 03-30   -13.19   -13.25
 Inf. 02-31      -16.43    -15.84      Inf. 02-31    -7.53    -12.65       Inf. 10-30   -14.49   -14.50



    Again, the resulting synthetic treatment countries are broadly similar to the actual treat-
ment countries in their pre-treatment characteristics. The right panel of Figure VI indicates
satisfactory matches also in terms of the pre-treatment path of realised inflation.
    The country weights (w above) used for constructing the synthetic treatment countries
are as follows:


                                                 Denmark      Finland     Sweden
                             Belgium             0.3045
                             Czechoslovakia                   0.7482      0.6580
                             Netherlands         0.2841                   0.2305
                             Romania             0.0020
                             Switzerland         0.4094       0.2518      0.1115



    Note that large countries in the control group such as France, Germany, and the US
receive zero weights in all the cases. Given the small open economy characteristics of the
treatment countries, it is reassuring to see this because the result otherwise may indicate an
identification failure.
    The results above are robust to alternative selections of the control group, for instance
if we include Bulgaria, Germany, and Hungary which imposed exchange controls but did
not leave the gold standard formally, and furthermore Argentina and Austria whose gold
standard departure dates are also ambiguous. They also pass placebo tests in which the
control group countries are treated as if they belong to the treatment group and leave-one-
out tests which check whether estimates are driven by an influential control country, for
instance a close trade partner.45
 45
      Because these are routine robustness checks, they are not included here.




                                                      87
Supplementary References
Abadie, A. (2019). Using Synthetic Controls: Feasibility, Data Requirements, and Method-
       ological Aspects [Forthcoming]. Journal of Economic Literature.
Edwards, S. (2018). American Default: The Untold Story of FDR, the Supreme Court, and
       the Battle over Gold. Princeton University Press.
Ellison, M., Sargent, T. J. and Scott, A. (2019). Funding the Great War and the Beginning
       of the End for British Hegemony. In E. Dabla-Norris (Ed.), Debt and Entanglements
       Between the Wars (pp. 59­79). Washington: International Monetary Fund.
Ellison, M. and Scott, A. (2020). Managing the UK National Debt 1694­2018. American
       Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 12 (3), 227­57.
Estrella, A. and Mishkin, F. (1997). The Predictive Power of the Term Structure of Interest
       Rates in Europe and the United States: Implications for the European Central Bank.
       European Economic Review, 41 (7), 1375­1401.
Fleming, G. (1997). Keynes, Purchasing Power Parity and Exchange Rate Policy in New
       Zealand During the 1930s Depression. New Zealand Economic Papers, 31, 1­14.
Fratianni, M. and Spinelli, F. (1997). A Monetary History of Italy. Cambridge University
       Press.
Hall, G. J. and Sargent, T. J. (2011). Interest Rate Risk and Other Determinants of Post-
       WWII US Government Debt/GDP Dynamics. American Economic Journal: Macroe-
       conomics, 3 (3), 192­214.
Jobst, C. and Kernbauer, H. (2016). The Quest for Stable Money. Central Banking in Austria
       1816-2016. Frankfurt: Campus Verlag.
Schedvin, C. (1988). Australia and the Great Depression: A Study of Economic Development
       and Policy in the 1920s and 1930s. Melbourne: Sydney University Press in Association
       with Oxford University Press.
Singleton, J. (2003). New Zealand in the Depression: Devaluation without a Balance-of-
       Payments Crisis. In T. Balderston (Ed.), The World Economy and National Economies
       in the Interwar Slump (pp. 172­190). London: Palgrave Macmillan UK.
Toniolo, G. (1980). L'economia dell'Italia Fascista (1. ed.) Roma; Bari: Laterza.



                                            88
