                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                AGE DISCRIMINATION ACROSS THE BUSINESS CYCLE

                                     Gordon B. Dahl
                                    Matthew M. Knepper

                                     Working Paper 27581
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27581


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2020




We are grateful to Ron Edwards and the EEOC for their guidance and provision of the EEOC
charge microdata. We would also like to thank Kate Antonovics, David Balan, Eli Berman,
Aislinn Bohren, Ben-jamin Bridgman, Julie Cullen, Abe Dunn, Roger Gordon, Alex Imas,
Yousra Khan, David Neumark, Devesh Raval, Dan-Olof Rooth, Ian Schmutte, Brett Wendling,
and seminar participants at several universities and conferences for valuable feedback and
suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Gordon B. Dahl and Matthew M. Knepper. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Age Discrimination across the Business Cycle
Gordon B. Dahl and Matthew M. Knepper
NBER Working Paper No. 27581
July 2020, Revised in October 2020
JEL No. J23,J64,J71

                                         ABSTRACT

We test whether age discrimination rises during recessions using two complemen-tary analyses.
EEOC microdata reveal that age-related ring and hiring charges rise by 3.4% and 1.4%,
respectively, for each percentage point increase in a state-industry's monthly unemployment.
Though the opportunity cost of ling falls, the fraction of meritorious claims increases--a
sufficient condition for rising discrimination under mild assumptions. Second, we repurpose data
from a hiring correspondence study conducted across different cities and time periods during the
recovery from the Great Recession. Each percentage point increase in local unemployment
reduces the callback rate for older versus younger women by 15%.


Gordon B. Dahl
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0508
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
gdahl@ucsd.edu

Matthew M. Knepper
Terry College of Business
University of Georgia
Athens, GA 30602
mknepper@uga.edu
1     Introduction

Starting with Becker (1957), economists have argued that taste-based discrimination­the
preference for a certain class of workers based on characteristics unrelated to productivity­is
costly, and hence, unsustainable in a competitive product market (Black and Strahan, 2001;
Black and Brainerd, 2004). Subsequent work extended this argument to the labor market
(Manning, 2003; Biddle and Hamermesh, 2013), with the insight that employer search costs
create a market penalty for passing on qualified, but disfavored workers. This implies that
slack in the labor market will increase the scope for taste-based discrimination to emerge.
Likewise, statistical discrimination should be more prevalent when search costs for workers
are low, since the return to discerning individual productivity falls. Hence, macroeconomic
shocks which increase the pool of unemployed workers will create opportunities and incentives
for employers to indulge in discrimination at lower cost.1 And if downwardly rigid wages
necessitate layoffs, discriminatory firms can fire equally productive but less preferred workers
without harming profits.
    We employ two unique data sources and two novel empirical strategies to test whether,
consistent with these theories, firing and hiring discrimination rise as unemployment in-
creases. We focus specifically on the incidence of age discrimination over the business cycle.
A key reason is that age discrimination must be intentional to be illegal under the Age
Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA), so our analysis concerns conscious decisions to
discriminate. This is in contrast to other classes, such as race and gender, which are pro-
tected under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 or the Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA), where unintentional discrimination is also illegal.2 Moreover, the Supreme Court
   1
     Related papers on discrimination and the macroeconomy include Ashenfelter (1970); Freeman (1973);
Shulman (1987); Neumark and Button (2014); Knepper (2018); Boulware and Kuttner (2019).
   2
     Disparate treatment is illegal under the ADEA, but disparate impact claims are not. As explained
by Rozycki and Sullivan (2010), in disparate treatment cases, "[t]he employee must prove through direct
or circumstantial evidence that the discrimination was intentional. In contrast, a disparate-impact claim
does not require proof of an intention to discriminate. Instead, showing that a facially neutral employment
practice has a disproportionately adverse impact on a protected group states a prima facie case of unlawful
disparate-impact discrimination."



                                                    1
has ruled that older workers may be terminated lawfully due to "reasonable factors other
than age," such as wages and productivity, which may be correlated with age (see Section
2.1 for details).3 Age discrimination also has potentially significant consequences: a large
and growing fraction of the labor force is older (Maestas et al., 2016), late-in-life involuntary
job loss has severe adverse effects on physical and mental health (Gallo et al., 2000), and
older workers have had a particularly difficult time getting rehired in the aftermath of the
Great Recession (Johnson, 2012; Neumark and Button, 2014).
       Measuring age discrimination, and indeed any type of workplace discrimination, is diffi-
cult. Direct, objective measures of discrimination are scarce and so scholarship has tended
to lean on indirect ones, such as wage and employment gaps. Such outcomes, while likely
to be adversely impacted by increases in discrimination, could also be due to productivity
or costs which differ across age groups (Scott et al., 1995). This measurement challenge
is complicated further by the presence of turbulent labor market conditions such as those
engendered by the Great Recession. While unemployment spells lasted longer and hiring
rates fell further for older workers during the Great Recession (Johnson and Butrica, 2012),
the attribution of these adverse outcomes to discrimination is called into question by early
claiming of Social Security (Hutchens, 1999) and early retirement (Bosworth, 2012).4
       Our paper overcomes these measurement challenges using two complementary analyses.
The first investigation leverages novel and direct measures of employment discrimination:
individual-level ADEA charges filed with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC). We use state×industry×month variation in exposure to the Great Recession to
test whether employers discriminate more against older workers when competitive forces
are weakened. For each one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate, we find
the volume of ADEA firing and hiring charges increases by 3.4% and 1.4%, respectively.
   3
     For example, the decision to renege on an implicit commitment to overpay older workers, as in a deferred
compensation model (Lazear, 1979; Schleifer and Summers, 1988), is perfectly legal.
   4
     Neumark and Button (2014) recognize this complication in their work: "Of course we do not actually
know whether age discrimination was or is occurring. But we can ask whether these state protections reduced
the adverse effects of the Great Recession on older workers relative to younger workers."



                                                     2
The number of charges does not increase merely because the number of displaced workers
increases; 75% of the former effect is driven by an increase in the share of fired workers filing
discharge claims.
       While these results point to an increase in the reported level of discrimination, they do
not distinguish genuine employer misconduct from elevated employee incentives to file a
case. The reason is that as outside labor market opportunities recede, the opportunity cost
of pursuing a claim will fall, and hence more marginal cases will be filed with the EEOC
even if actual discrimination has remained constant.
       We address this potential confound by taking advantage of the EEOC's determination
of whether a discrimination case has "merit" ­ a decision which involves a lengthy follow-up
investigation as needed. Using this proxy for the quality of claims, we find the fraction of
ADEA discrimination cases with merit rises in response to deteriorating labor market con-
ditions. For each one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate, the probability
a case has merit increases by a statistically significant 0.7%. Under relatively mild assump-
tions, this is a sufficient condition which allows us to conclude that actual (as opposed to
merely reported) age discrimination increased during the Great Recession.5
       Our finding that actual age discrimination rises when economic conditions are poor is
robust to a variety of alternative explanations and specifications. We first corroborate that
productivity considerations are unlikely to be the driving force behind the increase in merit.
Empirically, the countercyclical merit increase is concentrated in industries for which indi-
vidual productivity differences (as measured by wage dispersion) are, in fact, less likely to
be pronounced. Alternatively, merit might increase if the quality of laid-off workers who
file charges rises as the recession intensifies. This would imply that damages awarded in
meritorious cases (which is a function of backpay, a measure of worker productivity) should
be countercyclical. But we find that damages are uncorrelated with the business cycle. The
   5
    Specifically, we assume that holding constant the level of actual discrimination, the quality of marginally
added cases falls during a recession. We also require the merit variable to only vary with the business cycle
due to changes in the true quality of cases.



                                                      3
results additionally appear not to be driven by increases in employee effort to win a case, in-
dustries with a relatively large fraction of high-tech jobs, or the level of resources the EEOC
has at its disposal for investigating claims. Our general findings are also insensitive to the
use of alternative measures of labor market tightness and polynomial distributed lag models.
       The second analysis uses a correspondence study. A large literature has used this type
of design to study levels of hiring discrimination for different groups.6 More germane to our
analysis, two papers have looked at how labor market tightness across occupations affects
callback rates for ethnic minorities. Baert et al. (2015) finds that occupations with shorter
vacancy durations discriminate more in Belgium. As the authors recognize, an alternative
interpretation is that occupations with difficult to fill vacancies are less desirable and hence
ethnic minorities face less competition from natives (Bulow and Summers, 1986). Carlsson
et al. (2018) finds the opposite result using the native female callback rate as a measure of
labor market tightness in Sweden; since this measure is potentially endogenous, they also
use the vacancy-unemployment ratio by occupation and find marginally significant effects.7
       Our focus is on how the level of age discrimination varies over the business cycle. For-
tuitously, we are able to repurpose data from a correspondence study conducted by Farber
et al. (2017) in the aftermath of the Great Recession. These authors sent out fictitious re-
sumes for women applying to administrative support positions, to answer a different set of
questions.8 The resumes were assigned older versus younger ages (and other characteristics,
depending on treatment) and circulated across a panel of 8 different cities from 2012-2014,
generating ample across-city and across-time variation in unemployment. Exploiting this
rich variation, our analysis shows that the age callback penalty grows considerably in the
   6
     For a sampling of correspondence studies using race, ethnicity, and immigration status, see Bertrand
and Mullainathan (2004); Carlsson and Rooth (2012); Edo et al. (2019); Oreopoulos (2011); Rooth (2010).
For age, see Bendick et al. (1997, 1999); Riach and Rich (2010), and for age by sex, see Farber et al. (2017);
Lahey (2008); Neumark et al. (2019a,b). For broader surveys on labor market discrimination, see Bertrand
and Duflo (2017); Neumark (2018); Baert (2018).
   7
     Also related is the correspondence study of Kroft et al. (2013), which shows that in tight labor markets
employers lean more heavily on the length of unemployment spells to infer worker quality.
   8
     In their paper, the authors investigate the effect of age, unemployment spell length, and low-level interim
jobs on the callback rate.



                                                       4
presence of anemic labor market conditions: each one percentage point increase in the local
unemployment rate reduces the callback rate for older women by 1.6 percentage points (off
a baseline 10.8% callback rate), relative to younger women. We interpret this as evidence
that firms discriminate more as the number of hiring options increases.
   The EEOC and repurposed field experiment analyses complement each other well, as each
has unique strengths. The EEOC data cover the entire U.S. and capture age discrimination
borne by real people during a recession. Moreover, our EEOC analysis allows us to study
changes in discrimination on the firing margin, something which is not possible with a
correspondence or experimental study. The firing margin is particularly noteworthy, both
because it constitutes the bulk of these types of age discrimination cases (85% firing versus
15% hiring), and because losing a job is likely to impose greater immediate costs compared
to not being hired. The correspondence analysis has the advantage of random assignment of
applicant age to otherwise comparable profiles, and requires no assumptions about reporting
behavior during a recession.
   Interpreting our findings, the EEOC firing margin is more likely to be driven by taste-
based discrimination, since firms will have learned about productivity for already employed
workers (Altonji and Pierret, 2001). However, we also recognize employers may be statis-
tically discriminating based on expectations of future productivity related to age. For the
EEOC and correspondence hiring results, both taste-based and statistical discrimination
could play important roles. While we cannot distinguish between the two, we note that both
are illegal, and from the worker's perspective, equally harmful.
   Taken together, our two analyses provide compelling evidence that age discrimination
rises as labor markets deteriorate. As far as we know, this is the first direct evidence for
age discrimination varying with the business cycle, both for the firing and hiring margins.
This accords with predictions that as competition for workers wanes, discrimination should
increase. A related insight is that the extent of measured discrimination depends crucially
upon the labor market context during which that measurement happened. This is relevant


                                              5
when interpreting and comparing research documenting discrimination in different time pe-
riods or labor markets.9
        The next section describes federal ADEA laws and the EEOC's role in investigating
employer misconduct. Section 3 describes both the EEOC and correspondence study data.
Section 4 outlines a simple framework for discrimination reporting behavior and Section 5
details the empirical methodology. Section 6 presents the main results for our two comple-
mentary analyses. Section 7 summarizes and concludes.



2         The EEOC and Discrimination Reporting

2.1        Federal Age Discrimination in Employment Act

The Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) was codified into federal law in 1967
with the explicit purpose of protecting workers against workplace discrimination on the
basis of age. Issues covered include practices involving firing, hiring, promotion, layoff,
compensation, harassment, and so forth. The youngest age above which an employee is
eligible for protection under the ADEA is 40.
        A primary purpose of the ADEA is to help counter the perception among employers that
age adversely impacts ability. But research has found that taste-based discrimination may
also play an important role in explaining ageism; Neumark et al. (2019a) conclude that the
callback deficit for older workers is more consistent with a model of taste discrimination after
ruling out many common sources of statistical discrimination. Relatedly, Burn et al. (2019)
find that ageist language related to personality traits and physical attractiveness in job ads
predicts discrimination for both older men and women. Importantly, though, the EEOC
does not distinguish between taste-based and statistical discrimination in its enforcement
    9
    For example, this is salient when comparing estimates of discrimination against ethnic minorities (Doleac
and Hansen, 2020; Riach and Rich, 2002), women (Egan et al., 2017; Goldin and Rouse, 2000; Helleseter
et al., 2020; Kuhn and Shen, 2012; Neumark et al., 1996), or workers whose nationality or race differs from
that of their manager (°Aslund et al., 2014; Giuliano et al., 2009, 2011).




                                                     6
activities; both are considered to be illegal.
       There is, however, an important question on the extent to which the law does or does not
differentiate between cases arising due to age discrimination versus ability and/or costs. In
the majority opinion written for the 2005 Supreme Court Case of Smith v. City of Jackson,
Miss. (544 U.S. 228 (2005)), Justice Sandra Day O'Connor unequivocally asserts the right
of employers to lawfully take actions that are inimical to the class of older employees, so
long as they are based on a "reasonable factor other than age." Specifically, she writes:

              ...the Wirtz Report correctly concluded that­unlike the classifications protected
         by Title VII­there often is a correlation between an individual's age and her ability
         to perform a job. Wirtz Report 2, 11-15. That is to be expected, for "physical abil-
         ity generally declines with age," Murgia, supra, at 315, and in some cases, so does
         mental capacity, see Gregory v. Ashcroft, 501 U. S. 452, 472 (1991)....Beyond
         these performance-affecting factors, there is also the fact that many employment
         benefits, such as salary, vacation time, and so forth, increase as an employee
         gains experience and seniority. See, e.g., Finnegan v. Trans World Airlines,
         Inc., 967 F. 2d 1161, 1164 (CA7 1992) ("[V]irtually all elements of a standard
         compensation package are positively correlated with age"). Accordingly, many
         employer decisions that are intended to cut costs or respond to market forces will
         likely have a disproportionate effect on older workers. Given the myriad ways in
         which legitimate business practices can have a disparate impact on older workers,
         it is hardly surprising that Congress declined to subject employers to civil liability
         based solely on such effects....


       This ruling is important for interpreting our findings. The ADEA allows for disparate
impact in the hiring and firing of older workers, in contrast to other protected classes such
as race or sex where it would be illegal (see footnote 2). The implication is that an ADEA
claim in which older employees are fired based on cost or productivity considerations will
not be considered meritorious, at least under the post-2005 interpretation of the law.10 It is
for this reason as well that our EEOC analysis sample begins in 2005.
  10
    Section 4(f)(2) of the current version of the ADEA confirms that reasonable factors other than age are
allowable. To clarify, it would still be illegal to fire a worker based on expected future declines in productivity
based on their age as this is a form of statistical discrimination.


                                                        7
2.2       Process for Filing and Resolving Discrimination Charges

The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) enforces prohibitions against age
discrimination for private and public employers with over 20 employees (approximately 85%
of all U.S. workers).11 Figure 1 lays out the process for filing and resolving discrimination
charges. Individuals are typically required to file a charge with the EEOC within 180 days of
the alleged discriminatory action. The employer is then notified of the receipt of the charge
within 10 days of the filing date. Normally the case is first referred to mediation, during
which a neutral third party will attempt to assist the two parties in reaching a voluntary
resolution. The average time to resolution for mediated cases is less than three months.
       If instead either the employer or employee decides against mediation, the EEOC begins
its investigation by first asking the employer to provide a written answer to the discrimina-
tion charge, after which the EEOC may hold interviews, gather documents, and interview
witnesses. This process takes approximately 10 months on average. At any time during the
investigation, the charging party and respondent may reach a negotiated settlement or the
charging party may withdraw the case after receiving desired benefits from the employer.
These are both considered to be "merit resolutions" by the EEOC, as they imply an outcome
favorable to the charging party.
       Following the investigation, the EEOC determines whether they have reasonable cause
to believe that the alleged discrimination occurred according to the evidence collected. If
no reasonable cause is determined, the charging party may still exercise the right to sue. If
instead a reasonable cause is determined (i.e., the case has "merit"), the EEOC will again
attempt to negotiate a voluntary agreement with the employer and charging party, resulting
in either a successful or unsuccessful conciliation. If efforts to conciliate the charge are
  11
    Certain states, counties, towns, and cities have implemented their own anti-discrimination laws. The
organizations responsible for enforcing these laws, Fair Employment Practice Agencies (FEPAs), often have
worksharing agreements with the EEOC so that whenever the charge's allegation is also covered by an EEO
law, the FEPA will dual file the charge with the EEOC. To control for heterogeneity in the coverage and
intensity of employment discrimination enforcement across states, we include state fixed effects and exclude
FEPA charges from the analysis.




                                                     8
unsuccessful, the EEOC will then refer the case to its legal staff to determine its suitability
for litigation.
    Figure 1 displays the fraction of cases with different outcomes for ADEA hiring plus firing
charges in our baseline sample. Combined merit resolutions are significantly rarer (17%) than
are cases dismissed due to not having had reasonable cause (68%). The remaining category
is administrative closures, which are charges for which the resolution cannot be determined
(15%).12 Only a small number (0.3%) of all initially filed charges are litigated.



3     Data

This paper combines a unique source of EEOC administrative data on charges with local
area estimates of employment produced by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). This en-
ables us to examine the relationship between the Great Recession and self-reported, but
quality-validated, workplace discrimination charges filed by older employees. Additionally,
we use data from a correspondence study of job applications for older and younger women
to assess whether increases in local unemployment rates exacerbate age discrimination. In
the following subsections, we describe the primary data elements subsumed in each.


3.1     EEOC Charge Data

Our EEOC analysis uses the universe of roughly 80,000 ADEA firing and hiring charges filed
with the EEOC from 2005 through 2015 (approximately 8,000 annual filings).13 These are
further partitioned into 51 issues (e.g., Sexual Harassment, Discharge, Hiring, etc.) and 105
bases (e.g., Sex-Female, Race-Black, Age, etc.). Each observation in the EEOC dataset cor-
responds to a particular charge, which may include multiple claims of types of discrimination.
The average number of claims per charge is just over 4 for ADEA firing charges and just
  12
     These include scenarios where the charging party fails to respond to the letter, the EEOC does not have
jurisdiction, the charging party files a private lawsuit, there is a failure to locate the charging party, etc.
  13
     Data is unfortunately missing from October 2010 through September 2011.



                                                      9
over 3 for ADEA hiring charges. For the purposes of this paper, we classify an observation
as a firing charge if one of the issues was coded as "discharge" or "layoff" and as a hiring
charge if one of the issues was "hiring." These charge types account for approximately 73%
of all ADEA filings. Appendix Table A1 lists the most common basis categories in addition
to age, and the most common additional issue categories. The table shows that retaliation
and disability claims are commonly included in ADEA firing and hiring charges, and that
terms and conditions and harassment are commonly included as additional issues.14
       Appendix Table A1 also reports selected characteristics of the workers and firms. For
both firing and hiring, the average age of the charging party is 56 years old, with over half
being white and roughly one-quarter black. Interestingly, the gender composition skews more
male in hiring charges. The share of plaintiffs retaining private legal counsel is far greater
in ADEA cases of firing discrimination than in hiring discrimination (17% versus 7%), likely
reflecting the monetary stakes being greater in grievances involving a discharge. Finally, the
composition of private versus public firms differs by the type of charge filed; nine out of ten
firms accused of firing discrimination are private, compared to just three-quarters of those
accused of hiring discrimination.
       Particularly important for our study, the EEOC data include information on how the
charges are resolved, which results from a follow-up investigation conducted by the local
EEO office. We transform the resolution into a binary variable that indicates if the agency
determined the case to have had "merit," which serves as a useful proxy for the quality of
the charge filed. The EEOC classifies as meritorious those cases resulting in settlements,
withdrawals with benefits, and reasonable cause findings. Cases determined to have merit
include both successful and unsuccessful final conciliation attempts. In general, merit res-
olutions are those charges for which the outcome is favorable to the charging party, either
by way of monetary damages being exchanged or the EEOC concluding that the charge had
reasonable cause following its lengthy investigation.
  14
    Note that a charge including a discharge can also involve a hiring issue, for example if an employee feels
they were wrongly fired and not rehired for another position.


                                                     10
   Table 1 provides a detailed breakdown of case resolutions for the ADEA firing and hiring
charges separately. Notable differences between the two types of charges emerge; namely,
ADEA firing cases are six times as common, 22% more likely (17.2% versus 14.1%) to have
had merit, and generate larger monetary damages. This makes sense in light of the fact that
hiring discrimination is notoriously difficult to prove.
   There are several advantages of using the confidential EEOC microdata compared to the
publicly available EEOC data, which is nationally and annually aggregated, as others have
done in various settings (e.g., Donohue and Siegelman, 1992, 2005; Griffin, 2016; Wakefield
and Uggen, 2004). First, we can leverage information on the industry, state, and month
of a charge to generate far richer variation in unemployment. We can further combine this
information with a measure of the quality of each individual case. Moreover, we can separate
out hiring and firing discrimination from "on-the-job" discrimination, for which there may
be different reporting incentives during a recession.


3.2    State and Industry Unemployment Data

To measure local exposure to the Great Recession and subsequent recovery over the 2005-
2015 period, we first calculate the number of unemployed individuals at the state-month
level using the Local Area Unemployment Statistics series produced by the BLS. We also
use variation in industry-specific exposure using unemployment statistics tabulated at the
industry-month level by the BLS. We then impute state-by-industry specific unemployment
rates at the monthly level, the details of which appear in Section 5.
   Appendix Figure A1 shows state variation in the unemployment rate at the height of
the Great Recession (December 2009). There exists considerable cross-sectional variation;
unemployment rates ranged from just over 4% in North Dakota to nearly 14% in Michigan.
Appendix Figure A2 documents similarly wide variation across industries. Construction
was shocked particularly hard, seeing a peak unemployment of 22%, whereas Education and
Health Services were relatively insulated, with unemployment reaching only 6%. While not


                                               11
shown, there is also variation in the speed of recovery across both states and industries.


3.3        Correspondence Study Data

Our second analysis uses data from Farber et al. (2017), who generated over 12,000 ficti-
tious resumes and submitted them to 8 different cities over four time periods between 2012
and 2014. They explored how applicant characteristics (age, unemployment duration, and
whether the applicant held a low-level interim job) affected the callback rate for adminis-
trative support jobs. We repurpose their data to see how differences in local unemployment
affect callback rates of older workers. For context, all of the artificial applicants were college-
educated females with significant work experience.
       Consistent with standard methods used in correspondence studies, for each city and in
each application wave, paired applications were submitted with just one differing characteris-
tic. Importantly, in rounds 1-3, either two younger [35, 36, 37, 40, 41, or 42] or two older [55,
56, 57, or 58] applications were sent to each job posting, and so variation in age is generated
across rather than within job postings. Round 1 compared the newly unemployed with those
who had been randomly assigned an unemployment spell of 4, 12, 24, or 52 weeks. Round
2 was identical except that each applicant had been randomly assigned an unemployment
duration of 0, 4, 12, 24, or 52 weeks. Round 3 precisely mirrored round 2 except that a low-
level interim job had been assigned randomly at the application level, within matched-pairs.
Finally, round 4 added to round 3 the modification that each posting received an application
from both a younger and older pair of workers. Round 4, then, differs from the first three in
that older workers directly compete against their younger counterparts.
       Table 2 shows the number of applications submitted during each round of applications­
03/2012-05/2012, 07/2012-09/2012, 11/2013-4/2014, and 04/2014-08/2014­and for each of
the 8 cities­Charlotte, Chicago, Dallas, Omaha, Pittsburgh, Portland (ME), Sacramento,
and Tampa Bay.15 As Farber et al. (2017) note, they intentionally picked 4 low unem-
  15
       Portland, ME was omitted in rounds 1 and 3 of the survey.


                                                     12
ployment cities and 4 high unemployment cities. This feature, along with the fact that
each successive round of applications was submitted as labor markets continued to recover
from the Great Recession, generates meaningful across-city and across-time variation, as
illustrated in Figure 2.



4       Actual versus Reported Discrimination

Before turning to our empirical models, we briefly discuss how a recession is predicted to
impact both actual and reported age discrimination. We start with the model developed by
Biddle and Hamermesh (2013) and used by Baert et al. (2015) where (i) some firms have a
taste for discrimination, i.e., a preference for equally productive younger versus older workers
in our setting and (ii) the tightness of the labor market imposes a tradeoff between profits
and discrimination for monopsonistic firms. The tradeoff arises because there are search
costs to finding and retaining qualified workers.
      When the economy is doing well and the supply of workers thin, not retaining or not hiring
qualified older workers reduces profits through these higher search costs. Now consider what
happens during a recession. Discriminatory firms which need to lay off workers will want
to fire their older workers first, absent any legal costs of doing so. Similarly, discriminatory
firms that are hiring during a recession face lower search costs for finding a young worker
among the enlarged pool of those looking for work. This search cost model can readily be
extended to statistical discrimination. When the supply of job applicants is plentiful, firms
have little incentive to invest time and effort into disentangling individual productivity from
group averages. In contrast, the opportunity cost of waiting for another applicant to arrive
is high in a tight labor market, and so statistical discrimination becomes a less attractive
screening mechanism. The goal of this paper is to test whether actual discrimination moves
countercyclically, and the framework described above provides a possible explanation for
why it might.16
 16
      Other models are possible (see Carlsson et al. (2018)), and can even lead to the opposite prediction if age

                                                       13
    But one cannot distinguish between actual and reported discrimination without charac-
terizing a worker's incentives to file a charge. Older workers who are fired from their jobs
(or not hired in the first place) have the option to pursue a legal claim of discrimination
to receive both monetary payments and a potential restoration of their job. A worker's
firing may have been linked to age discrimination, but it could also have been due to lower
productivity/higher costs relative to retained workers and hence perfectly legal. How strong
a case the worker has influences their chances of winning, and therefore their likelihood of
filing an EEOC charge.
    The worker's reporting threshold will also respond to labor market conditions, due to the
time costs of filing a charge and the difficulty of finding new employment at a similar wage.
During good economic times, the opportunity cost of filing a claim is higher and the potential
benefits lower, as it is easier to find a new job quickly. Conversely, as the job market weakens,
workers have an incentive to file more marginal claims. Hence we make the assumption that
holding actual discrimination constant, more marginal claims will be reported during a weak
labor market. This implies that for a given level of discrimination, the volume of charges
will be higher while average claim quality will be lower during a recession.
    This simple framework makes clear that during a recession, the volume of hiring and
firing charges could go up for two different reasons: an actual increase in discrimination and
a reported increase in discrimination. Therefore, a jump in EEOC charges during a recession
does not, by itself, necessarily imply a rise in actual discrimination. We can, however, arrive
at such a conclusion if the quality of discrimination charges filed weakly increases. In this
case, the rise in actual discrimination more than offsets the increased filing of weaker cases.
This interpretation is valid so long as (i) holding constant the level of actual discrimination,
the merit of marginally added cases falls during a recession, and (ii) the merit variable is
an objective measure of case quality whose mean varies with the business cycle only due to
changes in the true quality of cases. As robustness checks, later in the paper we explore and
is a proxy for characteristics not observed by the employer (a situation more relevant to the hiring margin
than the firing margin).


                                                    14
rule out several alternative explanations for why merit might change during a recession.
    The benefit of our EEOC data is that we have an independent measure of the quality of
a case, which allows us to test whether the sufficient condition holds. Importantly, we are
able to measure discrimination on the firing margin, something not possible with a corre-
spondence study. The benefit of the correspondence data is that the issue of reporting does
not even arise. Moreover, we can directly test what happens when older job applicants face
increased competition from younger applicants. This is because, in the fourth round of the
correspondence study, older applicants compete against two additional younger candidates
which were experimentally added to the applicant pool.



5     Empirical Models

5.1    EEOC Charge Model

To identify the effect of unemployment on discrimination, we adapt the empirical model
outlined in Maestas et al. (2018). That paper leverages variation in unemployment across
states and over time to study disability insurance claims. We augment their formulation by
including imputed measures of monthly state exposure by industry. Such an enhancement is
possible because industry codes are included in the EEOC data and especially useful because
of the rich variation in unemployment exhibited across industries during the Great Recession
(see Appendix Figure A2).
    To exploit this additional layer of heterogeneity, we impute monthly industry-specific
unemployment at the state level using weighted national unemployment shares by industry.
Specifically, we first recognize the number of unemployed individuals in each state s in time
period t, Ust , equals the weighted sum of industry-specific unemployment j within that state:
                                              J
                                     Ust =          wjst Ujst                              (1)
                                             j =1

where the subscripts denote industries and the weights, wjst , represent each industry's share


                                              15
of total state employment in a period. These employment shares can be directly calculated
at the state-month level from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW).
   To impute Ujst , we assume that industry j 's employment-weighted share of unemploy-
ment in state s in period t is equal to the corresponding employment-weighted share of
unemployment at the national level n. This assumption can be expressed as:
                                          Ujst          Ujnt
                                 wjst ×        = wjnt ×                                   (2)
                                          Ust           Unt

As all other variables are available from the QCEW or BLS's Current Employment Statistics,
Ujst can be imputed by solving as a function of these known quantities.
   Armed with these monthly state-industry measures of labor market tightness, we estimate
two different types of models, one for hiring and firing volume, and one for hiring and firing
merit. Our baseline model for the volume regressions collapses the number of ADEA charges
to the industry-state-month level and takes the following form:

                           volumejst = Ujst + j + s + t +       jst                       (3)

where volumejst is the number of ADEA hiring or firing discrimination reports filed with
the EEOC in a state-industry-month and j , s , and t are fixed effects for industry, state,
and time. As in Maestas et al. (2018), we use the number unemployed as our measure
instead of the unemployment rate to eliminate the confound introduced by industry-state-
time differences in the size of the labor force on our outcome measures. The coefficient
 can easily be rescaled to estimate the effect of a one percentage point increase in the
national unemployment rate on the change in the number of ADEA discrimination claims
filed. In robustness checks, we explore alternative measures for labor market slackness, and
find similar results. Our main estimates weight by the size of the state-industry-month labor
force, so as to make the estimates representative of the entire U.S. population (see Solon et
al., 2015); as we show in the Appendix, unweighted estimates yield similar findings.
   This baseline model implicitly assumes that past changes in unemployment do not induce
contemporaneous discrimination charges. As an alternative, we allow for the possibility that

                                              16
discrimination charge filing behavior responds not just to current movements in the unem-
ployment rate but to previous changes as well. In particular, we implement a polynomial
distributed lag model similar to that in Maestas et al. (2018):

                         volumejst =  (L)Ujst + j + s + t +       jst                      (4)

where the function  (L) is a lag polynomial that measures the effects of current and past
values of unemployment on volume. The sum of the individual lag weights represents the
cumulative number of discrimination reports induced by current and previous changes in
unemployment. The appropriate polynomial degree and number of lags are chosen by mini-
mizing the Akaike Information Criteria (AIC).
   Our baseline model for the merit regressions uses noncollapsed data at the individual
case level, so that we can control for relevant case characteristics. We model the dummy
variable for whether case i was determined to have merit as:

                        meritijst = Ujst + j + s + t + Xi +        ijst                    (5)

where Xi is a vector of control variables associated with a case. We include the race, age,
and sex of the charging party, along with the firm's sector (public or private). Time fixed
effects implicitly account for the potential impact of changing resource constraints at the
EEOC on case success rates. In a robustness check, we additionally include controls for
the type of claim being filed (e.g., sexual harassment, wages, suspension) and the class of
protected employees involved (e.g., race, sex, disabled); the results are similar, suggesting
compositional changes are not driving our results. We also consider polynomial distributed
lag models for merit which are analogous to equation (4).
   Though state-industry-time differences in local labor market conditions constitute the
source of identifying variation, we conservatively cluster our standard errors at the state
level. Since charges are filed with one of the 53 local EEO offices, this also allows for
arbitrary correlation across the decisions reached by any one local office over time. Finally,
note that there is no reason to weight the merit regressions, as they use individual-level data

                                              17
for the entire U.S.


5.2    Correspondence Study Model

For our correspondence study analysis, we estimate two types of regressions, one for rounds
1-3 and another when including rounds 1-4. As a reminder, rounds 1-3 sent either 2 older
or 2 younger applications to each job posting. To estimate the effect of unemployment on
callback rates for older female applicants using rounds 1-3 of the Farber et al. (2017) study,
we use the following specification:

            callict = 1 U Rct + 2 olderi + 3 (olderi × U Rct ) + c + t + Xi +      ict         (6)

where callict is an indicator for whether resume i in a given city c at time t received a callback,
U Rct denotes the unemployment rate, and olderi indicates whether the applicant is over age
50. Additionally, c and t represent city and time fixed effects, respectively, and Xi is a
vector of other characteristics assigned to the resume (length of listed unemployment spell
and having held a low-level interim job).
   The coefficient of interest here is 3 , which tells us how much the callback rate changes
for elderly applicants, relative to younger ones, for a one percentage point increase in the
local unemployment rate. A negative coefficient would suggest that recessions exacerbate
age discrimination on the entry margin. We cluster the standard errors at the city-round
level, since that is the level of randomization. We follow Neumark et al. (2019b) and weight
observations by the ratio of the percentage of employment in Office and Administrative
Support positions supplied by a city in the Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) data
to the percentage of job postings in each city; as we show in the Appendix, unweighted
estimates yield similar findings. We use a linear probability model; results are virtually
identical if we instead use a probit.
   When analyzing the results from Round 4, we add both an indicator for this round of
treatment and its interaction with whether the fictitious resume was assigned an older age.


                                                18
We do this because, unlike in rounds 1-3, each employer receives two older applications and
two younger applications, rather than just a single pair of either type. Thus, this interaction
term captures how older female applicants fare when they are in direct competition with 2
additional younger female applicants, relative to when they are not.17
    A negative coefficient on this latter interaction term would be consistent with the idea
that increasing the number of younger employees applying to a firm increases the extent to
which a firm can be selective/discriminatory without bearing as much of a cost. One way to
increase the number of options an employer has is to increase the unemployment rate, since
more individuals will be looking for a job; this is the source of variation we exploit for both
rounds 1-3 and the EEOC analysis. In round 4 of the correspondence study, the options an
employer has to choose from is experimentally increased by 2 additional younger applicants.



6     Results

In this section, we first present results using the EEOC data. We begin with a graphical
overview, followed by our regression models and several robustness checks. We then report
our findings using the correspondence data.


6.1     EEOC Charge Results

Graphical overview. Figure 3 provides an initial look at how the combined number of
monthly ADEA hiring and firing discrimination charges evolves over the business cycle. Total
charges and merit charges increase by roughly 70% and 55% as unemployment rises from a
low of 4.5% to a peak of 10%.18 Moreover, while the number of ADEA discharge complaints
grew by 41% over this same period, the number of layoffs and discharges recorded in BLS
  17
     Phillips (2019) makes the general point that spillovers can occur when multiple applications of different
types are sent to the same job posting.
  18
     The number of merit charges drops following the break in the data near the end of 2011. We include
time fixed effects in all of our regressions, which should capture this level difference. Our results are also
robust to only using the period prior to the break in the data.



                                                     19
JOLTS data increased by only 9%. This suggests that less than one-quarter of the growth in
charges was mechanical. In other words, the share of fired workers filing an ADEA discharge
claim increased by approximately 30%.
   The aggregate trends in Figure 3, while informative, mask underlying heterogeneity by
geography and sector. Figure 4 provides a state-level view of how both the volume and
quality of ADEA hiring and firing claims moved during the pre versus post-recessionary
periods, using the official NBER recession dates. Panels (a) and (b) show that the economies
hit hardest by the contraction between 2005 and 2009 were also the ones for which total
discrimination charges and their average quality increased most sharply. Likewise, in panels
(c) and (d), each state's unemployment rate change between 2009 and 2015 is plotted against
the corresponding change in the volume and quality of ADEA charges, respectively. It is
clear from the graphs that the state economies that recovered least from the Great Recession
were also the ones that sustained the largest increase in volume and claim quality.
   Figure 5 presents a similar set of graphs, but this time using industry-specific changes in
the unemployment rate. Industries more susceptible to the negative labor demand shocks
perpetuated by the Great Recession, such as mining and construction, were also those that
experienced the largest increase in the volume of charges between 2005-2009 (panel a). Con-
versely, industries recovering more fully exhibited the largest reduction in charges from
2009-2015 (panel c). And as with the nature of the geographic shocks, the countercycli-
cal relationship of merit is borne of both an increase during bad times (panel b) and a
curtailment in the wake of the recovery (panel d). The differently-sized responses to these
shocks indicate that the state and industry sources of variation are somewhat unique from
one another. Combining both types of shocks, then, generates even richer variation in labor
market conditions, and should yield greater precision in estimation.


Volume regressions. We now turn to regression results for the volume of discrimination
charges at the industry-state-month level in Table 3. Start with column (1), which regresses



                                             20
the combined number of charges (firing and hiring) on the contemporaneous number of un-
employed individuals as described in equation (3). The point estimate reveals that when the
number of unemployed persons rises by 100,000, there will be 1.33 more age discrimination
charges. This coefficient can be easily rescaled to estimate the effect of a one percentage
point increase in the national unemployment rate.19 The rescaled estimate, which we label
in bold as the "effect of 1 pp  unemp" in our tables, reveals that each one percentage
point increase in the national unemployment rate generates 20.5 additional monthly ADEA
discrimination charges off a baseline of 665.0 charges, or a 3.1% increase. Alternatively, the
elasticity of charges with respect to the unemployment rate is 0.21.
       Splitting the sample into firing and hiring cases makes clear that most of the increase
in age discrimination is driven by the firing margin. This makes sense, as firing cases are
much more common (85% of the sample). Table 3 indicates that a one percentage point
increase in national unemployment leads to 19.1 additional monthly firing charges (column
3), compared to just 1.4 additional hiring charges (column 5). In percent terms, this is a
3.4% increase in firing charges and 1.4% in hiring charges.
       It is possible that discrimination effects are dynamic, growing over the life-cycle of the
recession. To allow for this, we turn to the polynomial distributed lag model of equation
(4). The AIC always selects an optimal lag length of 6. Column (2) reports these estimates
for the combination of hiring and firing. Most of the effect shows up contemporaneously,
with little evidence of lagged unemployment mattering. Moreover, when we integrate the
effects over all periods, we end up with a total effect which is similar to that found in the
contemporaneous model of column (1). The same is also true when we examine the firing
and hiring margins separately.
       Thus, we can use either the contemporaneous or polynomial distributed lag estimates to
make in-sample predictions for how the Great Recession induced hiring and firing discrim-
ination reports. During that period, the national unemployment rate more than doubled
  19
   Specifically, we multiply the coefficient by 1 percent times the average size of the labor force over the
sample period (154 million workers).


                                                    21
from 4.5% to 10%, suggesting that ADEA firing discrimination claims increased by 105 per
month, an 19% jump relative to the mean. ADEA hiring discrimination reports, on the
other hand, are predicted to have increased by 7.5 per month, an 8% increase.


Merit regressions. While the increases in volume are important in their own right, in
isolation they do not reveal whether actual employer misconduct rose, or whether the increase
is driven by lower quality filings in the midst of a weak job market. A sufficient condition for
elevated age discrimination during a recession is that average case quality does not decrease,
a condition we discuss in Section 4 and test for using our merit variable.
    Table 4 estimates the relationship between the number unemployed in a state-industry-
month and the quality of ADEA firing and hiring charges. The dependent variable is whether
a claimant's case was found to have merit. Both age and female are positive predictors of
the success of an ADEA discrimination claim. Charges are also 4 percentage points more
likely to be meritorious when filed against private versus public firms.
    Somewhat remarkably, the quality of combined age discrimination charges (firing+hiring)
increases during the Great Recession. The implied effect in column (1) is that each one
percentage point increase in a state-industry's monthly unemployment rate engenders a
0.0012 increase in the fraction of claims with merit.20 This is relative to an average merit
rate of 0.167, and so translates to a 0.7% increase. Looking at separate merit regressions
for firing and hiring in columns (3) and (5), a similar pattern emerges, although only the
firing estimate is statistically significant. The polynomial distributed lag models have noisy
estimates for individual time periods, but when integrated yield similar total implied effects.
    Combining the volume and merit results, we conclude that the level of actual discrimina-
tion rose during the Great Recession. During that period, the national unemployment rate
rose by 5.5 percentage points from trough to peak, implying the fraction of cases with merit
rose by 0.67 percentage points, or a 4% increase relative to the mean.
  20
     To calculated the implied effect, we multiply the estimated coefficient by 1% times the average size of a
state-industry's labor force (681,000).



                                                     22
Robustness. Table A3 reports a variety of specification checks, both for the volume (top
panel) and merit regressions (bottom panel). Mirroring the graphical analysis of Figures 4
and 5, in columns (1) and (2) we separately test for effects during the run-up (2005-2009Q2)
and recovery from (2009Q3-2015) the Great Recession. While the volume effects in terms
of percent change nearly double in the latter period, the countercyclical response of merit
is two and a half times stronger in the first half of the sample.21 Column (3) demonstrates
that the volume and quality results are nearly the same when the sample is restricted to
workers over the age of 50. In column (4), we replace the date of filing with the self-reported
date of the discriminatory event; while the direction is the same and precision similar, the
coefficients are smaller.
    The results are likewise robust to only using variation in unemployment at the state
level (column (5)), with even larger percent changes for both volume and merit. In column
(6), we use the unemployment rate as the independent variable and for volume use the
number of charges filed in a state-month divided by the size of the relevant labor force as
the dependent variable (the merit variable remains the same as before). This rate-on-rate
specification weights the data by the size of each state's labor force, and produces somewhat
larger estimated effects than the baseline specifications. Column (7) uses employment to
population ratios instead of unemployment rates as a measure of state labor market tightness,
and finds qualitatively similar results.22
    The volume estimates in Table 3 weight by the size of the state-industry-month labor force
to make the estimates nationally representative. Appendix Table A2 reports unweighted
volume regressions, with similar qualitative results.


Alternative hypotheses. In Table 5, we rule out a variety of alternative explanations
for why merit increases during recessions. One possibility is that other case characteristics
  21
     If we instead use the time period before the missing-data break period (2005-October 2010), the estimates
imply a 2.8% change effect for volume and a 0.9% change effect for merit.
  22
     To convert the volume of charges filed to a rate, we divide the number of charges by the size of each
state's population. The merit variable remains the same as before but both estimates weight observations
by the size of each state's working-age populaton.


                                                     23
that are correlated with ADEA charges, such as Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
or retaliation claims, are driving the results. Column (1) controls for the presence of all
other bases and issues raised (i.e., the types of case characteristics summarized in Table A1)
and finds the headline merit estimate unchanged. Another possibility is that the claimant
employs more resources to improve their chances of winning when the job market languishes.
As a partial test of this, we include a control for whether the charging party obtained
outside legal representation in column (2). While legal representation increases the chance
a claimant receives a merit ruling by 4 percentage points, the unemployment coefficient
remains virtually unchanged. Neither is it the case that the retention of legal representation
is more common during recessions.23 Moreover, the level of resources the EEOC has at its
disposal for investigating claims both over time and across geography is ruled out as an
explanation with the inclusion of month and state fixed effects in our regressions.
       It is also possible that employers are reluctant to hire (or quick to fire) older workers
if they subscribe to the stereotype that they are incapable of handling tasks that require a
high degree of technological sophistication (McCann and Keaton, 2013; Burn et al., 2019).
Thus we test in column (3) whether merit increases in ADEA charges are driven by 27
high-tech industries­identified as those whose share of Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics (STEM) jobs exceeds 2.5 times the national industry average­but find no
evidence in favor of such a hypothesis.24
       Another alternative is that merit increases countercyclically due to compositional changes
in the skill level of workers that file claims during recessions.25 The compensation awarded
to successful claimants should, in theory, equal the value of the lost wages due to a firm's dis-
  23
      We estimate that each one percentage point increase in the national unemployment rate reduces the
fraction of charging parties that privately obtain legal representation by a statistically insignificant 0.8
percentage points, off a 15.7% baseline.
   24
      This methodology was created by the BLS and is described at https://www.bls.gov/opub/btn/volume-
7/high-tech-industries-an-analysis-of-employment-wages-and-output.htm?viewfull#edn3
   25
      Consider, for example, a scenario in which only bad workers file claims when jobs are plentiful whereas
more skilled workers simply switch jobs when they are terminated illegally due to age considerations. In the
midst of a recession, however, even high-skilled older workers may fail in their job search and so would be
more inclined to file discrimination claims.



                                                     24
criminatory firing. If wages are a reasonably good proxy for skill, the positive selection story
would imply that the average compensation won by illegally discharged employees would be
countercyclical over the business cycle. But column (5) finds a negligible impact of unem-
ployment on the average damages awarded among those cases for which any compensation
is provided, suggesting no change in the composition of cases by benefit level.
    A different compositional explanation is that larger firms, against which discrimination
claimants have less success (see Appendix Figure A3), are less likely to have been accused
during recessions. However, we find that whereas the fraction of charges accounted for by
larger firms was less than proportional to the share of workers employed by such firms prior
to the Great Recession, larger firms contribute a more than proportionate share of ADEA
charges in its aftermath.26
    We also examine whether merit rulings reflect economic considerations­such as salary,
benefits, and productivity­rather than the unequal treatment of an equally performing cohort
of older workers. As a reminder, reasonable economic factors other than age are perfectly
legal grounds for dismissal, even if they have a disparate impact on older workers (see Section
2.1), and so should not result in a merit ruling. To explore this empirically, we first make the
observation that if workers are paid their marginal product, wage dispersion in an industry
should reflect the underlying productivity distribution of its workers. This is especially
true the more decentralized is the prevailing wage-bargaining system (Dahl et al., 2013).
The relative absence of intra-industry wage dispersion then implies either that productivity
is uniform or that differences in productivity are not easily observable. Thus, if recession-
generated increases in merit rulings are driven by high wage-dispersion industries, this would
raise the specter that our measure of quality in firing discrimination charges is contaminated
by productivity considerations.
    To test this, we use the 2004 BLS Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) to construct
  26
     We further find that the effect of recessions on merit is not monotonically increasing in firm size. Relative
to firms having 201-500 employees, the effect of a one pp increase in the unemployment rate on merit for
the largest firms is 0, as compared to a positive 2.8 pp (p<0.10) for firms having 101-200 employees and a
statistically insignificant negative 1 pp for firms with fewer than 100 employees.


                                                       25
a measure of industry wage dispersion: the quartile coefficient of wage dispersion.27 Among
the low wage-dispersion industries are those found in food services and accommodation,
retail, and transportation and utilities. We modify our merit regression to include a measure
of wage dispersion at the 4-digit industry level (290 industries) and its interaction with
the level of unemployment.28 Column (4) of Table 5 finds a sizable negative coefficient on
the interaction term, providing evidence that in slack labor markets, meritorious ADEA
discharge claims are being filed in industries for which differences in output across workers
are less, rather than more pronounced.29 The implication is that the recessionary uptick in
merit is unlikely to have resulted from age-blind economic calculations.


Heterogeneity by gender Recent work has highlighted the extent to which age discrimi-
nation is intersectional, with older women receiving less protection under the ADEA (Button,
2020; McLaughlin, 2020) and with more evidence of age discrimination against females in
correspondence studies (Lahey, 2008; Farber et al., 2017; Neumark et al., 2019a,b). Thus,
in columns (1) and (3) of Table A4 we test whether recessions affect the quality of age dis-
crimination firing and hiring charges differently by sex. We find no detectable differential
effect.
       Pushing further, it might be that older females face increased age discrimination specifi-
cally when they are competing against younger women. Because gender concentrations vary
substantially across industries, ranging from 10% female in Construction to over 78% female
in Health Care and Social Assistance, we can leverage this variation to estimate whether
  27
      The quartile coefficient of wage dispersion is defined as (P75 - P25 )/(P75 + P25 ). We obtain similar results
if we use the 90th and 10th percentiles instead. We use measures of wage dispersion from the year 2004 so
that they are uncontaminated by any recession-induced compression.
   28
      In 7.5% of observations, the quartile coefficient of wage dispersion is not available at the 4-digit industry
level either because the employment cell is too small to compute percentile wages or because the percentile
wage is top-coded at $145,600 (in 2004 dollars). In either case, we replace the missing value with that of its
2-digit industry measure of wage dispersion.
   29
      We limit the sample to firing cases for this analysis since productivity is more likely to be observed for
those already employed. However, the results are robust to including hiring cases as well. To rule out the
possibility that the dispersion interaction is instead capturing low-wage industries, which tend to have more
compressed wage distributions, we additionally tried interacting unemployment with median industry wages.
The measured wage dispersion interaction effect is insensitive to this modification.



                                                        26
recessions raise the quality of claims for older women more in industries employing a higher
fraction of women. Indeed, column (4) of Table A4 indicates that labor market slackness in-
creases the quality of ADEA hiring claims filed by older women more, relative to older men,
the higher is the ratio of female employees in an industry. While no such effect emerges for
firing discrimination, this exercise provides suggestive evidence that competition for work,
and the associated relaxation of hiring discrimination constraints, may be gender-specific.


6.2       Correspondence Study Results

We now shift focus to our complementary analysis using the correspondence study data,
where we test whether older women have a harder time finding a job as the labor market
deteriorates. We begin with a graphical view of the data. Figure 6 plots regression-adjusted
callback rates for applications assigned older versus younger ages­i.e., the age penalty­
against the local unemployment rate within each city and time period for rounds 1-3 of
the Farber et al. (2017) data.30 There is a clear negative slope, implying that weak labor
markets exacerbate age discrimination.
       For a more precise estimate of the relationship between recessions and the intensity of
age discrimination against women, we present regression results based on equation (6). The
key coefficient on the interaction term, older × unemployment ratect , tells us how much the
callback rate changes for older applicants, relative to younger ones, for each one percentage
point increase in the local unemployment rate. Because federal, state, and local government
employers are bound by additional regulations stipulating that all applicants receive a fair
chance at employment, they are likely to have less discretion to respond to job inquiries in a
discriminatory fashion. To account for this, we control for the fraction of public employment
in a city as well as an interaction term, older × publicct . This mainly impacts Sacramento,
which is a state capital, and has a public sector which is approximately twice as large as
the remaining 7 cities (see Appendix Figure A4). Following Neumark and Song (2013);
  30
    The regression-adjustment controls for other characteristics found on the resume, such as the length of
the applicant's listed unemployment spell and whether or not the applicant held a low-level interim job.

                                                    27
Neumark and Button (2014); Neumark et al. (2019a,b) we (i) control for the strength of
state age discrimination laws and (ii) weight observations by the ratio of the percentage of
administrative support positions to the percentage of job postings in a city.
   The first column of Table 6 reports estimates without city or time fixed effects. The sec-
ond column adds these fixed effects into the regression, and shows the estimates are similar.
Each one percentage point rise in the local unemployment rate reduces the callback rate
for older applicants by 2.2 percentage points in the first three rounds of the correspondence
study, off a baseline 11.6% callback rate. The estimate with fixed effects translates to an
19% decrease in the number of callbacks for older applicants. As anticipated, increases in
the size of the public sector appear to reduce age discrimination as well. In column (3),
we add an additional control for public × unemployment ratect , which while an important
callback predictor, has no measurable effect on our coefficient of interest.
   Next, we add to our analysis the 4th round of the study. Recall the 4th round treatment is
different from the first three as two "younger" and two "older" applications are submitted to
each posting, as opposed to just one set or the other. Whereas the variation in the first three
rounds emanates from differences in local labor market conditions over time and across cities,
the fourth round additionally introduces within-job posting variation in age. Both treatments
tell us something different about the effect of reduced labor market competition on outcomes
for older applicants. Therefore, we include an interaction term for older × 1(competing ),
where 1(competing ) is a dummy variable for being an observation from the 4th round of the
survey (and hence competing against an additional two younger applicants).
   The first column of Table 7 does not include city or time fixed effects, while the latter
two columns do. Focusing on the second column, similar to what we found in Table 6,
older applicants are relatively less likely to receive a callback in cities that recovered less
successfully from the Great Recession. In percent terms relative to the mean, the effect
size of -1.59 percentage points represents a 15% drop. The unweighted point estimates
corresponding to Tables 6 and 7 are remarkably similar (Appendix Tables A5 and A6).


                                              28
   The interaction term older × 1(competing ) tells us how older workers fare when they
are in direct competition with two additional younger workers versus when they are not.
The estimate in column (3) suggests that, all else equal, an older female applying to an
administrative support position is 5.8 percentage points less likely to receive a callback when
she is competing with two additional younger female applicants, a sizable 54% reduction
relative to the mean. We interpret this latter result as alternative evidence that when an
employer faces a lower search cost to hire younger workers, they tend to disfavor older
applicants. While the magnitude of this last estimate is large, it is worth emphasizing that
unlike the competition faced by older workers in rounds 1-3, the younger applicants in the
last round are perfect substitutes for their older counterparts. Moreover, as administrative
support positions are predominantly occupied by females (71% according to the BLS), this
finding is consistent with the EEOC hiring sub-analysis showing that recession-induced hiring
discrimination against women is particularly pervasive for female-dominated jobs.
   It would be interesting to extend our analysis to use data from other existing corre-
spondence studies on age discrimination. Unfortunately, either sample sizes are too small
(Bendick et al., 1997, 1999; Riach and Rich, 2010), the number of cities across which the
resumes were sent is too small (Lahey, 2008), or the variation in unemployment is too lim-
ited (Neumark et al., 2019a,b). While Neumark et al. (2019a) conducted a correspondence
study across twelve different cities and Neumark et al. (2019b) across 50 states, they did so
during 2015 or 2016, when even the hardest hit labor markets were mostly recovered from
the Great Recession. Hence, these two studies occurred during relatively tight labor markets
and provide substantially less variation in unemployment. In the Farber et al. (2017) study
we analyze, the mean unemployment rate across cities and time is 6.9%, with a variance of
3.0%. In comparison, Neumark et al. (2019a) has a mean of 5.3% and a variance of 0.6%,
and Neumark et al. (2019b) has a mean of 4.4% and a variance of 0.9%. When we attempted
to use the data from either Neumark et al. (2019a) or Neumark et al. (2019b), the estimates
were too noisy to be informative and not statistically different from zero.


                                              29
7     Conclusion

This paper tests the prediction that competition should reduce age discrimination, using
economic recessions as a source of reduced labor market competition. We separately test for
countercyclical changes in firing and hiring discrimination using two complementary analyses.
    In the first analysis, we deploy novel data on discrimination charge filings with the EEOC
before, during, and after the Great Recession. Our estimates imply that from the trough to
the peak in unemployment, age-related firing and hiring discrimination charges increased by
19% and 8%, respectively. We use a proxy for the quality of a claim to disentangle coun-
tercyclical employee filing incentives and genuine employer misconduct. We estimate that
the Great Recession induced a 4% increase in the quality of firing and hiring discrimination
claims. Under mild assumptions, these results are sufficient to conclude that both actual
and reported discrimination against older workers increased during the Great Recession.
    In our second analysis, we repurpose data from the correspondence study of Farber et
al. (2017) to examine how older female job applicants fare when unemployment is higher.
We find that a one percentage point increase in unemployment leads to a 15% decrease in
the relative likelihood of receiving a callback. Moreover, when an older female is in direct
competition with an additional two younger applicants, her callback rate falls by 54%.
    Combined, these two analyses provide compelling evidence that negative labor demand
shocks increase employment discrimination against both current and prospective older em-
ployees. The findings suggest that whatever power disparities exist between an individual and
her employer, they grow during recessions so that firms can engage in discrimination against
workers with relative impunity. From a policy perspective, this argues for increased sup-
port of deterrence efforts by guardians against corporate malfeasance­like the EEOC­during
periods of economic malaise. A similar conclusion could be extrapolated to other federal
watchdog agencies, such as the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA),
as worker injury risk has been shown to increase during economic contractions (Boone and
Van Ours, 2006; Boone et al., 2011). Given our findings, it is not surprising that other

                                              30
levers firms have at their disposal to exploit a worker's reduced bargaining power, such as
upskilling (Hershbein and Kahn, 2018; Modestino et al., 2016, 2019) and the implementa-
tion of non-compete agreements (Johnson and Lipsitz, 2020), have been found to proliferate
during recessions.
   In future work, it would be interesting to study how discrimination for other classes of
workers evolves over the business cycle. However, one challenge to studying classes protected
by Title VII (e.g., race or sex) or the ADA, is that employment practices that generate a
disparate impact are illegal, complicating the interpretation of any findings. In contrast, the
ADEA allows for firings and hirings based on cost or productivity considerations, even if
they disproportionately affect older workers.




                                                31
References
Altonji, Joseph and Charles Pierret, "Employer Learning and Statistical Discrimina-
  tion," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (1), 313­350.
Ashenfelter, Orley, "Changes in Labor Market Discrimination over Time," Journal of
  Human Resources, 1970, pp. 403­430.
°
Aslund, Olof, Lena Hensvik, and Oskar Nordstr¨         om Skans, "Seeking Similarity: How
  Immigrants and Natives Manage in the Labor Market," Journal of Labor Economics, 2014,
  32 (3), 405­441.
Baert, Stijn, "Hiring Discrimination: An Overview of (almost) all Correspondence Ex-
  periments since 2005," in "Audit studies: Behind the Scenes with Theory, Method, and
  Nuance," Springer, 2018, pp. 63­77.
  , Bart Cockx, Niels Gheyle, and Cora Vandamme, "Is there Less Discrimination
  in Occupations where Recruitment is Difficult?," ILR Review, 2015, 68 (3), 467­500.
Becker, Gary, The Economics of Discrimination, University of Chicago press, 1957.
Bendick, Marc, Charles Jackson, and Horacio Romero, "Employment Discrimination
  against Older Workers: An Experimental Study of Hiring Practices," Journal of Aging &
  Social Policy, 1997, 8 (4), 25­46.
  , Lauren Brown, and Kennington Wall, "No Foot in the Door: An Experimental
  Study of Employment Discrimination Against Older Workers," Journal of Aging & Social
  Policy, 1999, 10 (4), 5­23.
Bertrand, Marianne and Esther Duflo, "Field Experiments on Discrimination," in
  "Handbook of Economic Field Experiments," Vol. 1, Elsevier, 2017, pp. 309­393.
    and Sendhil Mullainathan, "Are Emily and Greg more Employable than Lakisha
  and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination," American Economic
  Review, 2004, 94 (4), 991­1013.
Biddle, Jeff and Daniel Hamermesh, "Wage Discrimination over the Business Cycle,"
  IZA Journal of Labor Policy, 2013, 2 (1), 1­20.
Black, Sandra and Elizabeth Brainerd, "Importing Equality? The Impact of Global-
  ization on Gender Discrimination," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 2004, 57 (4),
  540­559.
   and Philip Strahan, "The Division of Spoils: Rent-sharing and Discrimination in a
  Regulated Industry," American Economic Review, 2001, 91 (4), 814­831.
Boone, Jan and Jan Van Ours, "Are Recessions Good for Workplace Safety?," Journal
  of Health Economics, 2006, 25 (6), 1069­1093.
  , , Jean-Philippe Wuellrich, and Josef Zweim¨         uller, "Recessions are Bad for Work-
  place Safety," Journal of Health Economics, 2011, 30 (4), 764­73.
Bosworth, Barry, "Economic Consequences of the Great Recession: Evidence from the
  Panel Study of Income Dynamics," Center for Retirement Research at Boston College
  Working Paper, 2012, (2012-4).
Boulware, Karl David and Kenneth Kuttner, "Labor Market Conditions and Discrim-
  ination: Is There a Link?," AEA Papers and Proceedings, May 2019, 109, 166­70.
Bulow, Jeremy and Lawrence Summers, "A Theory of Dual Labor Markets with Ap-
  plication to Industrial Policy, Discrimination, and Keynesian Unemployment," Journal of

                                            32
  Labor Economics, 1986, 4 (3, Part 1), 376­414.
Burn, Ian, Patrick Button, Luis Felipe Munguia Corella, and David Neumark,
  "Older Workers Need Not Apply? Ageist Language in Job Ads and Age Discrimination
  in Hiring," NBER Working Paper 26552, December 2019.
Button, Patrick, "Population Aging, Age Discrimination, and Age Discrimination Protec-
  tions at the 50th Anniversary of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act," in "Current
  and Emerging Trends in Aging and Work," Springer, 2020, pp. 163­188.
Carlsson, Magnus and Dan-Olof Rooth, "Revealing Taste-Based Discrimination in
  Hiring: A Correspondence Testing Experiment with Geographic Variation," Applied Eco-
  nomics Letters, 2012, 19 (18), 1861­1864.
  , Luca Fumarco, and Dan-Olof Rooth, "Ethnic Discrimination in Hiring, Labour
  Market Tightness and the Business Cycle-Evidence from Field Experiments," Applied
  Economics, 2018, 50 (24), 2652­2663.
Dahl, Christian, Daniel Le Maire, and Jakob Munch, "Wage Dispersion and Decen-
  tralization of Wage Bargaining," Journal of Labor Economics, 2013, 31 (3), 501­533.
Doleac, Jennifer and Benjamin Hansen, "The Unintended Consequences of "Ban the
  Box": Statistical Discrimination and Employment Outcomes When Criminal Histories
  Are Hidden," Journal of Labor Economics, 2020, 38 (2), 321­374.
Donohue, John and Peter Siegelman, "Law and Macroeconomics: Employment Dis-
  crimination Litigation over the Business Cycle," S. Cal. L. Rev., 1992, 66, 709.
   and , "The Evolution of Employment Discrimination Law in the 1990s: A Prelimi-
  nary Empirical Investigation," in "Handbook of Employment Discrimination Research,"
  Springer, 2005, pp. 261­284.
Edo, Anthony, Nicolas Jacquemet, and Constantine Yannelis, "Language Skills and
  Homophilous Hiring Discrimination: Evidence from Gender and Racially Differentiated
  Applications," Review of Economics of the Household, 2019, 17 (1), 349­376.
Egan, Mark, Gregor Matvos, and Amit Seru, "When Harry Fired Sally: The Double
  Standard in Punishing Misconduct," NBER Working Paper No. 23242, 2017.
Farber, Henry, Dan Silverman, and Till Von Wachter, "Factors Determining Call-
  backs to Job Applications by the Unemployed: An Audit Study," RSF: The Russell Sage
  Foundation Journal of the Social Sciences, 2017, 3 (3), 168­201.
Freeman, Richard, "Changes in the Labor Market for Black Americans, 1948-1972,"
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1973, 1, 67­120.
Gallo, William, Elizabeth Bradley, Michele Siegel, and Stanislav Kasl, "Health
  Effects of Involuntary Job Loss among Older Workers: Findings from the Health and
  Retirement Survey," The Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and
  Social Sciences, 2000, 55 (3), S131­S140.
Giuliano, Laura, David Levine, and Jonathan Leonard, "Manager Race and the Race
  of New Hires," Journal of Labor Economics, 2009, 27 (4), 589­631.
  , , and , "Racial Bias in the Manager-Employee Relationship An Analysis of Quits,
  Dismissals, and Promotions at a Large Retail Firm," Journal of Human Resources, 2011,
  46 (1), 26­52.
Goldin, Claudia and Cecilia Rouse, "Orchestrating Impartiality: The Impact of "Blind"


                                           33
  Auditions on Female Musicians," American Economic Review, 2000, 90 (4), 715­741.
Griffin, Christopher, "Explaining ADA Employment Discrimination Charges over the
  Business Cycle," U. Cin. L. Rev., 2016, 84, 737.
Helleseter, Miguel Delgado, Peter Kuhn, and Kailing Shen, "The Age Twist in Em-
  ployers' Gender Requests: Evidence from Four Job Boards," Journal of Human Resources,
  2020, 55 (2), 428­469.
Hershbein, Brad and Lisa Kahn, "Do Recessions Accelerate Routine-biased Technolog-
  ical Change? Evidence from Vacancy Postings," American Economic Review, 2018, 108
  (7), 1737­72.
Hutchens, Robert, "Social Security Benefits and Employer Behavior: Evaluating Social
  Security Early Retirement Benefits as a Form of Unemployment Insurance," International
  Economic Review, 1999, 40 (3), 659­678.
Johnson, Matthew and Michael Lipsitz, "Why are Low-Wage Workers Signing Non-
  compete Agreements?," Journal of Human Resources, 2020, pp. 0619­10274R2.
Johnson, Richard, "Older Workers, Retirement, and the Great Recession," Great Reces-
  sion Brief, 2012.
   and Barbara Butrica, "Age Disparities in Unemployment and Reemployment during
  The Great Recession and Recovery," Unemployment and Recovery Project Brief, 2012.
Knepper, Matthew, "When the Shadow is the Substance: Judge Gender and the Out-
  comes of Workplace Sex Discrimination Cases," Journal of Labor Economics, 2018, 36 (3),
  623­664.
Kroft, Kory, Fabian Lange, and Notowidigdo Matthew, "Duration Dependence and
  Labor Market Conditions: Evidence from a Field Experiment," Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 2013, 128 (3), 1123­1167.
Kuhn, Peter and Kailing Shen, "Gender Discrimination in Job Ads: Evidence from
  China," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 128 (1), 287­336.
Lahey, Joanna, "Age, Women, and Hiring: An Experimental Study," Journal of Human
  Resources, 2008, 43 (1), 30­56.
Lazear, Edward, "Why is there Mandatory Retirement?," Journal of Political Economy,
  1979, 87 (6), 1261­1284.
Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen Mullen, and Alexander Strand, "The Effect of Economic
  Conditions on the Disability Insurance Program: Evidence from the Great Recession,"
  NBER Working Paper No. 25338, 2018.
  , , and David Powell, "The Effect of Population Aging on Economic Growth, the
  Labor Force and Productivity," NBER Working Paper No. 22452, July 2016.
Manning, Alan, "The Real Thin Theory: Monopsony in Modern Labour Markets," Labour
  Economics, 2003, 10 (2), 105­131.
McCann, Robert and Shaughan Keaton, "A Cross Cultural Investigation of Age Stereo-
  types and Communication Perceptions of Older and Younger Workers in the USA and
  Thailand," Educational Gerontology, 2013, 39 (5), 326­341.
McLaughlin, Joanne Song, "Falling Between the Cracks: Discrimination Laws and Older
  Women," Labour, 2020, 34 (2), 215­238.
Modestino, Alicia Sasser, Daniel Shoag, and Joshua Ballance, "Downskilling:


                                           34
  Changes in Employer Skill Requirements over the Business Cycle," Labour Economics,
  2016, 41, 333­347.
  , , and , "Upskilling: Do Employers Demand Greater Skill when Workers Are Plen-
  tiful?," Review of Economics and Statistics, 2019, pp. 1­46.
Neumark, David, "Experimental Research on Labor Market Discrimination," Journal of
  Economic Literature, 2018, 56 (3), 799­866.
   and Joanne Song, "Do Stronger Age Discrimination Laws Make Social Security Reforms
  more Effective?," Journal of Public Economics, 2013, 108, 1­16.
   and Patrick Button, "Did Age Discrimination Protections Help Older Workers Weather
  the Great Recession?," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 2014, 33 (3), 566­601.
  , Ian Burn, and Patrick Button, "Is it Harder for Older Workers to Find Jobs? New
  and Improved Evidence from a Field Experiment," Journal of Political Economy, 2019,
  127 (2), 922­970.
  , , , and Nanneh Chehras, "Do State Laws Protecting Older Workers from Dis-
  crimination Reduce Age Discrimination in Hiring? Evidence from a Field Experiment,"
  The Journal of Law and Economics, 2019, 62 (2), 373­402.
  , Roy Bank, and Kyle Van Nort, "Sex Discrimination in Restaurant Hiring: An Audit
  Study," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1996, 111 (3), 915­941.
Oreopoulos, Philip, "Why do Skilled Immigrants Struggle in the Labor Market? A Field
  Experiment with Thirteen Thousand Resumes," American Economic Journal: Economic
  Policy, 2011, 3 (4), 148­71.
Phillips, David, "Do Comparisons of Fictional Applicants Measure Discrimination when
  Search Externalities are Present? Evidence from Existing Experiments," The Economic
  Journal, 2019, 129 (621), 2240­2264.
Riach, Peter and Judith Rich, "Field Experiments of Discrimination in the Market
  Place," The Economic Journal, 2002, 112 (483), F480­F518.
    and , "An Experimental Investigation of Age Discrimination in the English Labor
  Market," Annals of Economics and Statistics, 2010, pp. 169­185.
Rooth, Dan-Olof, "Automatic Associations and Discrimination in Hiring: Real World
  Evidence," Labour Economics, 2010, 17 (3), 523­534.
Schleifer, Andrei and Larry Summers, "Corporate Takeovers as Breach of Trust,"
  Corporate Takeovers: Causes and Consequences. University of Chicago Press, 1988.
Scott, Frank, Mark Berger, and John Garen, "Do Health Insurance and Pension Costs
  Reduce the Job Market Opportunities of Older Workers?," Industrial and Labor Relations
  Review, 1995, 48 (4), 775­791.
Shulman, Steven, "Discrimination, Human Capital, and Black-White Unemployment: Ev-
  idence from Cities," Journal of Human Resources, 1987, pp. 361­376.
Solon, Gary, Steven Haider, and Jeffrey Wooldridge, "What Are We Weighting
  For?," Journal of Human Resources, 2015, 50 (2), 301­316.
Wakefield, Sara and Christopher Uggen, "The Declining Significance of Race in Federal
  Civil Rights Law: The Social Structure of Employment Discrimination Claims," Sociolog-
  ical Inquiry, 2004, 74 (1), 128­157.



                                           35
8     Figures




                     Figure 1: EEOC Charge Filing Process and Resolution

Flow chart describing the order of events, beginning with the discriminatory action and ending with the
resolution of the EEOC discrimination charge. Percentages are shown for ADEA hiring and firing charges
in our baseline sample. A small fraction of charges (0.3%) are resolved through EEOC-initiated litigation
(not shown above).




                                                   36
                Figure 2: Local Unemployment Rates in Correspondence Study

Unemployment rates calculated at the MSA level for a city, averaged over the relevant time period in a
round, for the Farber et al. (2017) data.




                                                   37
            Figure 3: ADEA Hiring and Firing Discrimination Charges over Time

Seven-month smoothed monthly number of nationally aggregated hiring and firing ADEA discrimination
charges filed with the EEOC, the smoothed number of those charges with merit, and the smoothed
unemployment rate. Total and merit charges are measured as a % relative to the amount of charges in
January of 2005. Data are missing from November 2010 through September 2011. The number of merit
charges drops following the break in the data near the end of 2011. We include time fixed effects in all of
our regressions, which should capture this level difference. Shading indicates the Great Recession, as
defined by the NBER.




                                                     38
                           (a)                                                    (b)




                           (c)                                                    (d)

      Figure 4: ADEA Firing + Hiring Charges Across the Great Recession (by State)

Change in volume is defined as the fractional change in charges relative to the size of each state's labor
force. The solid line is the regression line weighted by the size of the state labor force, while the dashed line
is unweighted. For visual clarity, the small state of ND is omitted from panel 4c; its changes in the
unemployment rate and volume are -1.53% and 349%, respectively.




                                                       39
                          (a)                                                  (b)




                          (c)                                                  (d)

   Figure 5: ADEA Firing + Hiring Charges Across The Great Recession (by Industry)

Change in volume is defined as the fractional change in charges relative to the size of each industry's labor
force. The solid line is the regression line weighted by the size of the national industry labor force, while
the dashed line is unweighted.




                                                     40
         Figure 6: Age Callback Penalty by Local Unemployment Rate, Rounds 1-3

Markers are the regression-adjusted differences in average callback rates between older and younger
applicants. The black line is the unweighted regression line through the markers.




                                                    41
9   Tables

                  Table 1: Resolution of ADEA Charges, 2005-2015

                                           Firing                   Hiring
      Resolutions by Type
      Merit                                 0.172                    0.141
       Settlement with benefits             0.091                    0.067
       Withdrawal with benefits             0.055                    0.035
       Reasonable cause                     0.025                    0.038
        Successful conciliation             0.010                    0.013
        Unsuccessful conciliation           0.015                    0.025
      No Merit
       No reasonable cause                  0.669                    0.735
      Uncertain Merit
       Administrative closures              0.159                    0.125

      Compensation Awarded
      Average damages awarded             $29,200                   $21,929
      Total monetary benefits             $280.8m                   $22.5m
      Charges                              68,164                   11,617
      Average damages awarded is conditional on winning any compensation. Monetary
      benefits are in millions of dollars and exclude those obtained through litigation.




                                             42
     Table 2: Job Postings by City and Time Period in Correspondence Study

                          Round 1:       Round 2:          Round 3:           Round 4:
                         03-05/2012     07-09/2012      11/2013-04/2014      04-08/2014      Total
Charlotte, NC                178            167               120                169          634

Chicago, IL                  173            165                67                275          680

Dallas, TX                   165            147               161                330          803

Omaha, NE                    85             147               122                110          464

Pittsburgh, PA               145            156               157                149          607

Portland, ME                  0             120                0                 87           207

Sacramento, CA               110            156                93                170          529

Tampa, FL                    171            157               114                228          670
Total job postings          1,027          1,215              834               1,518        4,594
Applications/posting          2              2                 2                  4
Data collected by Farber et al. (2017). In rounds 1-3 either two younger or two older applications
were sent to each job posting. In round 4, two younger and two older applications were sent to each
job posting.




                                                   43
                            Table 3: Charge Volume and Unemployment

                                 Firing + Hiring                      Firing                     Hiring
                                 Base      PDL                Base             PDL      Base              PDL
Dep. var. = # of charges          (1)       (2)                (3)              (4)      (5)

unemploymentjst                 1.33          1.20           1.24          1.09        0.09             0.11
                                (0.25)        (0.31)         (0.23)        (0.38)      (0.03)          (0.12)

unemploymentjst-1                              0.10                        0.65                         -0.55
                                              (0.46)                       (0.18)                      (0.33)

unemploymentjst-2                              -0.64                       -1.14                       0.50
                                              (0.40)                        (0.26)                     (0.17)

unemploymentjst-3                              -0.01                        0.14                        -0.14
                                              (0.45)                       (0.29)                      (0.18)

unemploymentjst-4                              0.54                         0.44                        0.09
                                              (0.57)                       (0.52)                      (0.13)

unemploymentjst-5                              0.27                        0.52                       -0.25
                                              (0.23)                       (0.23)                      (0.07)

unemploymentjst-6                              -0.11                        -0.46                      0.35
                                              (0.31)                       (0.35)                      (0.21)

Effect of 1 pp  unemp            20.5          20.9           19.1             19.2     1.37              1.71
Mean(# national charges)         665.0         665.0          568.6            568.6    96.3              96.3
% change                          3.1           3.1            3.4              3.4      1.4               1.8
Elasticity                        0.21          0.21           0.23            0.23     0.10              0.12
N (state-industry-months)       76,485        76,485         76,485         76,485     76,485          76,485
Polynomial degree                           quadratic                     quadratic                  quadratic
AIC                             321,274      321,113         300,064       299,924     139,744        139,682
R2                               0.487                        0.509                     0.115
Industry-state-month level regressions for the volume of cases. The sample period spans 2005-2015. Regression
coefficients show the change in charges filed per 100,000 increase in the number unemployed. Observations are
weighted by the industry share of employment in each state's labor force. Bolded `Effect of 1 pp  unemp' is the
implied effect of a one percentage point increase in the national unemployment rate on the national monthly
number of charges filed. The PDL model estimates the cumulative effect of previous and contemporaneous
unemployment on current period charges using a polynomial distributed lag model; the total effect is the sum
of coefficients across all lags. The AIC is used to choose the number of lags; while not shown, the BIC chooses
the same lag structure. All regressions include state, time, and industry fixed effects. Standard errors clustered
at the state level.

  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                                        44
                           Table 4: Charge Quality and Unemployment

                                  Firing + Hiring                      Firing                      Hiring
                                  Base       PDL              Base              PDL       Base              PDL
Dep. var. = 1(merit)               (1)        (2)              (3)               (4)       (5)               (6)

unemploymentjst                 18.0            -5.3          13.6               -17.0     19.4               9.6
                                (4.56)         (21.2)         (5.71)            (16.7)    (17.3)            (68.5)

unemploymentjst-1                               25.4                             27.3                        30.5
                                               (30.9)                           (30.8)                      (86.4)

unemploymentjst-2                               -15.9                            12.4                       -107
                                               (42.2)                           (56.8)                      (53.5)

unemploymentjst-3                              57.4                              6.43                       234
                                               (22.3)                           (21.6)                      (98.9)

unemploymentjst-4                               -25.2                            -4.70                       -98.6
                                               (27.2)                           (27.9)                      (62.6)

unemploymentjst-5                               10.4                            43.9                         -166
                                               (24.1)                           (23.4)                      (115)

unemploymentjst-6                               -29.6                            -55.5                       115
                                               (37.9)                           (33.8)                      (107)

age                            0.0015         0.0015         0.0015         0.0015       0.0016        0.0016
                               (0.0002)       (0.0002)       (0.0002)       (0.0002)     (0.0005)      (0.0005)

female                         0.0184         0.0184         0.0149         0.0149       0.0301        0.0301
                               (0.0024)       (0.0024)       (0.0026)       (0.0026)     (0.0061)      (0.0061)

private                        0.0405         0.0405         0.0406         0.0405       0.0415        0.0412
                               (0.0055)       (0.0055)       (0.0064)       (0.0065)     (0.0094)      (0.0093)

Effect of 1 pp  unemp           0.0012        0.0012         0.0009         0.0009       0.0013         0.0012
Mean(merit)                      .167          .167           .172           .172         .141           .141
% change                          0.7           0.7            0.5            0.5          0.9            0.8
Elasticity                       0.04          0.04           0.03           0.03         0.05           0.05
N (charges)                      78,202       78,202          68,157        68,157        11,614        11,614
Polynomial degree                            quadratic                     quadratic                    linear
AIC                              67,660       67,654          60,533        60,528        8,431         8,430
R2                                0.017                        0.018                      0.042
Individual level regressions for whether a case is determined to have merit. The sample period spans 2005-
2015. Regression coefficients on `unemployment' are multiplied by 10-8 . Bolded `Effect of 1 pp  unemp'
is the implied effect of a one percentage point increase in a state-industry's monthly unemployment rate
on the fraction of charges found to have had merit. The PDL model estimates the cumulative effect of
previous and contemporaneous unemployment on current period charges using a polynomial distributed
lag model; the total effect is the sum of coefficients across all lags. The AIC is used to choose the number
of lags; while not shown, the BIC chooses the same lag structure. All regressions include state, time, and
industry fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the state level.

  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                                        45
               Table 5: Alternative Hypotheses for the Increase in Charge Quality

                                                            1(merit)                             Log(benefit)
                                       (1)            (2)              (3)         (4)               (5)

unemploymentjst                      17.7          18.5           18.1          42.3                -0.095
                                     (4.50)        (4.80)         (4.85)        (13.3)              (49.3)

legal representation                               0.040
                                                   (0.008)

unemployment×high-tech                                             -2.00
                                                                  (10.2)

high-tech industry                                                 0.009
                                                                  (0.012)

unemployment×dispersion                                                          -100
                                                                                 (43.1)

dispersion                                                                      0.211
                                                                                (0.054)

Effect of 1 pp  unemp                0.0012        0.0013         0.0012        0.0007             -0.0015
Mean(dep. var.)                       .167          .167           .167          .172                 9.28
% change                               0.7           0.7            0.7           0.4                -0.02
Elasticity                            0.04          0.04           0.04          0.02               -0.001
Issue and Basis FEs                     X                                                              X
Discharges only                                                                     X                  X
N (charges)                          77,308         78,205        78,205         68,159              9,615
R2                                    0.022         0.019          0.017          0.022              0.143
Regression specifications parallel those of Table 4. Bolded `Effect of 1 pp  unemp' is the implied effect of a one
percentage point increase in a state-industry's monthly unemployment rate on the fraction of charges found to
have had merit. Column 1 adds in fixed effects for the issues and bases included in a case, and column 2 adds
in a variable for whether the claimant retained outside legal representation. Column 3 controls separately for 27
'high-tech' industries­identified as those whose share of STEM workers exceeds 2.5 times the national average­
and its interaction with unemployment. In column 4, the variable `dispersion' is the quartile coefficient of wage
dispersion (mean = 0.315, sd = 0.063), and we evaluate the effect of a 1 pp increase in unemployment at the
mean level of industry wage dispersion. Column 5 uses the natural log of monetary benefits in discharge cases for
which the claimant receives positive compensation. All regressions include state, time, and industry fixed effects
and controls for age, female, race, and private firm. Standard errors clustered at the state level.
                              
   p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01




                                                       46
 Table 6: Callback Rates and Labor Market Conditions (Rounds 1-3)

Dep. var. = 1(callback )                       (1)              (2)              (3)

older x unemployment ratect                -0.0229          -0.0216          -0.0216
                                            (0.0063)         (0.0063)         (0.0063)

older                                        0.0380           0.0313           0.0342
                                            (0.0506)         (0.0496)         (0.0492)

unemployment ratect                          0.0041           0.0023          0.0722
                                            (0.0049)         (0.0148)         (0.0242)

publicct x unemployment ratect                                               -0.3945
                                                                              (0.1166)

publicct                                   -0.6443
                                           (0.2294)

older x publicct                            1.195            1.188            1.1585
                                            (0.3045)         (0.3009)         (0.2995)

Mean(callback rate)                           .116              .116             .116
City FE                                                          X                X
Time FE                                                          X                X
Job postings                                  3,076            3,076            3,076
Resumes                                       6,152            6,152            6,152
City-rounds                                     22               22               22
R2                                            0.009            0.015            0.016
Correspondence study data originally collected by Farber et al. (2017) across 8
cities and 3 different time periods. In rounds 1-3 either two younger or two older
applications were sent to each job posting. The variable `older' is a dummy for
whether the applicant is over age 50, `unemployment ratect ' is the city-round un-
employment rate, and `publicct ' is the fraction of the city's workforce employed in
the public sector. Additional controls include the ficticious applicant's unemploy-
ment spell length, whether they held a low-level interim job, and whether the state
offers stronger ADEA protections. For each city-round, observations are weighted
by the ratio of the percentage of employment in Office and Administrative Support
positions in the Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) data to the percentage
of job postings in the city. Standard errors clustered at the city-round level.

   p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                         47
Table 7: Callback Rates and Labor Market Competition (All 4 Rounds)

Dep. var. = 1(callback )                     (1)             (2)            (3)

older x 1(competing)                      -0.0231        -0.0586         -0.0584
                                         (0.0173)        (0.0206)        (0.0205)

older x unemployment ratect              -0.0138         -0.0159         -0.0158
                                         (0.0058)        (0.0063)        (0.0064)

older                                     0.0150           0.0571         0.0577
                                         (0.0468)         (0.0533)       (0.0530)

unemployment ratect                       0.0045           -0.0101        -0.0019
                                         (0.0043)         (0.0089)       (0.0169)

1(competing)                              0.0068
                                         (0.0125)

publicct x unemployment ratect                                            -0.0449
                                                                         (0.0714)

publicct                                 -0.5588
                                          (0.1965)

older x publicct                         0.6392           0.6391         0.6230
                                         (0.3193)         (0.3242)       (0.3199)

Mean(callback rate)                          .108           .108           .108
City FE                                                       X              X
Time FE                                                       X              X
Job postings                                 4,594          4,594          4,594
Resumes                                     12,224         12,224         12,224
City-rounds                                    30             30             30
R2                                           0.007          0.012          0.012
See notes to Table 6. In rounds 1-3 either two younger or two older applications
were sent to each job posting. The variable `1(competing)' is a dummy for being
part of round 4, where two younger and two older applications were sent to each
job posting. Standard errors clustered at the city-round level.

  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                       48
10   Online Appendix



            "Age Discrimination across the Business Cycle"
               By Gordon Dahl and Matthew Knepper

                    Appendix Figures and Tables
        Figure A1: State Unemployment Rates at the Height of the Great Recession

Nonseasonally-adjusted monthly unemployment rates by state in December of 2009, split into quintiles.




                                                   1
      Figure A2: Industry Unemployment Rates at the Height of the Great Recession

Nonseasonally-adjusted monthly unemployment rates by industry in December of 2009.




                                                 2
                 Figure A3: Charges Filed by Firm Size and Claim Quality

The EEOC reports number of employees in the bins used above.




                                                 3
                       Figure A4: Size of Public Sector, by City and Year

The fraction of each city's workforce that is employed in the public sector based on BEA Regional
Employment statistics.




                                                    4
                     Table A1: ADEA Charges by Type

                               Firing                       Hiring
Top Basis Categories
Retaliation                    0.286                         0.157
Disability                     0.233                         0.167
Race-Black                     0.161                         0.179
Sex-Female                     0.147                         0.097
National Origin                0.088                         0.100
Sex-Male                       0.056                         0.085

Top Issue Categories
Discharge                        1                           0.135
Hiring                         0.023                           1
Terms and Conditions           0.197                         0.072
Harassment                     0.168                         0.031
Discipline                     0.115                         0.013
Reasonable Accom.              0.059                         0.016
Wages                          0.040                         0.015
Suspension                     0.037                         0.002
Promotion                      0.036                         0.037
Demotion                       0.023                         0.006
Sexual Harassment              0.020                         0.004

Worker/Firm Characteristics
Age                             56.0                          56.0
White                          0.560                         0.544
Black                          0.241                         0.256
Female                         0.509                         0.370
Legal representation           0.171                         0.073
Private firm                   0.908                         0.756
Charges                        68,164                       11,617
Claims per charge               4.19                         3.23
ADEA firing and hiring charges filed with the EEOC between 2005 and 2015. Only
the most prevalent basis and issue categories are shown. Because the number of claims
per charge exceed 1, the fraction of all bases and of all issues need not sum to 1.




                                         5
                  Table A2: Charge Volume and Unemployment, Unweighted

                                Firing + Hiring                     Firing                     Hiring
                                Base      PDL               Base             PDL      Base              PDL
Dep. var. = # of charges         (1)       (2)               (3)              (4)      (5)

unemploymentjst                1.97          1.45          1.76          1.30        0.21            0.15
                               (0.43)        (0.31)        (0.41)        (0.34)      (0.05)         (0.11)

unemploymentjst-1                             0.06                        0.25                       -0.19
                                             (0.32)                      (0.24)                     (0.18)

unemploymentjst-2                             0.02                        -0.21                     0.24
                                             (0.25)                      (0.25)                     (0.13)

unemploymentjst-3                             0.41                       0.41                        -0.01
                                             (0.31)                      (0.24)                     (0.14)

unemploymentjst-4                             -0.25                       -0.23                      -0.03
                                             (0.45)                      (0.39)                     (0.12)

unemploymentjst-5                             0.33                        0.42                       -0.09
                                             (0.23)                      (0.29)                     (0.09)

unemploymentjst-6                             -0.01                       -0.16                      0.15
                                             (0.35)                      (0.37)                     (0.09)

Effect of 1 pp  unemp           30.3         30.8           27.0             27.4     3.25              3.38
Mean(# national charges)        665.0        665.0          568.6            568.6    96.3              96.3
% change                         4.6          4.6            4.7              4.8      3.4               3.5
Elasticity                       0.31         0.32           0.32            0.33     0.23              0.24
N (state-industry-months)       76,485       76,485        76,485         76,485     76,485          76,485
Polynomial degree                          quadratic                    quadratic                  quadratic
AIC                            321,274      321,113        300,064       299,924     139,744        139,682
R2                              0.434                       0.432                     0.118
Regressions parallel Table 3, but are unweighted. Standard errors clustered at the state level.

 p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                                       6
              Table A3: Robustness checks, All ADEA Firing + Hiring Charges

                                                                    Volume
Dep. var. = # of charges         (1)         (2)            (3)      (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)

unemploymentjst                 0.72        1.41        1.00        0.71
                                (0.35)      (0.32)      (0.20)      (0.21)

unemploymentst                                                                  3.11
                                                                                (0.54)

unemployment ratest                                                                          3.00
                                                                                             (1.54)

emp:pop ratiost                                                                                          -1.28
                                                                                                         (0.64)

Effect of 1 pp                  11.08       21.71          15.40    10.93        47.89       46.20       -30.50
Mean(# national charges)        651.0       694.3          512.5    644.3        665.0       665.0        665.0
% change                         1.7         3.1            3.0      1.7          7.2         6.9          -4.6
Elasticity                       0.10        0.23           0.20     0.11         0.49        0.47        -2.76
N                              32,235       44,250      76,485      79,103       6,240       6,240        6,120
R2                             0.399         0.548      0.492        0.333       0.906       0.702        0.693

Dep. var. = 1(merit)                                                 Merit

unemploymentjst                 36.8        9.93        19.7        15.9
                                (13.9)      (5.05)      (5.15)      (4.03)

unemploymentst                                                                   2.62
                                                                                 (1.16)

unemployment ratest                                                                         0.463
                                                                                            (0.182)

emp:pop ratiost                                                                                         -0.390
                                                                                                         (0.134)

Effect of 1 pp                 0.0024      0.0007      0.0013       0.0011      0.0016      0.0046       -0.0039
Mean(merit)                     .182        .155        .170         .165        .167        .167          .167
% change                         1.3         0.5         0.8          0.7         1.0         2.8           -2.4
Elasticity                      0.06        0.03        0.05         0.04        0.07        0.19          -1.31
N (charges)                    35,157       43,048      61,492      77,308      78,212       78,212      78,027
R2                              0.023        0.017       0.018       0.018       0.025        0.026      0.026
2005-2009Q2 sample                X
2009Q3-2015 sample                            X
Age 50+ sample                                              X
Event date used                                                        X
See notes to Tables 3 and 4. Columns 1-4 test sensitivity to different time periods, a different age sample,
and using the event date in place of the filing date. Column 5 uses the number unemployed at the state-
month level instead of the industry-state-month level. Columns 6 and 7 are rate-on-rate regressions at the
state level, where the dependent variable is the number of charges divided by the size of each state's labor
force and population, respectively, and the regressions are weighted by each state's labor force and population,
respectively. The top-panel coefficients show the change in charges filed per 100,000 increase in the number
unemployed (employed). Bolded `Effect of 1 pp  unemp' is the implied effect of a one percentage point increase
in the national unemployment rate on the national monthly number of charges filed.

  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
                                                       7
Table A4: Charge Quality and Unemployment, by Gender and Industrial Gender Mix

                                                               Firing                     Hiring
                                                         (1)            (2)       (3)              (4)

unemploymentjst × 1(female) × % femalej                              -12.8                      122
                                                                    (28.8)                      (53.2)

unemploymentjst × 1(female)                              -4.1         2.3         -0.7          -64.3
                                                        (5.8)       (16.0)       (12.9)         (28.3)

Mean(dep. var.)                                          .171           .171      .134           .134
N (charges)                                             66,590      66,590      10,046          10,046
R2                                                       0.019      0.019       0.046            0.047
Regression specifications parallel those of Table 4, with the additional controls of % femalej ,
unemploymentjst , 1(female), unemploymentjst × % femalej , and 1(female) × % femalej . unemploymentjst
indicates the number unemployed in a state-industry-month cell, 1(female) is a dummy variable for whether
the charging party is female, and % femalej denotes the fraction of jobs occupied by women for a given
NAICS2 code. All regressions include state, time, and industry fixed effects and controls for age, female,
race, and private firm. Standard errors clustered at the state level.
                              
   p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01




                                                    8
Table A5: Callback Rates and Labor Market Conditions (Rounds 1-3), Unweighted

     Dep. var. = 1(callback )                      (1)            (2)              (3)

     older x unemployment ratect               -0.0219         -0.0207         -0.0207
                                               (0.0091)        (0.0091)        (0.0091)

     older                                      0.0068          -0.0005          0.0016
                                               (0.0634)        (0.0634)         (0.0630)

     unemployment ratect                        -0.0048         -0.0027         0.0592
                                               (0.0048)        (0.0129)         (0.0239)

     publicct x unemployment ratect                                            -0.3538
                                                                                (0.1025)

     publicct                                   -0.412
                                               (0.2539)

     older x publicct                          1.032           1.0249           0.9993
                                               (0.3598)        (0.3601)         (0.3586)

     Mean(callback rate)                          .116           .116            .116
     City FE                                                       X               X
     Time FE                                                       X               X
     Job postings                                 3,076          3,076           3,076
     Resumes                                      6,152          6,152           6,152
     City-rounds                                    22             22             22
     R2                                           0.010          0.022           0.023
     Regressions parallel Table 6, but are unweighted. Standard errors clustered at the
     city-round level.
     
       p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                              9
Table A6: Callback Rates and Labor Market Competition (All 4 Rounds), Unweighted

       Dep. var. = 1(callback )                     (1)            (2)             (3)

       older x 1(competing)                      -0.0394        -0.0681         -0.0682
                                                 (0.0218)       (0.0260)        (0.0262)

       older x unemployment ratect               -0.0139        -0.0167         -0.0167
                                                 (0.0077)       (0.0076)        (0.0077)

       older                                      0.0286         0.0666          0.0666
                                                 (0.0562)       (0.0623)        (0.0617)

       unemployment ratect                        -0.0029       -0.0189          -0.0195
                                                 (0.0050)       (0.0090)        (0.0278)

       1(competing)                               -0.0073
                                                 (0.0164)

       publicct x unemployment ratect                                            0.0028
                                                                                (0.1148)

       publicct                                  -0.3844
                                                 (0.1977)

       older x publicct                          0.5450         0.5623          0.5635
                                                 (0.3052)       (0.3021)        (0.3019)

       Mean(callback rate)                          .108          .108            .108
       City FE                                                      X               X
       Time FE                                                      X               X
       Job postings                                4,594          4,594           4,594
       Resumes                                    12,224         12,224          12,224
       City-rounds                                   30             30              30
       R2                                          0.007         0.017            0.017
       Regressions parallel Table 7, but are unweighted. Standard errors clustered at the
       city-round level.
       
         p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                               10
