                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      USING TAX DATA TO BETTER CAPTURE TOP INCOMES IN OFFICIAL UK
                     INCOME INEQUALITY STATISTICS

                                     Dominic Webber
                                     Richard P. Tonkin
                                       Martin Shine

                                     Working Paper 27582
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27582


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2020




The authors would like to thank Peter Matejic (formerly Department for Work and Pensions),
Stephen Jenkins (London School of Economics), Steve Martin-Drury, Callum Clark and Ozer
Beha (all Office for National Statistics) for their incredibly helpful input throughout the
development of this work. The UK Office for National Statistics bears no responsibility for
the analyses and conclusions within this paper, which are solely those of the authors. Email
address for correspondence: hie@ons.gov.uk The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Dominic Webber, Richard P. Tonkin, and Martin Shine. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Using Tax Data to Better Capture Top Incomes in Official UK Income Inequality Statistics
Dominic Webber, Richard P. Tonkin, and Martin Shine
NBER Working Paper No. 27582
July 2020
JEL No. D31,H31

                                          ABSTRACT

It is widely recognised that household surveys do not fully capture the incomes of the very richest
individuals and households, particularly those among the so-called "top 1%", for reasons
including non-response and under-reporting. As a consequence, estimates based on survey data
alone typically understate true levels of inequality.

This paper presents new research and analysis to develop a methodology for improving the
measurement of the upper tail of the distribution, which is suitable for use in ONS's official
statistics on household income, in terms of being methodologically sound and based on robust
academic research; transparent and understandable by users; and an approach where adjustments
are made to underlying microdata rather than aggregates. The methods presented in the paper
build upon the work of both the UK Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) and Burkhauser
et al. (2018a) in employing methods in which survey-based mean incomes for quantile groups at
the top of the distribution are replaced by equivalent figures from tax data. The analysis examines
two sets of methods developed from these approaches, with variants of each tested to determine
the most appropriate methodology to apply in future official statistical releases by ONS.


Dominic Webber                                   Martin Shine
Office for National Statistics, UK               Office for National Statistics, UK
Government Buildings                             martinmshine@yahoo.co.uk
Cardiff Road
Newport NP10 8XG
United Kingdom
dominic.webber@ons.gov.uk

Richard P. Tonkin
Office for National Statistics, UK
richard.tonkin@hotmail.co.uk
                                               Introduction

The Office for National Statistics (ONS) and its predecessors have published statistics on the distribution
and redistribution of household income since 1961, beginning with "The Incidence of Taxes and Social
Service Benefits", which was one of the first publications in the world to give such a complete
examination of these issues.

Throughout this time, ONS's statistics on income inequality have been based primarily on household
surveys, in common with the majority of official statistics on the distribution of household finances
globally. Data are currently derived from the Living Costs and Food Survey (LCFS), a voluntary sample
survey of private households in the UK. While household surveys have several important benefits over
relying solely on administrative records, there is a well-recognised challenge: they do not fully capture
the incomes of the very richest individuals and households, particularly those among the so-called "top
1%". There are several potential reasons for this (see e.g. Lustig, 2018), the relative importance of which
vary across countries and across surveys depending on the methods used. These include:

    ·   frame or noncoverage error, where the frame used to select the sample for the survey does not
        fully cover the population of interest (in this case, households in the UK);

    ·   unit nonresponse error, which may occur if individuals or households with higher incomes are
        less likely to participate in surveys than those in the rest of the income distribution;

    ·   item nonresponse error, if those with higher incomes participating in surveys do not report all
        their sources of income;

    ·   under-reporting, where the levels of income received for some sources may be intentionally or
        unintentionally underreported by survey respondents; and

    ·   sparseness, where data on top incomes are limited due to the fewer number of observations
        within the dataset with very high incomes, making it difficult to estimate the true distribution.

The first section of this paper looks at the nature and scale of undercoverage of top incomes in the UK,
and in particular, in the LCFS data currently used to produce ONS's official statistics on the distribution
of household income.

The second section of the paper considers the variety of approaches that have been used to address
these issues in previous economic research, including those using survey data only (e.g. Ruiz &
Woloszko, 2016), those using tax data only (e.g. Alvaredo, 2017; Atkinson & Ooms, 2015), and those that
combine survey and administrative data in some way (e.g. Burkhauser et al., 2018a; Jenkins 2017),
before considering the most appropriate family of methods for potential application to ONS's statistics.

The following section introduces in more detail the methods developed first by the UK's Department of
Work and Pensions (e.g. DWP, 2015) and then expanded upon by Burkhauser et al. (2018a), which make
use of the so-called Survey of Personal Incomes (SPI), a microdata set containing taxable incomes, based
on a sample of administrative records from UK taxpayers.

The paper then examines two sets of methods which build upon this approach, in which survey-based
mean incomes for quantile groups are replaced by equivalent figures from the SPI tax data. In the first,
the mean gross income for each SPI quantile group is imputed onto individuals in the equivalent
quantile groups in the survey data. In the second, means for each SPI quantile group are first imputed
onto the survey data based on the monetary value of the boundary for each quantile group, before the
dataset is reweighted to reflect control totals for each quantile group and the overall population. In
addition, the analysis also examines the effects of using different levels of granularity in the quantile
groups, along with those of different thresholds for applying the adjustments.

Finally, full SPI data for any year is not normally available at the time of producing official income
distribution statistics, and to wait would introduce an unacceptable time lag for users of these
estimates. This paper therefore also assesses the impact of using projected SPI data versus waiting for
final outturns on the estimates and the conclusions that might be drawn from them.



                         1. Survey under coverage of richest households in the UK


The primary source of data for ONS's official statistics on household income inequality is the Living Costs
and Food Survey (LCFS), a sample survey of private households in the UK, collecting detailed data on
household income and expenditure, and currently covering approximately 5,000 households. The
household income dataset produced from the LCFS, is often known as the Effects of Taxes and Benefits
(ETB) data, after one of the main publications which uses it, the Effects of Taxes and Benefits on
Household Income (ONS, 2019).

The response rate for the LCFS, following trends for social surveys internationally, has declined over
recent years, falling from 62% in 2001/02, to 43% in 2017/18. Falling response rates is likely to impact
on the reliability of data, potentially across the whole of the distribution, and further strengthens the
case for supporting survey data with other sources as we describe in the next stages.

It is possible to make an assessment to which the survey does not fully capture top incomes by making a
comparison to the Survey of Personal Incomes (SPI), an individual-level dataset produced from tax
records by Her Majesty's Revenue & Customs (HMRC), based a sample of individuals potentially liable
for UK tax. Figure 1 displays the ratio of individual-level gross income in the SPI data to that in ETB,
providing a clear demonstration of the issue of survey undercoverage of top incomes.

Examining the three most recent years where full SPI datasets are available, Figure 1 highlights that at
around the 97th percentile, average personal income as reported in the SPI is higher than that reported
in ETB. This shows that survey under coverage is an issue for ETB, and therefore measured estimates of
income inequality are potentially lower than they should be. These findings are similar to those
presented by Burkhauser et al (2018a, 2018b) where they examined the issue of survey under coverage
of top incomes in the Household's Below Average Income dataset (HBAI), produced by Department for
Work and Pensions. That the ratio becomes close to 1 below the top few percentiles of the distribution
provides evidence to suggest that the largest challenge affecting top incomes in UK survey data is that of
under-reporting by survey respondents rather than lower survey participation. If the primary issue was
that of unit non-response, it might be expected that the ratio would remain above 1 considerably
further down due to the misalignment of the two distributions due to those with the highest incomes
being absent from the survey.
Figure 1: Ratio of gross income of tax data to survey data, by quantile, 2013/14 to 2015/16, UK




Source: Office for National Statistics - Living Costs and Food Survey, HM Revenue and Customs - Survey of
Personal Incomes



                    2. Approaches to addressing survey under coverage of top incomes


Economic research has employed a variety of methods to address the issues outlined in the previous
section. While a more detailed taxonomy is provided in Lustig (2018), broadly speaking, these can be
divided into three groups: methods that use survey data only, those using tax data only, and those that
combine survey and administrative data in some way.

In the first of these approaches, income estimates are calculated directly from the survey data, for all
but the very richest. To derive an estimate of overall inequality, these are combined with estimates of
inequality amongst the very rich calculated by approximating the tail of the distribution by a Pareto
distribution (for example, see Ruis & Woloszko, 2016). However, Jenkins (2017) notes that such an
approach may be unreliable, due to under-coverage, resulting in downwards bias, particularly where
sparseness in the survey data is an issue.

Sources, such as World Inequality Database (WID.world), do not use survey data at all for their UK
estimates. Instead, they use HM Revenue and Customs data about personal incomes subject to tax,
supported by population and income control totals from the mid-year population estimates and national
accounts respectively (e.g. Alvaredo, 2017; Atkinson & Ooms, 2015) Tax data-based approaches also
have their limitations, however. For example, while such an approach can provide estimates of
measures such as top-income shares, it does not provide microdata that allow analysis of the full income
distribution. Also, such methods can typically only provide measures of individual income rather than
household income, as well as excluding several important income sources such as inter-household
transfers and ISA interest.

For these reasons, in trying to address the issue of measuring top earners' income, we have focused on
approaches that combine both survey and administrative sources. There are a wide variety of potential
methods within this category (e.g. Burkhauser et al., 2018a; Jenkins 2017; Campos & Lustig, 2017;
Medeiros et al., 2018), but the common feature is that such methods allow one to draw on the relative
strengths of each relative strengths of each source.

Within this broad category of methods which combine survey and administrative sources, we have
considered several other criteria to select our preferred approach for adjusting ONS's ETB statistics.
First, recognising our role as producers of official statistics, our approach needs to be methodologically
robust, based on academic research and existing best practice, as well as being relatively transparent
and understandable by users. In addition, the value of ETB microdata to academics and researchers
needs to be reflected, with any approach continuing the enable the replication of headline measures
using the data. This means the method needs to be applied to the underlying microdata, rather than the
headline measures themselves.

The adjusted data should also enable the reporting of income on a household, rather than individual
basis reflecting the greater insight this measure provides due to, for instance, intra-household sharing of
resources. Finally, the selected approach necessarily needs to be feasible to achieve considering the
current availability of source data.

It is for this final reason, we have not focussed on the direct use of linked survey and administrative data
in this paper, though in the slightly longer-term this is our ambition as more record-level administrative
data becomes available within ONS under the Digital Economy Act. This will help to improve the quality
of estimates of income both at the bottom and top of the income distribution, whilst maintaining the
detailed information about people and households (such as intrahousehold relationships, spending,
health status etc.) that is not so readily available in administrative data. However, there remains a clear
need to develop and introduce a method of bringing together the survey and administrative data that
does not rely on direct record linkage, that can be applied now, and allows for the production of
historical data.

These criteria have led us to the set of methods first implemented in the UK by the Department for
Work and Pensions (DWP) for the Households Below Average Incomes Series (HBAI), which is based on
the Family Resources Survey (FRS), and later adapted by Stephen Jenkins and colleagues (Burkhauser et
al., 2018a, 2018b). These methods replace the highest incomes in the survey with cell-mean
imputations based on corresponding observations in tax return data. In the UK context, this adjustment
is often referred to as the "SPI adjustment", due to its use of HMRC's SPI data (with the Burkhauser et al.
modification referred to as the "SPI2").
                                      3. The SPI and SPI2 adjustments

The Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) introduced the pioneering SPI adjustment to their
Households Below Average Incomes (HBAI) statistics, based on the Family Resources Survey (FRS),
during the early 1990's. The adjustment itself was developed to correct for both levels of and volatility in
the highest incomes captured in the survey.

While the approach has been modified over recent years, the current SPI methodology is as follows:

    1. Estimate personal total taxable income for individuals on survey data.
    2. Use ONS population data to estimate the number of people equivalent to the top 0.32% of non-
       pensioner adults, separately for Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
    3. Estimate the income threshold on the SPI dataset above which the number of non-pensioners is
       equal to that estimated in stage 2.
    4. Flag all non-pensioners on HBAI data with personal total taxable income above this threshold.
    5. All flagged individuals have their income replaced with the mean average of SPI income above
       the threshold.
    6. All flagged individuals are reweighted so that the population total estimated in step 2 is
       achieved.
    7. All non-flagged people are reweighted so that population totals are maintained.

The same methodology is applied for pensioners, but based on the richest 1.16%.

As the Survey of Personal Incomes data is not usually available until a number of years after the end of
the reference period, the adjustments that DWP apply to their statistics need to rely on projected
information supplied by HMRC. The impact of adjustments that are derived using projected rather than
final data will be explored further on in this paper.

Figure 2 shows the overall impact of the SPI adjustment, increasing reported levels of income inequality,
while dampening the volatility of the overall series. Between 1994/95 and 2017/18, the SPI adjustment
increases the Gini coefficient by an average of 1 percentage point per year, while the average absolute
annual change decreased from 1.0 to 0.5 percentage points.

Looking at this more detail, Figure 2 highlights the respective role of each stage of the adjustment. It
shows that the impact of the adjusting just the income of the richest individuals, acts primarily to
smooth the series, without affecting the levels substantially compared with the unadjusted series. This
demonstrates the amount of volatility there is in the HBAI data, with the number of very rich individuals
surveyed throughout fluctuating over the period. The impact of just adjusting the weights, so that the
number of very rich individuals on HBAI is consistent with the SPI data, acts to increases measured
inequality with little effect on survey volatility.
Figure 2 - Relative impacts of the different phases of the SPI adjustment on Households Below
Average Income statistics, 1994/95 to 2017/18




Source: Department for Work and Pensions ­ Family Resources Survey, HM Revenue and Customs - Survey of
Personal Incomes

The ground-breaking work of the original SPI adjustment is recognised by Burkhauser et al (2018b), but
they go on to argue that with the increasing focus on income inequality, and the income shares of
specific groups such as the so-called top 1%, the SPI approach requires `new scrutiny'. They outline
several recommendations for optimising the SPI adjustment, setting out a so-called `SPI2' methodology.

First, they demonstrate that survey under-coverage of top incomes in HBAI data tends to become more
of an issue from around the 95th percentile upwards, becoming particularly acute from the top 2%. As
highlighted in Figure 1 earlier, similar results are demonstrated in ETB data, making a case for adjusting
incomes at a lower threshold than that currently set by the current SPI1 adjustment.

Burkhauser et al. also compare the ratios of adjusted HBAI data with SPI data at different quantile
groups towards the top of the distribution. They highlight that the gap between the mean incomes of
HBAI and SPI quantile groups is reduced for the top 2 per cent to 1 per cent group, as well as for the top
1 per cent to 0.5 per cent group. However, they further highlight that the correspondence between
adjusted-HBAI data and SPI remains low towards the very top of the distribution (in the top 0.5% to
0.1% group, and the top 0.1%). They argue that this stems from the fact that cell means from the
original SPI adjustment are calculated from a wide range of incomes. Therefore, the adjustment tends to
impute incomes that are too low for the 0.5 to 0.1 percentile group, and too small for the top 0.1 per
cent. They conclude that more granular adjustments could lead to improved measures of income
inequality for the very top incomes.
Aside from applying a lower threshold and increased granularity, the SPI2 adjustment differs in two
important ways from the original SPI methodology. First, the SPI2 methodology contains no stratification
for pensioner and non-pensioner individuals, or for Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Second, the SPI2
does not involve reweighting of the data, instead simply replacing survey incomes for each quantile
group with the SPI mean for the same quantile group.

This paper therefore builds on the work of both DWP and Burkhauser et al., through exploring different
methodological choices with the aim of identifying a perceived optimum variant for use with ONS's
household income statistics, considering the various constraints that exist.



                         4. New approaches - quantile and reweighting methods


In determining the optimal approach for adjusting for under-coverage of top incomes in ETB statistics,
two underlying methods are used and tested. The first, which we term the `quantile `approach, closely
resembles the so-called SPI2 approach developed by Burkhauser et al. The second - `reweighting' ­
brings together elements of both the SPI2 and the original SPI adjustment adopted for HBAI statistics
described earlier.

Under the quantile method, the mean gross income for each SPI quantile group is imputed onto
individuals in the equivalent quantile groups in the survey data. More specifically:

   1.   Estimate personal taxable income for individuals on ETB data.
   2.   Add a dummy case to the SPI data to account for individuals who do not pay tax. Their personal
        taxable income is set to zero, and their weight reflects the difference in population totals
        between the ETB and SPI data sets.
   3.   Rank individuals in ETB and SPI data by personal taxable income.
   4.   Allocate individuals at the top of both the ETB and SPI distributions to quantile groups,
        depending on the threshold and granularity selected. For instance, at the 97th percentile and
        0.5% levels of granularity, there will be 6 groups of individuals at the top, each representing
        1/200th of the population.
   5.   Calculate the mean personal taxable income for each quantile group in the SPI data.
   6.   Replace the income of each case within the ETB quantile groups with the mean SPI income from
        the corresponding group.
   7.   Add back several income components to the ETB cases not represented in SPI data, such as ISAs,
        and intrahousehold transfers;
   8.   Re-calculate income tax and national insurance contributions for the adjusted ETB cases based
        on new estimates of personal pre-tax income;
   9.   Aggregate personal-level income across household members to estimate adjusted household
        disposable income

By contrast, the reweighting methodology replaces steps 4-6 with the following:

   4a. Allocate individuals at the top of the SPI distributions to quantile groups, depending on the
       threshold and granularity selected. For instance, at the 97th percentile and 0.5% levels of
         granularity, there will be 6 groups of individuals at the top, each representing 1/200th of the
         population.

   4b. Calculate the lower income boundaries for each of these quantile groups on the SPI data. Create
       bands in the ETB data using these boundaries.

   5.    Calculate the mean personal taxable income for each quantile group in the SPI data and impute
         this onto individuals in the equivalent survey bands.

   6a. Reweight the ETB bands so that their weights are the same as the SPI quantiles.

   6b. Reweight the unadjusted ETB data so that overall population totals for each weighting variable
       are maintained.

Where the primary challenge affecting top incomes is that of under-reporting rather than lower survey
participation of very rich households, the effects of the two methods should be largely equivalent in
practice. However, where lower participation also has an important impact, the second `reweighting'
method should prove more effective.

The combination of two different SPI adjustment methods (reweighting and quantile), many possibilities
in both the threshold and granularity of adjustments, as well as the decision whether adjust separately
for pensioners and non-pensioner, means that there are many choices to be made in selecting a
preferred approach. In determining this, we have sought to address the following questions:

    1.   Should the richest pensioner and non-pensioners p be adjusted separately?
    2.   How low should the threshold be?
    3.   How granular should the adjustment be?
    4.   Should the quantile or reweighting method be chosen?
    5.   Should estimates be revised once final outturn data is available?

The following sections will present analysis, examining each of these questions in turn, in order to arrive
at an evidence-based rationale for deciding on the method to be used in future official statistics.

4.1 Should the richest pensioner and non-pensioners be adjusted separately?

The SPI adjustment currently implemented in HBAI statistics involves separately adjusting the income of
the top pensioner and non-pensioners. Considering this approach, Burkhauser et al (2018) questions
whether there is clear rationale for doing so. Exploring these issues in more detail, Figure 3 presents the
ratio of average (mean) personal taxable income by quantile group reported on ETB and SPI, for both
pensioner and non-pensioner distributions.
Figure 3: Ratio of gross income measured using SPI and ETB data, by quantile, and pensioner status
2015/16, UK




Source: Office for National Statistics - Living Costs and Food Survey, HM Revenue and Customs - Survey of
Personal Incomes

The ratio of taxable income measured on ETB and SPI for working age people closely resembles the
whole population average shown in Figure 1, hovering around 1.0 before sharply increasing at the 96th
percentile. We see a similar observation in the distribution of pensioners, where the ratio also increases
at the 96th percentile. In contrast to the non-pensioner distribution, the ratio remains above 1 during the
entirety of the portion of the distribution shown in this chart, suggesting that the income distribution for
pensioners is affected by both under-reporting and unit non-response.

These findings indicate that survey undercoverage of top incomes is one which affects both the non-
pensioner and pensioner distributions. Only 1.7% of pensioners have a personal taxable income high
income high enough to feature in the top 5% of the overall income distribution. This means that an
adjustment applied just to the overall distribution would be unlikely to fully adjust for undercoverage of
the incomes of pensioners.

Providing statistics on pensioner incomes is an important breakdown for users, and given the issues with
underreporting presented here, there is a clear rationale for these statistics to stratify by pensioner and
non-pensioners, as is currently done by DWP. In addition, pensioners and non-pensioners typically have
very different sources of income, which can mean that government policy can impact upon these groups
in different ways, and so it's important for the LCFS data to best reflect the differences these different
groups.
4.2 Which income threshold?

In considering the threshold to use, there is a balance that needs to be struck. Too high, and there is a
risk that the adjustment does not fully account for survey undercoverage. Too low and survey data is
being unnecessarily discarded in exchange for averages from the SPI.

As demonstrated in Figure 1, undercoverage of top incomes in the LCFS begins to become an issue at
around the 96th percentile. On this evidence, thresholds ranging from the 95th to 99th percentile were
explored and tested, using both the quantile and reweighting methods. In testing these different
thresholds, the quantile group sizes were held constant at 0.5%.

In general, these variations in the thresholds were found to have a relatively small impact of measures
of average income for the top decile and inequality. This is demonstrated in Figures 4 and 5, which
present the average disposable income of the top decile, and Gini Coefficients respectively, comparing
these measures under a range of different thresholds to the unadjusted estimate. By far the largest
difference is that between having any adjustment (with a threshold between the 95th and 99th
percentiles) and not having one at all.

Figure 4 - Mean equivalized household disposable income of the richest 10% of people, with varying
thresholds, 0.5% granularity, 2001/02 to 2017/18, UK




Source: Office for National Statistics - Living Costs and Food Survey, HM Revenue and Customs - Survey of
Personal Incomes

Over the period considered, differences between the various adjustments, based on different
thresholds, are relatively small under both the quantile and reweighting methods. For instance, Figure 4
looks at the mean of the richest 10%, across the 5 adjustments, and over the period 2001/02 to
2017/18. It shows that under the quantile method, the average absolute deviation of the 5 adjustments
from their mean is 0.4%, compared with the 14.2% average difference between each adjusted estimate
and the unadjusted amount. Similarly, under the reweighting approach, these figures are 0.5% and
16.2% respectively.



The same is also true when examining the Gini coefficient (Figure 5). Under the quantile method, the
average absolute deviation of the 5 adjustments from their mean is 0.1 percentage points, compared
with the 1.8 percentage point average absolute difference between each adjusted estimate and the
unadjusted amount. Similarly, under the reweighting approach, these figures are 0.1 and 2.0 percentage
points respectively.

The gap between the adjusted and unadjusted was greatest during the period between 2005/06 and
2009/10 where, according to the reweighting method (based on 97th percentile threshold, and 0.25%
granularity), the average income of the richest 10% of people increased by 28.5% between 2001/02 and
2007/08, before falling 20.8% by 2012/13. This compares with the unadjusted data which was much
more stable over this period.

Figure 5 ­ Gini Coefficient of disposable income, with varying thresholds, 0.5% granularity, 2001/02 to
2017/18, UK




Source: Office for National Statistics - Living Costs and Food Survey, HM Revenue and Customs - Survey of
Personal Incomes

The trends of adjusted data compared with unadjusted data over time are broadly similar. The most
notable exception is during the four years from 2005/06, where income inequality increased sharply as
measured using adjusted data, before falling back to similar levels observed in the unadjusted data.
Also, between 2012/13 and 2015/16, there was a larger rise in inequality in the adjusted data compared
with the unadjusted data. However, the gap between adjusted and unadjusted data narrowed between
2015/16 and 2017/18, due to a larger rise in the inequality levels seen in the unadjusted data.

In 2010/11, there was little difference between the Gini coefficients for the adjusted and unadjusted
data. This most likely reflects the introduction of a 50% top tax rate in 2011/12, with evidence to suggest
that this led to people forestalling their income (HMRC, 2012), which has resulted in closer similarity
between income for top earners as reported in the SPI data, and the LCFS.

Looking across the time series, the differences between the adjustments based on different thresholds
are largest between adjustments based thresholds at the 99th percentile and 98th percentile, suggesting
that the former may not necessarily fully addressing the survey undercoverage (though these
differences are very small in comparison to the difference between having an adjustment and not).
Given that Figure 1 highlights that survey undercoverage becomes more apparent at the 97th percentile,
it seems that this be a sensible long-term position for the threshold to be set.



4.3 What size should the quantile bands be?

Another consideration when applying a methodology for adjusting top incomes is the width of quantile
bands. As explained earlier, while the current SPI adjustment in place for HBAI statistics using a single
quantile band, Jenkins et al demonstrate that more precise estimates of the incomes of the very richest
individuals may be achieved by introducing more granular band. There is, of course, a trade-off: while
smaller quantile groups may provide more granularity to the adjusted data ­ potentially allowing for a
closer representation of the upper tail of the income distribution ­ we risk finding ourselves with very
few, maybe zero, cases within bands in the survey data 2.




2 This can only be found under the reweighting approach. By construction there will always be cases on the survey data when bands are formed

on the basis of quantiles, as is the case under the quantile approach, rather than the income thresholds used for the reweighting approach.
Figure 6 ­ Mean equivalized household disposable income of the richest 10% of people, with varying
granularities, 97th threshold, 2001/02 to 2017/18, UK




Source: Office for National Statistics - Living Costs and Food Survey, HM Revenue and Customs - Survey of
Personal Incomes

This section explores the impact of varying quantile band sizes, looking again at the incomes of the
richest 10% of people, and the Gini coefficient, under different adjustments. This time, it is the threshold
that is kept constant (97%), so that the impact of changing the quantile group size between 0.25%, 0.5%
and 1% is clearly seen.

Whichever quantile group size is used, the top-income adjustment has a similar effect on both the
average income of the richest 10% (Figure 6) and the Gini coefficient (Figure 7). In both cases, the
differences between adjustments are much smaller than any differences between adjusted and
unadjusted data (excluding 2010/11, as discussed in Section 4.2).

Across all years, the average change in income of the richest 10%, compared with the unadjusted data,
is 14.5% for the quantile method, and 15.9% for the reweighting method (Figure 6). The different trends
in the adjusted and unadjusted data, in the income of the richest 10% over time, are broadly similar to
those discussed in Section 4.2. While the differences between adjustments based on different quantile
bands are small under the quantile method, they are slightly more pronounced under the reweighting
method. For instance, while the average absolute difference between adjustments based on 0.25% and
1% quantile bands is 0.6% under the quantile method, it is 0.8% using the reweighting approach.
Figure 7 ­ Gini Coefficient of disposable income with varying granularities, 97th percentile threshold,
2001/02 to 2017/18, UK




Source: Office for National Statistics - Living Costs and Food Survey, HM Revenue and Customs - Survey of
Personal Incomes

Looking at income inequality as measured by the Gini coefficient, over the period analysed, the average
difference between the unadjusted and adjusted data, is 1.7 and 1.8 percentage points for the quantile
and reweighting methods respectively, with the differences between the different quantile sizes being
considerably smaller. Notably, the difference between the 1% and 0.25% quantile bands in the
reweighting approach is not so pronounced when measuring the Gini coefficient, compared with
measures for the average income of the top 10%.

Income share of the top 1%

While the impact of the changing the granularity is modest on estimates of income of the richest 10%,
and the Gini coefficient, there are much more substantial differences between quantile band sizes when
examining an alternative measure of income inequality: the household income share of the richest 1% of
individuals. The income of the so-called top 1% is a topic of considerate focus that has not historically
been reported in ONS' household income releases due to the reported issues with the top end of survey
data. These adjustments provide the opportunity to examine these analyses of the top 1% share on
ONS's survey data for the first time.

Figure 8 highlights that estimates for the income share of the top 1% are slightly higher with a 0.25%
quantile band size, compared with 0.5%, which in turn gives considerably higher estimates in most years
than 1%. For example, the average share of income for the top 1% is 6.1% between 2010/11 and
2017/18, based on quantile band sizes of 1%, compared with 5.1% using that data is unadjusted. This
average increases to 7.1% and 7.7% for 0.5% and 0.25% quantile band sizes respectively.

Figure 8 ­ Share of household equivalised disposable income received by the richest 1% of individuals,
with varying granularities, 97th percentile threshold, 2001/02 to 2017/18, UK




Source: Office for National Statistics - Living Costs and Food Survey, HM Revenue and Customs - Survey of
Personal Incomes

These differences arise as a result of the composition of households at the top of the distribution,
reflecting that most households have multiple occupants, but typically only one person will have a
personal income high enough to warrant being adjusted. For instance, in the 2017/18 dataset, just
under half of the people in the top 1% of people based on personal income are in the top 1% based on
household income. This means that most of those in the top 1% of household income, using a 0.25%
quantile band size adjustment, will contain those whose incomes have been replaced with an average of
the 0.5% richest people as reported in the SPI. Whereas people in the top 1% of household income,
adjusted using 1% quantile band sizes, will include people who have had their income replaced with the
lower mean derived from the top 1% of the SPI data, and hence they have a lower estimated income
share.

Given the increasing focus on measures such as the income share of the top 1%, these findings suggest
that 1% quantile bands are too broad. However, the trade-off - when applying the reweighting method ­
is the increasing likelihood of empty bands on the survey data for smaller quantile band sizes, resulting
in adjusted survey data that is not as representative of the tax data. For example, in the hypothetical
situation where the richest three 0.25% bands of pensioners are empty, adjusted data will not reflect
the average income of the richest 0.75% of this group, resulting in less precise measures of income
inequality, and greater volatility at the top of the distribution.
Table 1 explores this in more detail, counting the number of cases in the pensioner distribution within
the top 20 0.25% quantile groups (as defined in the SPI data). It highlights that over the period 2001/02
to 2017/18 only 7 bands were empty. This highlights that while the issue of empty bands can occur, it is
not at a scale considered large enough to be considered a major issue.

In summary, Figures 6, 7 and 8 highlight the impact of different granularities on measures such as the
average income of the richest 10% of people, the Gini coefficient, and the income share of the top 1%.
The income share of the top 1%, and to a lesser extent, the Gini coefficients, highlight larger deviations
in adjustments based on 1% quantile bands, compared with 0.5% and 0.25% bands. It concludes that 1%
bands are potentially too broad, leaning us towards smaller band sizes.

In deciding between a 0.25% and 0.5% quantile bands, Table 1 is instructive in that it highlights that the
former isn't overly affected by the issue of zero survey observations in within quantile groups, even
when looking at the income distribution of pensioners. For these reasons, we conclude that adjustments
based on 0.25% quantile bands most likely to be optimal, with the greater granularity offered ensuring a
more realistic approximation of the upper tail of the income distribution.
Table 1: Number of survey cases in the top 20 0.25% quantiles of pensioners




                                Cases in top 20 0.25% quantiles of pensioners (20 = top)




    Year       1 2      3 4 5 6 7            8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20

  2001/02      3 8      3 4 4 7 3            3 4      4     2    2    6     3    7    2    7     6    2     6

  2002/03      6 4      4 1 9 8 2            7 5      5     3    5    4     6    1    3    3     5    7     0

  2003/04      4 2      6 2 1 3 4 10 4                3     3    2    5     2    1    6    1     1    4     5

  2004/05      7 4      6 3 5 4 3            3 4      6     7    2    2     2    3    1    5     3    0     2

  2005/06      2 8      2 6 5 4 2            7 3      4     4    4    8     4    3    1    4     4    1     3

  2006/07      1 7      3 1 6 6 4            3 2      5     2    7    5     2    2    3    2     5    2     2

  2007/08      5 2      5 6 1 3 4            2 4      3     2    2    3     8    3    4    2     0    1     2

  2008/09      1 2      4 1 3 0 4            3 6      3     3    2    4     3    3    6    2     3    5     1

  2009/10      6 7      2 1 1 3 3            5 2      4     3    5    2     1    4    4    2     1    3     1

  2010/11      4 3      2 0 3 4 4            5 6      5     6    5    4     1    5    2    3     5    4     1

  2011/12      3 6      7 6 3 3 5            7 2      7     4    6    1     6    8    7    3     3    3     2

  2012/13      6 3      3 1 5 4 2            6 3      5     5    7    4     7    4    2    4     3    4     3

  2013/14      1 3      2 6 5 8 4            7 3      1     2    3    6     9    7    5    2     7    7     1

  2014/15      1 5      8 7 3 5 4            4 2      4     6 10      5     2    9    3    2     5    5     2

  2015/16      6 5      7 6 7 2 6            4 3      2     7    2    2     3    2    4    0     6    4     2

  2016/17      3 5      5 7 1 1 6            5 9      5     6    6    8     8    8    5    3     4    0     2

  2017/18      3 7 11 4 3 7 8                7 6      3     8    3 10       6    7    6    2     2    2     3

Source: Office for National Statistics - Living Costs and Food Survey, HM Revenue and Customs - Survey of
Personal Incomes
4.4 Quantile or reweighting method?

Figure 9 shows the differences in the Gini for disposable income under the quantile and reweighting
approaches based on a fixed threshold (97th percentile) and granularity (0.5%). It shows that, while
broadly similar, since 2011/12, the Gini under the reweighting approach has been marginally higher than
for the quantile approach in most years.

Figure 9 ­ Gini Coefficient of disposable income based on quantile and reweighting adjustment, 97th
percentile threshold and 0.5% quantile bands, 2001/02 to 2017/18, UK




Source: Office for National Statistics - Living Costs and Food Survey, HM Revenue and Customs - Survey of
Personal Incomes

Figure 1 suggested that the primary reason for the undercoverage of top incomes in the LCFS was under-
reporting rather than unit non-response. However, if that were entirely the case, it might be expected
that the quantile and re-weighting approaches would be essentially comparable, with the distributions
under the threshold being the same for each. That the Gini is marginally higher under the reweighting
approach suggests that non-response at the top of the distribution does play some role, indicating that,
although more complex, the reweighting approach is to be preferred.

Another reason for adopting the reweighting approach comes from Figure 3, which highlighted that,
although non-response may be a lesser concern for the overall income distribution (mirroring the
findings of Burkhauser et al.), there is evidence to suggest it may be more noticeable in the distribution
of pensioners' incomes.
A further important consideration is coherence. The reweighting approach is closest in methodological
terms to the original SPI adjustment currently used by DWP's HBAI statistics. Adopting this approach
therefore ensures greatest coherence in terms of methods across the UK statistics (Figure 10).

Figure 10 - Gini coefficients of published HBAI data compared with Unadjusted ONS data and
adjusted ONS data (adjusted using the reweighting method, on the 97th percentile threshold in 0.25%
quantile groups), 2001/02 to 2016/17, UK




Source: Office for National Statistics - Living Costs and Food Survey, HM Revenue and Customs - Survey of
Personal Incomes, Department for Work and Pensions ­ Family Resources Survey



4.5 Should estimates be revised once final outturn data is available?

As previously discussed, one of the challenges in implementing the approaches discussed in this paper is
their reliance on SPI data, which is not typically made available to researchers until at least 2 years after
the end of the income reference period. The most recent dataset, for example, covering 2016/17 was
released on the UK Data Service in November 2019. To ensure that detailed analysis of household
income is published in a timely manner, it is necessary to use estimates provided by HMRC which are
based from projections from historical SPI datasets.

While Burkhauser et al. (2018b) have demonstrated that there can be notable differences between the
projected data and the published outturn data, the key consideration is whether these lead to
significant impacts on headline measures of income inequality, and then (assuming the projected data is
deemed suitable to adjusting top incomes) should there be a revision once final data is published?
In order to address these questions, we have compared estimates of inequality based on projected and
outturn data. In this analysis, we used projected SPI estimates that was originally supplied to DWP in the
production of their HBAI statistics, to adjust ETB statistics. These results are then compared to estimates
using the same adjustment, but using final outturn data which has since been published.

The analysis in Figure 11 demonstrates that the impact of moving from projected to final data leads to,
on average, a 0.2 percentage points revision of the Gini Coefficient, without a systematic bias either
way. Given that the revisions are small, coupled with the effort involved in revising data two years or
more after its initial publication, we feel there is not a compelling case for routinely revising measures of
Gini Coefficients once final SPI data is made available, at this stage. Therefore, we do not propose a
policy of regular revision to our household income statistics, following the adoption of the new top
income adjustment, to take account of the outturn SPI data when it becomes available. However, this
will need to be closely monitored, initially once the 2017/18 SPI data is released later in 2020, and for a
few years thereafter, to determine whether this revision policy needs re-evaluating.

Figure 11 ­ Comparison on measures of inequality using ETB data that is unadjusted, adjusted using
projected SPI data, and adjusted using final published SPI data, 2011/12 to 2017/18, UK




Source: Office for National Statistics - Living Costs and Food Survey, HM Revenue and Customs - Survey of
Personal Incomes

                                                5   Conclusion

This paper has sought to develop, test and decide upon a methodology for addressing survey under-
coverage of top incomes in ONS's official statistics based on the Effects of Taxes and Benefits (ETB) data.
Building on the SPI adjustment developed by the Department for Work and Pensions and more recent
work by Burkhauser et al., we have tested two separate adjustment methods - the quantile and
reweighting approach ­ and under each we have explored different variations, including the thresholds
above which incomes are adjusted, and different size quantile bands.

The analysis has highlighted that the issue of survey undercoverage affects both the pensioner and non-
pensioner populations, which, given the importance of such breakdowns within ONS's analysis, provides
a clear case for adjusting separately for pensioners and non-pensioners as DWP's HBAI statistics
currently do.

The findings of this analysis also provide evidence to suggest that the `re-weighting' approach may be
preferable to the `quantile' approach. The former approach helps ensure that undercoverage due to
both under-reporting and unit non-response is adequately covered, and again helps maximise
coherence with DWP's HBAI statistics.

In exploring the impact of varying the threshold, this paper found that by far the key difference is
between having an adjustment and not, and that thresholds between the 95th and 99th percentile have
relatively little impact. However, as survey coverage of top incomes starts to become most problematic
above the 97th percentile, there is a rationale for making adjustments above this level.

In contrast to differences due to varying the threshold, differences between measures based on
different quantile sizes are much more visible. This is particularly the case when examining the income
share of the richest 1% of the population, with band sizes of 0.25% leading to the top 1% share being 1.5
percentage point share higher on average than for estimates based on 1% quantile band sizes. We
conclude that for these types of measures, 1% quantile bands are too broad, not sufficiently reflecting
the steep tail at the richest end of the income distribution. We conclude that 0.25% quantile band are
able to benefit from increased granularity, whilst being sufficiently broad to ensure that having cells to
impute in the survey based on zero cases does not become a problem.

Finally, we discuss the issue of revisions, reflecting that the SPI data we use as the basis for adjusting the
highest earners in our surveys is not usually available until at least 2 years after the end of the income
reference period. This means that, to ensure statistics that are timely, and that also don't suffer from
the survey-under coverage of top incomes, it is necessary to use projected SPI data. Our analysis
concludes that, in terms of headline measures such as the Gini Coefficient, the impact of projected
against outturn data is marginal. This leads us to conclude that, having adopted the adjustment, we will
not plan to regularly revise, once full SPI data becomes available, though this decision will continue to be
reviewed.

This preferred top income adjustment (reweighting approach, stratified by pensioners and non-
pensioners, 97th percentile threshold & 0.25% quantile groups) will be introduced from ONS's 2018/19
income distribution statistics onwards, to be published in March 2020. At this stage, the adjusted ETB
time series will go back to 2001/02, reflecting the availability of SPI data from the UK Data Service
(UKDS). However, we intend to explore options for extending the time series back further, ideally to
1977, reflecting the start of the ETB data currently available. We will also make the top income adjusted
ETB series itself available to researchers via the UKDS.
References

Alvaredo, F. (2017). UK estimates of top income shares 2013-2014 and 2014-15: Note on Methods,
     WID.world Technical Note, 2017/2.

Atkinson, A. and Ooms, T. (2015). UK Estimates of Top Income Shares 2012-2013: Note on Methods,
     WID.world Technical Note, 2015/4.

Campos-Vazquez, R. M., & Lustig, N. (2017). Labour income inequality in Mexico: Puzzles solved and
   unsolved, UNU-WIDER Working Paper, No. 2017/186

Department of Work and Pensions (2015). Households below average income: an analysis of the income
    distribution 1994/95 to 2013/14, London: Department for Work and Pensions.

Burkhauser, R.V., Hérault, N., Jenkins, S.P. & Wilkins, R. (2018a). Top incomes and inequality in the UK:
    reconciling estimates from household Survey and tax return data, Oxford Economic Papers, 70:2,
    301-326.

Burkhauser R.V., Hérault, N., Jenkins, S.P. & Wilkins, R. (2018b). Survey under-coverage of top incomes
    and estimation of inequality: what is the role of the UK's SPI adjustment?, Fiscal Studies, 39:2 , 213-
    240.

Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs (2012), The Exchequer effect of the 50 per cent additional rate of
    income tax, London: The National Archives.

Jenkins, S.P. (2017). Pareto models, top incomes and recent trends in UK income inequality, Economica,
     84:334, 261-289.

Lustig, N. (2018). Measuring the distribution of household income, consumption and wealth, in Stiglitz,
     J.E., Fitoussi, J-P. & Durand M. (Eds.), For Good Measure: Advancing Research on Well-being Metrics
     Beyond GDP, Paris: OECD Publishing.

Medeiros, M., de Castro Galvão, J. & de Azevedo Nazareno, L. (2018). Correcting the Underestimation of
   Top Incomes: Combining Data from Income Tax Reports and the Brazilian 2010 Census. Social
   Indicators Research, 135, 233­244

Office for National Statistics (2019). Effects of taxes and benefits on UK household income: financial year
     ending 2018. Newport: Office for National Statistics.

Ruiz, N., & Woloszko, N. (2016). What do household surveys suggest about the top 1% incomes and
     inequality in OECD countries?, OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No. 1265, Paris: OECD
     Publishing.

Shine, M., Clark, C., Tonkin, R.P. & Webber, D. (2019). Using tax data to better capture top earners in
    household income inequality statistics. Newport: Office for National Statistics.
