                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   HETEROGENEOUS PATHS OF INDUSTRIALIZATION

                                        Federico Huneeus
                                        Richard Rogerson

                                       Working Paper 27580
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27580


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2020




We thank conference participants at Notre Dame for useful comments The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27580.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Federico Huneeus and Richard Rogerson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Heterogeneous Paths of Industrialization
Federico Huneeus and Richard Rogerson
NBER Working Paper No. 27580
July 2020
JEL No. E24,O11

                                           ABSTRACT

Industrialization experiences differ significantly across countries. We use a bench-mark model of
structural change to shed light on the sources of this heterogeneity and, in particular, the
phenomenon of premature deindustrialization. Our analysis leads to three key findings. First,
benchmark models of structural change robustly generate hump-shaped patterns for the evolution
of the manufacturing sector. Second, heterogeneous patterns of catch-up in sectoral productivities
across countries can generate variation in industrialization experiences similar to those found in
the data, including premature deindustrialization. Third, differences in the rate of agricultural
productivity growth across economies can account for a large share of the variation in peak
manufacturing employment shares.


Federico Huneeus
115 Prospect Street
Rosenkranz Hall, Office 334
Economics Department
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06511
federico.huneeus@yale.edu

Richard Rogerson
Department of Economics
JRR Building Room 292
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
rdr@princeton.edu
1       Introduction

In his Nobel Prize address, Kuznets emphasized structural transformation­the realloca-
tion of economic activity across broad sectors­as one of the key stylized facts of growth
and development. One empirical regularity of structural transformation is that the size
of the industrial sector exhibits a hump-shaped pattern, increasing at low levels of devel-
opment (i.e., the industrialization phase), reaching a peak, and then declining in the later
stages of development (i.e., the deindustrialization phase). Recent work by (Rodrik, 2016)
documents that many recent developers seem to be experiencing a much lower value for
this peak, and that the peak is occurring at a much lower level of development relative to
what earlier developers experienced. He coined the term premature deindustrialization to
describe this phenomenon.1
    In this paper we study the industrialization process from the perspective of a simple
benchmark model of structural change. We have three key findings. First, we show that
the model robustly implies hump-shaped dynamics for the employment share of manu-
facturing.2 Second, we show that variation in the profile of sectoral productivity growth
rates across countries can generate variation in industrialization patterns that that mimic
those found in the data, including the phenomenon of premature deindustrialization. In
particular, we show that relatively slow productivity growth in agriculture can give rise
to differences comparable to those found in the data. Third, we calibrate our model to
match the industrialization process of the US and then use it to study the industrializa-
tion experiences of a set of Asian and Latin American economies. Our model accounts
for a significant portion of the variation in industrialization paths found in the data and
differences in the relative growth rate of agricultural productivity are key to this finding.
    The literature on structural change emphasizes the role of sectoral productivities in
    1
    This observation was also noted independently by Felipe et al. (2018).
    2
    We follow the standard practice in the literature of using the term manufacturing to refer to the
broader industrial sector.


                                                 1
shaping the structural transformation process, and consistent with this, relative sectoral
productivity growth rates play a central role in our analysis. Following Gollin et al.
(2002, 2007), food is a necessity and the agricultural employment share is dictated by
productivity of the agricultural sector. Non-agricultural employment is allocated between
manufacturing and services and following Boppart (2014), depends both on the overall
level of productivity as well as the relative productivity of the two sectors.3
    The evolution of the manufacturing employment share is determined by the inter-
play of two forces: productivity growth in agricultural creates a flow of workers into
manufacturing, but (for empirically reasonable specifications) productivity growth in the
non-agricultural sectors creates a flow of workers out of manufacturing. At low levels of
development the first force dominates, while at higher levels of development the second
force dominates, thereby giving rise to the hump-shaped pattern for the manufacturing
employment share.
    Late developing economies are effectively inside the world technology frontier but are
moving toward it. It is well established that different countries have moved toward the
frontier at significantly different rates. But what is important for our analysis is the fact
that this rate varies across sectors within economies. Variation in the rate of convergence
across sectors affects the relative magnitudes of the two forces identified in the previous
paragraph and therefore affect the path of industrialization. For example, we show that
relatively slow growth in agriculture will lead to a lower peak employment share for
manufacturing and that this peak will be reached at an earlier point in the development
process.
    Our paper is intimately related to the recent and growing literature on models of
   3
     Our specification thus allows for the allocation of non-agricultural employment between manufac-
turing and services to be influenced by both income effects as in Kongsamut et al. (2001) and relative
                                                                   ´
price effects as in Baumol (1967) and Ngai and Pissarides (2007). Swiecki  (2017) and Comin et al. (2015)
also allow for both effects. For additional discussion and evidence see Herrendorf et al. (2014).




                                                   2
structural change.4 Our analysis is most closely linked to those of Duarte and Restuccia
           ´
(2010) and Swiecki (2017). Like us, Duarte and Restuccia (2010) study productivity
driven structural transformation in a large set of countries using a benchmark closed
economy model of structural change. While our model is somewhat more general because
it allows for non-homotheticities in preferences over manufacturing and services, the key
difference between the two analyses is our focus on the industrialization phase and the
ability of the model to account for the heterogeneity in industrialization experiences across
           ´
countries. Swiecki (2017) extends Duarte and Restuccia (2010) to a multi-country setting
and considers additional driving forces. His analysis focuses on the post 1970 period and
again does not focus on the industrialization phase.
   Recent papers by Sposi et al. (2020) and Wise (2020) have also sought to isolate factors
that might give rise to the premature industrialization phenomenon. These papers both
emphasize open economy interactions, and so are complementary to our analysis of forces
in a closed economy setting. Our analysis is also related to that in Gollin et al. (2016), who
study heterogeneous urbanization experiences and how this relates to industrialization.
   An outline of the paper follows. In the next section we present evidence on the hetero-
geneity in industrialization experiences across a set of Asian and Latin American countries
in the post 1950 period, as well as three European economies that also experienced con-
siderable industrialization during this period. While we choose a different representation
of the data than Rodrik (2016), our analysis yields a similar characterization. In Section 3
we present a benchmark model of structural change and study the forces shaping industri-
alization. In Section 4 we calibrate the model to the US industrialization experience, and
Section 5 uses the calibrated model to illustrate the ability of the model to capture the
quantitative differences in industrialization experiences when sectoral productivity profiles
differ. Section 6 connects the model to data for our sample of Asian and Latin American
   4
     Important contributions include Kongsamut et al. (2001), Gollin et al. (2002, 2007), Ngai and Pis-
sarides (2007), Buera and Kaboski (2009), Boppart (2014) and Comin et al. (2015).


                                                  3
economies and shows that differences in the growth rate of agricultural productivity across
countries can account for a large part of differences in peak manufacturing employment
shares across countries. Section 7 discusses extensions and Section 8 concludes.



2       Industrialization Patterns Across Countries

In this section we document patterns of industrialization for a set of Asian and Latin
American economies using the Groningen Growth and Development Centre (GGDC) 10-
Sector database. By industrialization we refer to the phase of economic development
in which the manufacturing sector is growing in terms of its share of the overall labor
force. At its core, industrialization reflects the release of labor from agriculture that is
then absorbed into non-agricultural activities. To best focus on this dynamic, we study
the relationship between the release of labor from agriculture and its absorption into the
manufacturing sector. While we focus on an alternative representation of the data, our
characterization is very similar to that offered by Rodrik (2016).5


2.1     Data

Our selection of countries is dictated by those that are included in the GGDC 10-Sector
database. The Asian countries in the dataset are China, India, Indonesia, Japan, South
Korea, Malaysia, the Philippines, Taiwan and Thailand. The Latin American countries
are Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Mexico, Peru and Venezuela.
We also include three countries from Europe that are included in the data base and
experienced significant industrialization since 1950­France, Spain and Italy. While the
data set generally covers the period from 1950 to 2010, coverage for some countries begins
    5
     Rodrik (2016) focused on value added shares and the level of GDP/capita measured using PPP. We
focus on employment shares and so do not use any information about relative prices.




                                                4
after 1950.6 While the US is included in the GGDC 10-Sector database, the post 1950
data for the US is of limited interest for the simple reason that the post 1950 period does
not cover the industrialization phase in which the employment share of manufacturing is
increasing. In order to include the US experience as a reference point we will combine
data from Carter et al. (2006) for the pre-1930 period with data from the BEA starting
in 1929 to cover the US over the period 1880-1980.
    We aggregate the ten sectors covered by the GGDC 10-Sector database into three using
standard methods. Agriculture is one of the ten sectors in the database, so this does not
involve any aggregation. We aggregate four sectors (mining, manufacturing, construction
and utilities) to obtain what we will label as manufacturing, and the remaining five sectors
(trade, restaurants and hotels, transportation, finance insurance, real estate and business
services, government and community, social and personal services) are combined to obtain
what we label as services.
    For each country we compute time series for the employment shares of the three sec-
tors, which we denote as hat , hmt and hst for agriculture, manufacturing and services,
respectively. We define hnt , the nonagricultural employment share, as 1 - hat . Our empir-
ical analysis focuses on the relationship between hmt and hnt . Because we are interested
in trend relationships, we smooth the data by regressing hmt on a fifth order polynomial
in hnt , and will use these smoothed profiles in our analysis.7
    Almost all of the countries in our sample have experienced peaks for their manufactur-
ing employment share. The clear exceptions are China, India, and Thailand. The cases
of Bolivia and Colombia are less clear­it appears that they have reached their peaks near
the end of the sample period, though absent additional data it is not possible to make a
   6
       The notable exceptions are that data for Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines does not start until
the 1970s.
     7
       For each country we only consider the range of values for hnt that are are observed in the data;
i.e., we only use our polynomial to smooth the data and do not use it to extrapolate either forward or
backward in time.



                                                     5
             Figure 1: Paths of Industrialization: Four Emerging Economies
                                                0.35



               Manufacturing Employment Share
                                                 0.3


                                                0.25


                                                 0.2


                                                0.15
                                                                                   South Korea
                                                                                   Brazil
                                                 0.1                               Mexico
                                                                                   Indonesia

                                                0.05
                                                   0.3   0.4       0.5    0.6    0.7     0.8       0.9   1
                                                               Non-Agricultural Employment Share


definitive statement. In what follows we treat them as having reached their peaks, but
excluding them does not affect the empirical patterns that we document.


2.2    Patterns

As a first step we illustrate the range of experiences within our sample of countries. Figure
1 shows profiles for four countries that have experienced peak manufacturing employment
shares­South Korea, Brazil, Mexico and Indonesia.
   We highlight three properties of Figure 1. First, the level of peak employment in
manufacturing varies significantly: Indonesia has a peak value below 0.20, whereas South
Korea reaches a value of almost 0.35. Second, there is also significant variation in the
value of hnt at which the peak is reached, ranging from less than 0.60 for Indonesia to
more than 0.80 for South Korea. Third, there is a strong positive correlation between the
level of the peak and the value of hnt at which the peak occurs.
   While Figure 1 showed that the industrialization process varies substantially across


                                                                           6
                   Figure 2: Paths of Industrialization: Advanced Economies
                                                  0.45



                 Manufacturing Employment Share
                                                   0.4


                                                  0.35


                                                   0.3


                                                  0.25                                   JAP
                                                                                         KOR
                                                                                         TWN
                                                   0.2                                   FRA
                                                                                         ITA
                                                  0.15                                   SPA
                                                                                         AVG

                                                   0.1
                                                     0.3   0.4       0.5    0.6    0.7     0.8       0.9   1
                                                                 Non-Agricultural Employment Share


countries, it is also of interest to ask whether there is some sense of a "typical" pattern
that current advanced countries have followed. To examine this, Figure 2 shows profiles
for the six countries in our sample that currently qualify as advanced: Japan, South
Korea, Taiwan, France, Italy and Spain.
   While there is still some heterogeneity among the experiences of these countries, the
dispersion is quite small relative to what we saw in Figure 1. All six of these countries
reach their peak manufacturing employment shares when hnt lies between .80 and .90,
and the peak shares range from 0.34 to 0.40. The thick black line in the picture reflects
the average for this subset of countries for hnt in the range of 0.60 to 0.90.8
   As described earlier, we create a profile for the US pattern of industrialization using
data from Carter et al. (2006) and the BEA. The early data is decadal, and so cannot
really be smoothed, but for the post 1929 period we compute five year moving averages
for employment shares. Figure 3 shows the data for the US and the profiles for the six
    8
      The average excludes France on account of the fact that the French data do not begin until hnt is
already beyond 0.70.


                                                                             7
          Figure 3: Paths of Industrialization: Advanced Economies and the US
                                                  0.45
                                                            JAP
                                                            KOR

                 Manufacturing Employment Share
                                                   0.4
                                                            TWN
                                                            FRA
                                                  0.35      ITA
                                                            SPA
                                                            US
                                                   0.3


                                                  0.25


                                                   0.2


                                                  0.15


                                                   0.1
                                                     0.3   0.4       0.5    0.6    0.7     0.8       0.9   1
                                                                 Non-Agricultural Employment Share


advanced economies shown in Figure 2.
    A notable feature of the industrialization process in the US is that it was severely
disrupted by the Great Depression, and this effect is readily apparent in the figure. It
seems reasonable to infer that the counterfactual profile that would have occurred in the
US in the absence of the Great Depression would have been broadly similar to what these
countries experienced.
    Figure 4 shows the profiles for the three countries that have not yet reached a peak
for their manufacturing employment share­China, India, and Thailand.9 As a reference
point, we have included the profile for South Korea on this figure as well.10
    Given that none of these countries has yet reached their peak employment share for
manufacturing it is premature to say anything definitive. But, a casual look at this figure
suggests that these three countries are following different paths and that only China seems
    9
      Appendix A includes a plot showing industrialization paths for all of the remaining countries in our
sample.
   10
      We include South Korea since it is the advanced economy that has data coverage for the lowest
values of hnt .


                                                                             8
               Figure 4: Paths of Industrialization: Four Asian Economies
                                                 0.35



                Manufacturing Employment Share
                                                  0.3


                                                 0.25


                                                  0.2


                                                 0.15
                                                                                      China
                                                                                      India
                                                                                      Thailand
                                                  0.1
                                                                                      South Korea


                                                 0.05
                                                        0   0.2       0.4       0.6        0.8      1
                                                            Non-Agricultural Employment Share


to be exhibiting behavior that is similar to that of South Korea. Comparing with Figure
1, it would appear that Thailand looks to be on a path that is similar to that of Brazil,
whereas it is quite difficult to say much about India given its current stage. By way of
summary, it appears that the experiences of these three countries will ultimately exhibit
a fair bit of heterogeneity.
   When summarizing the patterns in Figure 1 we noted a strong positive correlation
between the value of hnt at which the peak value of hmt occurred and the value of peak
hmt . Denote these two values by h       
                                  n and hm respectively. We now pursue this pattern

further using the full sample of 18 countries who have attained their peak. Table 1 shows
the values of h       
               n and hm for each of the 18 countries.




                                                                            9
                                                Table 1
                                        Values of h       
                                                   n and hm

                        Asia               Latin America               Europe

                           hn    hm                hn     hm             hn     hm

                 IDN     0.56    0.19    ARG      0.82    0.35 FRA      0.86    0.38
                JAP      0.88    0.33    BOL      0.78    0.25   ITA    0.82    0.39
                KOR      0.82    0.34    BRA      0.65    0.23   SPA    0.77    0.35
                MAL      0.83    0.34    CHL      0.73    0.31
                PHL      0.59    0.17    COL      0.81    0.20
                TWN      0.82    0.40    CRI      0.75    0.27
                                         MEX      0.79    0.28
                                         PER      0.56    0.20
                                          Ven     0.83    0.27

    Figure 5 shows a scatterplot for the pairs of h       
                                                   n and hm across countries as well as a

fitted linear regression line.
    The positive correlation is evident in the picture, and is equal to 0.76. In the remainder
of this paper we will try to shed some light on factors that can give rise to this pattern,
both qualitatively and quantitatively.



3     A Model of Industrialization

In this section we introduce a simple benchmark model of structural change. While
simple, the model captures the key forces that the literature has emphasized as the drivers
of structural change. The model's tractability allows us to analytically characterize the
industrialization phase.



                                                  10
             Figure 5: Correlation of Peak and Timing of Industrialization
                                     0.4                                                          twn
                                                                                                  ita
                                                                                                            fra


                                    0.35                                            spa           arg
                                                                                                    mal
                                                                                                  kor
              Value of hm at Peak
                                                                                                                  jap
                                                                        chl
                                     0.3
                                                                                          mex
                                                                              cri                     ven

                                    0.25                                             bol
                                                         bra


                                     0.2   per                                                  col
                                           idn
                                                 phl

                                    0.15
                                       0.55      0.6   0.65       0.7    0.75             0.8           0.85        0.9
                                                              Value of hn at Peak


3.1    Model

We consider a simple benchmark model of structural transformation formulated in con-
tinuous time. The allocation decisions in the model are all static, with all dynamics
generated by exogenous technological change over time. In this subsection we focus on
the decisions made at a particular point in time and so suppress time subscripts.
   There are three consumption goods in the economy: agriculture, manufacturing and
services. Each of the consumption goods is produced using a linear production function
with labor as the only input:
                                                       ci = Ai hi , i = a, m, s

   There is a representative household that is endowed with one unit of time and has
preferences over the three consumption goods. Preferences reflect a combination of those
used by Gollin et al. (2002) and Boppart (2014). In particular, following Gollin et al.
(2002) we assume an extreme form of a subsistence constraint in terms of agricultural



                                                                   11
consumption: households receive no utility from consumption of manufacturing or services
if ca < c
        ¯a , utility from consuming ca is increasing until ca reaches c
                                                                      ¯a , but they receive no
additional utility from consuming additional food beyond c
                                                         ¯a . While somewhat extreme,
this assumption serves to generate tractability and facilitate transparency. Moreover, as
we show later on, its key prediction for agricultural employment tracks the data quite
well for our sample of countries.11
    Conditional on ca being at least equal to c
                                              ¯a the household will also receive utility
u(cm , cs ) from consuming cm and cs . The literature on structural change emphasizes two
forces that affect the allocation of expenditure between manufacturing and services and
thereby shape structural change between the two sectors: income effects and relative price
effects. Boppart (2014) shows that price inelastic generalized linear (PIGL) preferences
offer a tractable specification in which these effects operate smoothly along a development
path, and we follow him. These preferences have an analytic representation for the indirect
utility function but not for the direct utility function u(cm , cs ). For this reason we will
work with the indirect utility function for the utility that derives from consumption of
cm and cs . Letting E be total expenditure on manufacturing and services, and pm and ps
be the prices of manufacturing and services, we will assume that indirect utility function
v (E, pm , ps ) is given by:

                                                                  
                                           1   E             pm          1 
                         v (E, pm , ps ) =             -             -    + ,
                                               ps            ps           

where  > 0 and 0 <  <  < 1. Boppart (2014) shows that this indirect utility function
is well defined given these parameter restrictions.12
  11                         ¨ or (2013).
     This finding is also in Ung¨
  12
     The parameter  controls income effects. In the limit as  goes to zero preferences are homothetic.
The parameter  controls the elasticity of substitution between goods and services, but it should be noted
that the elasticity is not equal to  and in fact is not even constant. In the limiting case of  = 0, 
tending to one corresponds to Leontief and  tending to zero corresponds to Cobb-Douglas. See Boppart
(2014) for more details.


                                                    12
    We focus on the competitive equilibrium allocation for the above economy.13 We
normalize the wage rate to equal unity and let the three prices be denoted by pi , i = a, m, s.
Given the linear production functions it follows that in equilibrium we must have:

                                                 1
                                          pi =      , i = a, m, s                                      (3.1)
                                                 Ai

    It remains to determine the allocation of labor. Because we normalize the wage to
unity, total income for the household will also equal unity. The allocation of labor will then
be dictated by the demands of the representative household for the three consumption
goods given equilibrium prices and total income.
    If Aa  c
           ¯a then the household will allocate all of its income to purchasing the agri-
cultural good and the equilibrium allocation of labor is ha = 1 and hm = hs = 0. In
what follows we will focus on the case in which Aa > c
                                                     ¯a . In this case the household will
purchase c
         ¯a units of ca , implying that the equilibrium allocation of labor to agriculture
allocation will be:
                                               ha = c
                                                    ¯a /Aa                                             (3.2)

    To solve for the allocation of non-agricultural labor between manufacturing and ser-
vices we need to consider the optimal allocation of non-agricultural expenditure between
manufacturing and services. We begin by using Roy's Identity to uncover the expenditure
share for cm as:
                                                          -         
                                      p m cm   E               pm
                                             =                         .                               (3.3)
                                        E      ps              ps

    Note that the share of non-agricultural expenditure devoted to manufacturing depends
upon both total expenditure and the relative price of manufacturing to services. Both
   13
     The equilibrium allocation will also be the unique Pareto efficient allocation. But because we have
specified preferences with an indirect utility function we will solve for allocations by directly considering
the equilibrium.




                                                     13
effects display constant elasticities, with  governing the income effect and  governing
the relative price effect.
   Recalling the expressions for equilibrium prices, market clearing implies:


                                   pi ci = hi , i = a, m, s                            (3.4)


   Since E = 1 - pa ca , equation (3.4) implies:


                                        E = 1 - ha                                     (3.5)


   Substituting equations (3.1), (3.4), and (3.5) into equation (3.3) and using hn = 1 - ha
gives:
                                                              
                                  hm              As
                             fm =    =  (hn As )-                                      (3.6)
                                  hn              Am

   Having solved for the equilibrium values of ha and hm , the equilibrium value of hs is
then determined as 1 - ha - hm .


3.2      Hump-Shaped Industrialization Dynamics

We now use the previous expressions to characterize the evolution of sectoral employment
shares along a development path when technical change is the sole driving force. To
maximize transparency we focus on the case in which there is constant technological
progress in each of the three sectors, though possibly at different rates:


                                         Ait = egi t


where gi > 0 for {i = a, m, s} and we have implicitly normalized all three initial pro-
ductivities at time zero to unity. It is useful to focus on the empirically relevant part of


                                             14
parameter space, and so consistent with empirical evidence we assume that  < 1 and
that g = gm - gs > 0.14
   Two simple properties follow. First, ga > 0 implies that hat will decrease over time. It
follows that hnt will be increasing over time. Combined with g > 0 and  < 1, Equation
(3.6) then implies that hmt /hnt will be decreasing over time. Since non-agricultural labor
is increasing and a decreasing share of it is devoted to manufacturing, it follows that hst
will be increasing over time. Importantly, these two properties­a monotonic decline in
hat and a monotonic increase in hst ­are robust features of the development process.
   Next we turn to the evolution of the manufacturing employment share. It is useful to
start with the following identity:

                                                    hmt
                                      hmt = hnt ·       = hnt · fmt
                                                    hnt

where as before, hnt = 1 - hat and fmt is defined by Equation (3.6).
   It follows that:
                                            mt
                                           h      nt fmt
                                                 h
                                               =    +                                  (3.7)
                                           hmt   hnt fmt

   Equation (3.7) shows the two opposing forces that shape the dynamics of hmt . On the
one hand, increases in Aat lead to movement of labor out of agriculture, so that the first
term on the right hand side is always positive. But, growth in hnt coupled with higher
growth in Amt relative to Ast leads to a decreasing share of non-agricultural labor in the
manufacturing sector, so that the second term is always negative.
   Our assumptions on preferences and technology allow us to characterize what happens
to the relative magnitude of these effects as technology advances, as summarized in the
following proposition.
   Proposition 1: Assume gi > 0 for i = {a, m, s}, 0 <  <  < 1 and g = gm - gs > 0.
  14
       See, for example the summary in Herrendorf et al. (2014).


                                                    15
Then,
           nt
          h
   (i)    hnt
                 > 0, and decreases monotonically to 0.
           fmt
   (ii)    fmt
                 < 0, and increases monotonically to -gs - g .
            mt
           h
   (iii)   hmt
                  decreases monotonically and converges to -gs - g .
   Proof:
   To prove (i) recall that hat = c
                                  ¯a /Aat , so that:


                                    nt
                                   h         at
                                            h           ¯a e-ga t
                                                        c
                                       =-         = ga
                                   hnt    1 - hat      1-c ¯a e-ga t

The result follows from the fact that the numerator decreases monotonically to 0, while
the denominator increases monotonically to 1.
   To prove (ii), start with:

                                                                     
                                          hmt                Ast
                                 fmt =        =  (hnt Ast )-            .
                                          hnt                Amt

Straightforward calculation implies:

                                         fmt      nt
                                                 h
                                             = -     - gs - g
                                         fmt     hnt

   The second and third terms on the right are both constant and negative, so the result
                                  nt
                                 h
follows from the fact that       hnt
                                       is positive but decreases monotonically to zero.
   To prove (iii), combine the results from (i) and (ii) to get:

                                        mt
                                       h             nt
                                                    h
                                           = (1 - )     - gs - g
                                       hmt          hnt

   The result follows from the fact that the first term is monotonically decreasing to zero
(recall that 0 <  < 1).
   It follows from Proposition 1 that a sufficient condition for hmt to exhibit hump-

                                                    16
                            m0
                           h
shaped dynamics is for     hm0
                                 to be positive. The following result is essentially a corollary
of Proposition 1 and provides a necessary and sufficient condition for this to hold.
                                                                                             mt
                                                                                            h
   Corollary 1: Assume gi > 0 for i = {a, m, s}, 0 <  <  < 1 and g > 0. Then                hmt
                                                                                                  >0
if and only if:


                                     hat
                       (1 - )ga            > gs + g = ( - )gs + gm                             (3.8)
                                   1 - hat

   Proof: Follows immediately from substituting into equation (3.7), noting that hat =
¯a e-ga t and using the expressions derived in Proposition 1.
c
   Because the inequality in equation (3.8) will always hold as hat tends to one, it follows
that the model will always generate a hump-shaped path for hmt . A more interesting issue
concerns the point at which the peak occurs. To pursue this, define ha as the value of hat

at which equation (3.8) holds with equality:


                                     ha
                        (1 - )ga          = gs + g = ( - )gs + gm                              (3.9)
                                   1 - ha

   As in the previous section, define h                                                
                                       n = 1 - ha as the value of hnt at the peak and hm to

be the value of hmt at the peak. We will be interested in how these values are affected by
changes in the sectoral productivity growth rates. Accordingly, we can write these values
as functions of ga , gs and gm , i.e., h                       
                                        n (ga , gs , gm ) and hm (ga , gs , gm ). Several comparative

statics results of interest follow and are summarized in the next Proposition.
   Proposition 2: Assume gi > 0 for i = {a, m, s}, 0 <  <  < 1 and g = gm - gs > 0.
Then,
   (i) hn (ga , gs , gm ) is increasing in ga and gs and decreasing in gm .

   (ii) hm (ga , gs , gm ) is increasing in ga and gs and decreasing in gm .




                                                 17
   Proof : Part (i) follows immediately from using equation (3.9) to solve for h         
                                                                                n = 1 - ha :



                                                   1
                                    hn =        (-)gs +gm
                                                                                      (3.10)
                                           1+    (1-)ga


To show part (ii) we start with the case of an increase in ga . To show that hm increases it

suffices to show that there is some value of t at which the new series for hmt exceeds the
original value of hm . To show this, let t be the value of t at which the new series for hnt

equals the original value of h                                                 
                              n . Because ga has increased it follows that if t is the time

at which the peak occurs for the original value of ga , then t < t . If fm
                                                                         
                                                                           is the value of
fmt at the original value of t , then g > 0 implies that the new value of fmt at t is greater
      
than fm . It follows that the new value of hmt at t exceeds the original value of hm.

   The other two results in part (ii) are much simpler to derive. The result for gs follows
from the fact that the series for hnt is unaffected, and the series for fmt is everywhere
higher. Similarly, the result for gm follows from the fact that the series for hnt is again
unaffected, and the series for fmt is now everywhere lower.
   Importantly, this proposition shows that variation in sectoral productivity growth
rates can qualitatively generate the empirical pattern shown previously in Figure 5. These
results are also intuitive: a higher value for ga serves to increase the flow of workers into
manufacturing, while higher values of gs and lower values of gm serve to decrease the
flow of workers out of manufacturing. In the remainder of the paper we examine the
quantitative significance of these effects.
   Before proceeding we want to emphasize an important property of the model regarding
its implications for the industrialization path plotted in hn - hm space. Specifically, this
profile is determined by the profile of relative sectoral productivities that the economy
experiences and not by the pace at which the economy moves along this profile. More
formally, let  be an indicator for the level of development, and assume that the rela-


                                              18
tionship between sectoral productivities and development is given by Aj = egi  . Fixing
these profiles, let  (t) be a function that describes how quickly a country moves along
the development path. The key feature of our model is that the industrialization path in
hn - hm space is invariant to the function  (t).
     With this result in mind, consider the comparative static result concerning an increase
in the value of ga . This serves to both increase the pace of overall development and change
the profile of relative productivities along the development path. But in view of the previ-
ous discussion, the implications for h       
                                      n and hm are invariant to the pace of development, so

the comparative static result should be understood as highlighting changes in the profiles
of relative productivity rather than changes in the pace of development.



4         Benchmark Calibration

In this section we present a benchmark calibration of the above model that captures the
trend evolution of sectoral employment shares in the US economy during its industrial-
ization period, which we take as 1880-1950. Because our application will focus on the
industrialization phase for current developing economies, we want our calibrated model
to reflect this phase for the US economy. The changing composition within services might
reasonably lead to secular changes in the properties of preferences defined over highly
aggregated sectors, and we want our preference parameters to be relevant for the in-
dustrialization phase of development. Additionally, the fact that services is increasingly
dominated by low productivity growth sectors like education and health care suggests that
the gap between manufacturing and services productivity growth is plausibly increasing
over time, especially in the post 1970 period.15
     As noted earlier, our data for the evolution of US sectoral employment shares between
    15
         See, for example, Duernecker et al. (2017) for an analysis that disaggregates the service sector.



                                                       19
                                           Figure 6: US Sectoral Employment Shares 1880-1980
                                           0.7
                                                    Agriculture
                                                    Manufacturing
                                           0.6      Services
               Sectoral Employment Share
                                           0.5


                                           0.4


                                           0.3


                                           0.2


                                           0.1


                                            0
                                            1880    1900            1920          1940   1960   1980
                                                                           Year


1880 and 1950 comes from Carter et al. (2006) and the BEA. Figure 6 shows the time
series for these shares between 1880 and 1980.
   The figure displays the monotonic decline in the agricultural employment share as
well as the monotonic increase in the services employment share. The trend behavior
of the manufacturing employment share reflects a hump-shaped pattern, but as noted
earlier, the disrupting effect of the Great Depression on the evolution of the manufacturing
employment share is readily apparent. Our calibration procedure will implicitly reflect
the evolution that would have occurred if the Great Depression had not occurred.
   As of 1880 the agricultural employment share in the US is approximately 0.50. For
considering the development paths of current developing countries we will be interested in
considering even higher values of hat than witnessed during this period for the US. For this
reason our benchmark calibration will consider an economy that begins with ha = 0.60,
though parameters will be set so that the model matches the evolution of the US economy
as hat decreases from 0.50 to slightly less than 0.10.


                                                                           20
    Next we assign values for the three (constant) growth rates of sectoral labor produc-
tivity. We do not have sectoral productivity data that covers that period from 1880-1950.
The growth rate for agricultural productivity, ga , is set by requiring the model to achieve
the observed decrease in hat for the US economy between 1880 and 1950. This implies
that ga = 1.0239. For the other two growth rates we use data from the GGDC Ten Sec-
tor Data Base for the period 1950-1970 and assume that these are indicative of average
productivity growth rates in the preceding 70 year period. While somewhat heroic, this
assumption seems somewhat reasonable given the relative constancy of trend aggregate
growth over this period. This implies gm = 1.0225 and gs = 1.0147. We normalize all
three productivity levels in the initial period to equal unity. Because we start the economy
with a fraction 0.60 of employment in the agricultural sector, this implies that c
                                                                                 ¯a = 0.60.
    It remains to pick values for the three remaining preference parameters that define the
indirect utility from consumption of manufacturing and services: , , and . Although
both Boppart (2014) and Herrendorf et al. (2020) estimate parameters for the PIGL
specification, we note that neither of them is appropriate for our setting. In both cases
they assumed that goods included both manufacturing and agriculture. Importantly, our
specification has a very strong income effect for agricultural consumption, whereas in
their settings this effect is reflected in the income effect for overall spending on goods.
Additionally, whereas Boppart (2014) considered preferences over final expenditure, our
preferences should be interpreted as being over value added components of consumption,
as in Herrendorf et al. (2020).16
    Our strategy is to pick values for these three parameters so as to match the industrial-
ization profile for the US as shown in Figure 3. Table 4 displays the calibrated values and
Figure 7 shows the fit of the model for the profile of hmt versus hnt as shown in Figure 3.
   16
    See also Herrendorf et al. (2014) for additional discussion of this issue and its significance for esti-
mating preference parameters.




                                                    21
                                                          Figure 7: Model Fit to US Data
                                                0.35



               Manufacturing Employment Share

                                                 0.3




                                                0.25


                                                                                                 Model
                                                                                                 Data


                                                 0.2
                                                   0.4     0.5       0.6          0.7          0.8       0.9      1
                                                             Non-Agricultural Employment Share


                                                                           Table 2
                                                                 Benchmark Calibration

                                                   ga      gm         gs       ¯a
                                                                               c                          m

                                                 1.0239   1.0225    1.0147 .60          0.30     0.06    0.4762

   Recall that our calibrated model assumes that all three productivity growth rates are
constant, so that to the extent that trend productivity growth in the US varied over the
period 1880-1950, we will see departures of the data from the paths implied by the model.
Our calibrated model implicitly assumes that the Great Depression and WWII did not
occur.
   We make two remarks about the calibrated preference parameters. First, note that
the calibrated value of  is quite small, so that income effects are relatively unimportant
for the allocation of expenditure between manufacturing and services. In particular, our
value is very small compared to the value estimated in Herrendorf et al. (2020). But as
noted earlier, it is critical to emphasize that their estimate implicitly included the income

                                                                             22
effect operating via agricultural consumption. Additionally, the increasing importance of
health and education may result in a drift in this parameter over time.
    Second, and related, because we calibrate a relatively low value of , our calibrated
model is quite close to a model that assumes a homothetic CES specification for prefer-
ences over consumption of manufacturing and services. If we adopted this specification
then the calibrated elasticity parameter would be close to zero, indicating that preferences
over manufacturing and services are approximately Leontief. We note that the results that
we present in the next section would be virtually unchanged if we had instead worked
with this somewhat simpler specification.
    Related to this last point, our calibration procedure does not provide much guidance
on disentangling the role of income and substitution effects in the neighborhood of our
calibrated values, in that small changes in one can be offset by small changes in the other.
However, the value of  cannot be much larger than 0.10 without a large sacrifice in fit.
But consistent with what was previously stated, varying  within this range has little
effect on the results that we present in the next section.



5     Alternative Industrialization Paths

All of the Asian and Latin American economies in our sample lagged behind the US as of
1950, but most of them experienced some degree of catch-up since that time. It is natural
to view the calibrated sectoral productivity profile for the US as representing the time
paths of the sectoral technology frontiers. An appealing property of our representation
of industrialization in hm - hn space is that if a late developing country follows the same
sectoral productivity profile as the US, though possibly at an accelerated speed, it will
produce exactly the same industrialization path as the US.
    However, there is no reason that the process of catch-up to the frontier for late devel-


                                             23
opers will necessarily mimic the historical evolution of the frontier; that is, an individual
country may converge towards the frontier technology at different rates across sectors. In
this case the evolution of its productivity profile may differ from the one experienced his-
torically in the US. In this section we use our calibrated model to learn about the extent to
which alternative sectoral productivity profiles can generate the range of industrialization
experiences depicted in Figure 5.
    Following our theoretical analysis earlier, we will focus on two departures that can
give rise to the pattern found in Figure 5. The first is slower growth in agricultural
productivity. A large literature has emphasized the relatively large differences in agricul-
tural productivity between rich and poor countries and hence the apparent slow rate of
catch-up of agricultural productivity in these countries.17 Building on the earlier work of
Johnston and Mellor (1961) and Johnston and Kilby (1975), Gollin et al. (2002, 2007)
emphasize that slow productivity growth in agriculture can delay overall development of
the non-agricultural sector. Building on this work, we show that relatively slower catch-
up in agricultural productivity can also affect the path of industrialization in a way that
quantitatively mimics the findings presented in Section 2.
    The second departure is to consider slower productivity growth in services.18 While
this departure can also generate significant differences in the peak employment share
for the manufacturing sector, we find that this departure is less able to generate the
large differences found in the data. The evidence for this departure is somewhat less
strong. Whereas Rodrik (2012) argued that productivity gaps in manufacturing are small
suggesting that differences in services must be large, both Hsieh and Klenow (2007) and
Herrendorf and Valentinyi (2012) found that differences in manufacturing were relatively
large.
   17
     See, for example, Restuccia et al. (2008), Caselli (2005) and Gollin et al. (2013).
   18
     Because our calibrated model displays preferences over manufacturing and services which are nearly
homothetic, the effects of gs and gm on the industrialization path are close to mirror images of each other.
For this reason we do not report separate results for variation in gm .


                                                    24
         Figure 8: Agricultural Productivity Growth and Peak Industrialization
                                     0.4



              Value of hm at Peak   0.35



                                     0.3



                                    0.25



                                     0.2



                                    0.15
                                       0.55   0.6   0.65       0.7    0.75       0.8   0.85   0.9
                                                           Value of hn at Peak


5.1    Slow Catch-up in Agricultural Productivity

To pursue this we consider a set of economies that differ from our benchmark calibrated
economy solely in terms of their productivity growth rate in agriculture. Our benchmark
economy featured ga = 1.0239. Here we consider four economies with values of ga that
vary from 1.005 to 1.0200 in increments of 0.005. For each economy we simulate outcomes
beginning with the same initial conditions as in our benchmark model. In Section 3 we
showed that a decrease in ga will decrease both h       
                                                 n and hm . Our goal here is to examine

the quantitative implications of this decrease.
   Figure 8 shows the scatter plot that corresponds to the aforementioned counterfactuals,
along with the regression line from the scatter plot of Figure 5.
   Our calibrated economy lies a little below the regression line from the data, but the
model-generated data track the regression line from the data remarkably well. We con-
clude that differences in agricultural productivity growth are capable of generating differ-
ences in industrialization experiences similar to those found in the data.


                                                                25
        Figure 9: Agricultural Productivity Growth and Paths of Industrialization
                                                   0.35
                                                             g a=1.0239


                  Manufacturing Employment Share
                                                             g a=1.0200
                                                             g a=1.0150
                                                             g a=1.0100
                                                    0.3
                                                             g a=1.0050




                                                   0.25




                                                    0.2
                                                      0.4   0.5      0.6        0.7   0.8     0.9   1
                                                              Non-Agricultural Employment Share


    Figure 9 shows the hmt versus hnt profiles for the different values of ga .
    In each case we run the economy forward for 150 years. Note that because the
economies differ in their value of ga they achieve different levels of hnt during the 150
years.19


5.2     Slow Catch-up in Services Productivity

In this subsection we repeat the previous exercise but this time considering the possibility
of slower catch-up in services.20 Recall that our calibrated value of gs was 1.0147. Here
we consider five alternative values ranging from 1.0025 to 1.0125 in increments of 0.0025.
The results are shown in Figure 10.
    We highlight three features of this figure. First, we again see that the points closely
   19
      We emphasize again that the resulting path of industrialization as represented in hm - hn space is
invariant to the speed with which the country travels along the given productivity profile; what matters
for this plot is the relative sequence of sectoral productivities and not the overall rate at which a country
moves along the profile.
   20
      As noted earlier, this exercise is almost identical to considering a higher growth rate for manufac-
turing productivity.

                                                                           26
            Figure 10: Services Productivity Growth and Peak Industrialization
                                       0.4



                Value of hm at Peak   0.35



                                       0.3



                                      0.25



                                       0.2



                                      0.15
                                         0.55   0.6   0.65       0.7    0.75       0.8   0.85   0.9
                                                             Value of hn at Peak


track the regression line from Figure 5. Second, the figure indicates that large differences
in gs can affect the peak manufacturing employment share by as much as five percentage
points. And third, comparing Figures 8 and 10, there is somewhat greater scope for
differences in ga to affect these values.



6        Rationalizing the Data

In the previous section we showed that seemingly reasonable cross-country differences in
the rate at which sectoral productivities move toward the frontier can generate differences
in industrialization paths that mimic those found in the data. In this section we use the
model to infer the sectoral productivity profiles that would be required to rationalize the
data for each of the 21 countries in our sample and then compare these productivity
profiles to those observed in the GGDC Ten Sector Data Base.21
    21
     An obvious alternative to this two-step procedure would be to simulate the model using empirical
productivity profiles. If productivities are measured with error we think our two step procedure is
preferable. As we discuss later, there is good reason to think that there is substantial measurement error


                                                                  27
6.1     Inferring Productivity Profiles

The first step in our exercise is to use our model calibrated to the US industrialization
experience to infer sectoral productivity profiles for each of the countries in our sample
using data on employment shares. To do this we assume that preferences are the same
across countries, and that the sole source of differences across countries are the time series
profiles for sectoral productivities.
    Before proceeding it is important to note that there is a basic invertibility issue that
one must confront when using the model to recover productivities with data on sectoral
employment shares. Specifically, there are three sectoral productivities to determine in
each period, but since sectoral employment shares sum to one, employment shares provide
only two moments at each point in time. In particular, our model implies the following
mapping from the productivity profile (Aa , Am , As ) into the employment shares ha and
hm :

                                             ¯a
                                             c
                                 ha =                                                    (6.1)
                                             Aa
                                                                
                                                          As
                                hm = (1 - ha )1- As -                                    (6.2)
                                                          Am

    The time series for Aa is uniquely determined by the time series for the employment
share ha . But the second equation shows that the evolution of hm depends both on
the evolution of relative productivity As /Am and the overall level of productivity in the
non-agricultural sector.
    Our strategy will be to use the data to pin down the level effect and then use the model
to infer the profile for the relative productivity of manufacturing and services. That is,
we will take the growth rate of As as given in the data and use the model to infer series
in the relevant productivity growth rates.




                                                  28
               Figure 11: Agricultural Productivity Growth: Model and Data
                                            0.07

                                            0.06
                Growth Rate of Aa (Model)
                                                                                                                twn
                                            0.05                                                                      kor
                                                                                ven                      jap                   ita
                                                                                                                      fra
                                            0.04                                            mal

                                                                                                               spa
                                            0.03
                                                                          mex
                                                                                bol
                                                                                 arg
                                                                                cri    bra
                                            0.02                          col
                                                                          idn
                                                        per                         tha
                                                                                   chi
                                            0.01       phl        chl
                                                               ind

                                              0
                                                   0         0.01       0.02      0.03            0.04         0.05         0.06     0.07
                                                                         Growth Rate of Aa (Data)


for the growth rate of Aa and the growth rate of (As /Am ).22


6.2     Results

We carry out the above procedure for each of the 21 countries in our sample up to the
point at which they reach their peak employment share in manufacturing.23 We focus on
this period because we calibrated our model to the industrialization phase.
    We are particularly interested in the relationship between the productivity growth
processes in the data and those implied by this procedure. We begin with the results for
growth in agricultural productivity. Figure 11 shows a scatterplot for the values from the
data and those inferred from our model based exercise, as well as a 45 degree line.
    The figure shows that there is a strong positive correlation between the two, and that
  22
      We note that if preferences over manufacturing and services were homothetic then only the ratio
of the two non-agricultural productivities would matter for the determination of sectoral employment
shares and the invertibility issue would not arise.
   23
      We follow each country for a minimum of 25 years to ensure a sufficiently long sample for estimating
average productivity growth rates. This only affects a small number of countries.



                                                                                       29
 Figure 12: Growth in Manufacturing-Services Relative Productivity: Model and Data
                                             0.06

                                                                                               per
              Growth Rate of Am/As (Model)
                                             0.04

                                                                                  bol
                                             0.02                                           bra fra
                                                                                  phl     col arg
                                                                                                    spa
                                                                                         mex     ita ven
                                                                                                jap
                                                 0                                    chl
                                                                                       cri
                                                                           ind
                                                                                                                chi
                                             -0.02                                            tha
                                                                            idn


                                             -0.04
                                                                                        twn            kor
                                                                   mal

                                             -0.06
                                                 -0.06   -0.04     -0.02          0             0.02         0.04     0.06
                                                                 Growth Rate of Am/As (Data)


the points tend to track the 45 degree line. The correlation between the two values is 0.83.
Being mindful of the fact that there are various issues that result in classical as well as
non-classical measurement error, we view this as a very strong correlation. We conclude
that the model's relatively stark predictions about the relationship between productivity
and employment in the agricultural sector are largely supported by the data.
   Next we turn to the results for the growth rate of manufacturing productivity relative
to services. Figure 12 shows a scatterplot as well as a 45 degree line.
   While many of the points do track the 45 degree line, there are a number of significant
outliers relative to the 45 degree line and the overall correlation is only 0.25. The two
points in the bottom right corner are China and South Korea. We will revisit these cases
in the next section when we discuss extensions, but for now we note if we exclude these
two countries the correlation increases quite substantially to 0.56.
   Once again, it is important to recognize the potential for measurement error in the
productivity series. Importantly, the plot in Figure 12 is comparing the difference between


                                                                           30
two productivity growth rates. Assuming each growth rate is independently measured
with error, the difference between the two growth rates will display much greater error.
In Appendix B we carry out one exercise to explicitly address the measurement error issue
and conclude that measurement of the relative growth rate of manufacturing and services
productivity should reasonably be viewed as having a significant amount of error. In view
of this the correlation of 0.56 for the subsample without China and South Korea should
perhaps be viewed as quite supportive for the model.


6.3       Agricultural Productivity and Industrialization

The previous analysis showed that the benchmark model does a very good job of ac-
counting for the movement of labor out of agriculture in the sense that the model implied
values for agricultural productivity growth are closely related to measured values from the
GGDC 10-Sector database. The results were a bit more mixed regarding the model's abil-
ity to account for the division of non-agricultural labor into manufacturing and services.
In this section we show that differences in agricultural productivity profiles play a dom-
inant role in accounting for the observed differences in peak manufacturing employment
shares.
   To do this we carry out the following exercise for each of the 18 countries in our sample
that reach a peak employment share in manufacturing. First, we assume that initial pro-
ductivity levels for each country are such that model implied employment shares perfectly
match the observed employment shares in the first period for which data is available. Sec-
ond, for each country we take productivity growth in agriculture as measured from the
GGDC. Specifically, for each country we assume that productivity growth in agriculture is
constant, equal to its average value during the industrialization phase. Third, we assume
that the growth rates of productivity in both manufacturing and services are those that



                                            31
Figure 13: Agricultural Productivity Growth and Peak Manufacturing Employment:
Model and Data
                                                              0.5

                Peak Value of hm With Aa Variation (Model)   0.45

                                                              0.4                                                          ita
                                                                                                                         fra
                                                                                                                   spa
                                                             0.35
                                                                                    bra                        jap arg
                                                                                          bol            chl
                                                              0.3
                                                                                                                                 twn

                                                                                                ven
                                                                                                 cri
                                                                                                  mex
                                                             0.25             col
                                                                                                                kor
                                                                                                                 mal

                                                              0.2
                                                                         idnper
                                                                       phl
                                                             0.15
                                                                0.15         0.2     0.25           0.3         0.35       0.4         0.45   0.5
                                                                                          Peak Value of hm (Data)


we calibrated for the US economy.24 Note that this exercise differs from the counterfac-
tuals reported in Section 5 in which we varied ga because the current exercise assumes
differences in both initial conditions and the growth rate of agricultural productivity.
   We simulate data for each of the 18 economies and find the peak employment share
for the manufacturing sector. Figure 13 plots the values from this exercise against the
values reported in Section 2 as well as a 45 degree line to facilitate comparison.
   The figure shows that the specification in which observed differences in agricultural
productivity growth are the only source of difference across countries does an excellent
job of accounting for the observed variation in peak levels of hm for most of the countries
in our sample. Twelve of the countries lie very close to the 45 degree line, indicating
that the differences in agricultural productivity are essentially sufficient to account for
the large differences in peak values for hm .
  24
     Because our preferences over manufacturing and services are not that far from being homothetic,
the key assumption in this exercise is that the gap between these two productivity growth rates is the
same as in the US.


                                                                                                        32
    There are six countries for which the gap between the model predicted value and the
actual value exceeds 5 percentage points. Three of these countries lie below the 45 degree
line and are all from Asia: South Korea, Malaysia and Taiwan. For these countries the
model requires significant differences in the growth rate of Am /As relative to the US to
replicate the evolution of employment shares. It is noteworthy that this is not the case
for Japan. The other three countries lie above the 45 degree line and are all from Latin
America: Bolivia, Brazil and Colombia.
    Importantly, Figure 13 shows that differences in the evolution of agricultural produc-
tivity alone can account for gaps in peak manufacturing employment shares that range
from less than 0.20 to almost as high as 0.40.



7     Discussion

We view the previous results as supportive of the view that an important part of the
heterogeneity in paths of industrialization among our sample of Asian and Latin Amer-
ican economies can be rationalized within the context of a simple benchmark model of
structural change, with the differences across countries driven by differences in sectoral
productivity dynamics. This finding is consistent with the growing literature on structural
change that stresses productivity dynamics as central to understanding the stylized facts
of structural transformation.
    But our analysis also suggests a role for additional factors in some countries that are
particularly relevant for the division of non-agricultural labor between manufacturing and
services. With this in mind, in this section we discuss factors that our model abstracts
from which we believe may play an important role and which future research should seek
to incorporate into the analysis.
    Our model is static and views economies as closed. This raises the issue of how trade


                                            33
might matter, and in particular the role of dynamic trade imbalances. Several remarks
are in order regarding the potential importance of these channels. First, consider the
case in which trade is statically balanced, so that for each country, imports are equal to
exports period by period. If trade occurs entirely within the manufacturing sector, the
associated specialization would manifest itself as productivity increases and so would be
picked up by our analysis. More generally, if trade occurs in other sectors but is balanced
within each sector then the same comment would apply.
   Trade that is balanced across time but not across sectors would affect our analysis;
if a country imports food and exports manufacturing goods this would necessarily affect
the employment shares that are the focus of our analysis. However, from an empirical
perspective, net trade flows in agriculture tend to be relatively small for most countries,
and trade in services has been much less important than trade in manufacturing, though
the amount of trade within services continues to rise and is becoming more important in
some countries. From a theoretical perspective there is an important question as to why
countries that are relatively unproductive in agriculture do not simply import food from
abroad (Tombe, 2015). But from an empirical perspective the assumption of no net trade
flow in agriculture is not strongly counterfactual.
   Next consider the case in which trade is not balanced period by period. Of particular
relevance is the possibility that a country chooses to have a trade surplus and that the
source of this surplus is exports of manufacturing goods. In this case current consumption
is no longer the same as current production. If we take the amount of labor used to produce
net exports of manufacturing as given, our model determines the optimal allocation of the
remaining labor. This would imply a larger overall share for manufacturing employment.
   This mechanism may be important for understanding the dynamics of some of the
Asian economies in our sample. As noted earlier, China and South Korea were both
notable outliers in terms of model predictions for the growth of Am relative to As . In


                                            34
        Figure 14: Trade Surplus and Non-Agricultural Employment Shares: Asia

                                                  0.25
                                                                CHN        IDN
                                                                IND        KOR
                                                   0.2
                                                                MYS        PHL
                 Current Account Surplus (%GDP)
                                                                THA        TWN

                                                  0.15


                                                   0.1


                                                  0.05


                                                     0


                                                  -0.05


                                                   -0.1
                                                          0.2    0.3     0.4     0.5    0.6    0.7    0.8   0.9   1
                                                                       Non-Agricultural Employment Share



the data both countries had a relatively high value for this ratio, which in our model
would imply a counterfactually high reallocation of labor from manufacturing to services.
Dynamic trade imbalances may well play an important role for these countries. Figure 14
shows the trade surplus as a percentage of GDP versus the non-agricultural employment
share for the Asian countries in our sample. It shows that both China and South Korea
exhibit a significant increase in the trade surplus along the industrialization path.25
    Dynamics may also matter for another reason. Recent work by Garcia-Santana et al.
(2019) notes that the investment sector draws much more heavily from the manufacturing
sector than does consumption sector. In the standard one sector growth model, a one
time increase in TFP will generate a period of high investment as part of the transition
dynamics. More generally, this raises the possibility that countries experiencing growth
miracles that were associated with periods of relatively high investment may experience
high peak employment shares in manufacturing that are at least in part driven by in-
   25
    Malaysia and Taiwan also experience an increase but it is effectively at the end of the industrialization
phase. Trade data is taken from the World Bank and the OECD national accounts database.


                                                                                       35
vestment rather than consumption. This is also more likely to be relevant for some of
the Asian economies. Consistent with this, our analysis found that it was a set of high
growth Asian economies that had higher peak employment shares than predicted solely
by agricultural productivity dynamics.
    Lastly, our analysis has abstracted from distortions that may impact sectoral labor
allocations. Some of these might relate to distortions of consumption versus savings
and so relate to the previous discussion. But they may also impact the composition of
consumption. Many activities within services are either carried out by the government or
subsidized by the government. Differences in government policies may therefore also play
a role.



8     Conclusion

Countries exhibit significant heterogeneity in their paths of industrialization. In particu-
lar, industrialization paths of many recent developers differ from that of earlier developers
(Rodrik, 2016). We have studied a benchmark model of structural change in order to assess
the extent to which it can shed light on the sources of the heterogeneous industrialization
experiences found in the data.
    Our analysis led to three key findings. First, benchmark models of structural change
naturally generate hump-shaped patterns for evolution of the manufacturing sector. Sec-
ond, heterogeneous patterns of catch-up in sectoral productivities across countries natu-
rally give rise to heterogeneous patterns of industrialization similar to those found in the
data. Third, differences in the rate of agricultural productivity growth across economies
can account for the majority of the variation in peak manufacturing employment shares.
    The key message from our analysis is that simple benchmark models of structural
provide the foundation for analyzing heterogeneous industrialization experiences across


                                             36
countries. An important next step is to extend the simple benchmark model used here to
explore the role of additional factors beyond differences in sectoral productivity growth.
We think it will be valuable will be to include trade and capital accumulation and to
focus on dynamic implications. It will also be of interest to extend the analysis here to
additional countries.




References
Baumol, W. J. (1967). Macroeconomics of unbalanced growth: The anatomy of urban
  crisis. The American Economic Review 57(3), 415­426. 3

Boppart, T. (2014). Structural change and the kaldor facts in a growth model with relative
  price effects and non-gorman preferences. Econometrica 82(6), 2167­2196. 1, 4, 3.1,
  12, 4

Buera, F. J. and J. P. Kaboski (2009, 05). Can Traditional Theories of Structural Change
  Fit the Data? Journal of the European Economic Association 7(2-3), 469­477. 4

Carter, S. B., S. S. Gartner, M. R. Haines, A. L. Olmstead, R. Sutch, and G. W.
  (Eds.) (2006). Historical Statistics of the United States, Earliest Times to the Present:
  Millennial Edition. Cambridge University Press, New York. 2.1, 2.2, 4

Caselli, F. (2005). Accounting for cross-country income differences. In: Aghion, Philippe,
  Durlauf, Steven (Eds.), Handbook of Economic Growth, vol. 1A. North Holland, Am-
  sterdam and New York, pp. 679­742 (Chapter 9). 17

Comin, D. A., D. Lashkari, and M. Mestieri (2015, September). Structural change with
  long-run income and price effects. Working Paper 21595, National Bureau of Economic
  Research. 3, 4

Duarte, M. and D. Restuccia (2010, 02). The Role of the Structural Transformation in
 Aggregate Productivity*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125(1), 129­173. 1

Duernecker, G., B. Herrendorf, and A. Valentinyi (2017). Structural change within the
 service sector and the future of baumol's disease. Discussion Paper 12467, CEPR. 15

Felipe, J., A. Mehta, and C. Rhee (2018, 02). Manufacturing matters. . . but it's the jobs
  that count. Cambridge Journal of Economics 43(1), 139­168. 1

Garcia-Santana, M., J. Pijoan-Mas, and L. Villacorta (2019). Investment demand and
 structural change. CEPR Working Paper 11636. 7

                                            37
Gollin, D., R. Jedwab, and D. Vollrath (2016). Urbanization with and without industri-
 alization. Journal of Economic Growth 21, 35­70. 1

Gollin, D., D. Lagakos, and M. E. Waugh (2013, 12). The Agricultural Productivity Gap
 *. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(2), 939­993. 17

Gollin, D., S. Parente, and R. Rogerson (2002). The role of agriculture in development.
 The American Economic Review 92(2), 160­164. 1, 4, 3.1, 5

Gollin, D., S. L. Parente, and R. Rogerson (2007). The food problem and the evolution
 of international income levels. Journal of Monetary Economics 54(4), 1230 ­ 1255. 1,
 4, 5

Herrendorf, B., R. Rogerson, and Valentinyi (2020). Structural Change in Investment
  and Consumption--A Unified Analysis. The Review of Economic Studies. 4, 4
                                 ´
Herrendorf, B., R. Rogerson, and Akos Valentinyi (2014). Chapter 6 - growth and struc-
  tural transformation. In P. Aghion and S. N. Durlauf (Eds.), Handbook of Economic
  Growth, Volume 2 of Handbook of Economic Growth, pp. 855 ­ 941. Elsevier. 3, 14, 16

Herrendorf, B. and Valentinyi (2012, 04). Which Sectors Make Poor Countries so Un-
  productive? Journal of the European Economic Association 10(2), 323­341. 5

Hsieh, C.-T. and P. J. Klenow (2007, June). Relative prices and relative prosperity.
  American Economic Review 97(3), 562­585. 5

Johnston, B. F. and P. Kilby (1975). Agriculture and Structural Transformation:
  Economic Strategies in Late-Developing Countries. Oxford University Press. 5

Johnston, B. F. and J. W. Mellor (1961). The role of agriculture in economic development.
  The American Economic Review 51, 566­593. 5

Kongsamut, P., S. Rebelo, and D. Xie (2001, 10). Beyond Balanced Growth. The Review
  of Economic Studies 68(4), 869­882. 3, 4

Ngai, L. R. and C. A. Pissarides (2007, March). Structural change in a multisector model
  of growth. American Economic Review 97(1), 429­443. 3, 4

Restuccia, D., D. T. Yang, and X. Zhu (2008). Agriculture and aggregate productivity: A
  quantitative cross-country analysis. Journal of Monetary Economics 55(2), 234 ­ 250.
  17

Rodrik, D. (2012, 11). Unconditional Convergence in Manufacturing *. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 128(1), 165­204. 5

Rodrik, D. (2016). Premature deindustrialization. Journal of Economic Growth 21, 1­33.
  1, 2, 5, 8

                                           38
Sposi, M., K. Yi, and J. Zhang (2020). Structural change and deindustrialization. Working
  paper, University of Houston. 1

Tombe, T. (2015, July). The missing food problem: Trade, agriculture, and international
  productivity differences. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7(3), 226­58.
  7

Wise, A. (2020). Global dynamics of structural change. Working paper, Princeton Uni-
 versity. 1
¨ or, M. (2013). De-agriculturalization as a result of productivity growth in agriculture.
Ung¨
 Economics Letters 119(2), 141 ­ 145. 11
´
Swiecki, T. (2017). Determinants of structural change. Review of Economic Dynamics 24,
  95 ­ 131. 3, 1




                                           39
Appendix A                                               Industrialization Across Countries

In this appendix we document industrialization (and deindustrialization) paths across
countries using the same structure of Figure 1 but for all the other countries in our
sample.
   Figure A.1 shows similar patterns to the ones in Figure 1. In particular, four patterns
stand out. First, the level of peak employment in manufacturing varies significantly:
Venezuela has a peak value below 0.20, whereas Philippines reaches a value of almost
0.35. Second, there is also significant variation in the value of hnt at which the peak is
reached, ranging from around 0.60 for Venezuela to more than 0.80 for Argentina. Third,
there is a strong positive correlation between the level of the peak and the value of hnt at
which the peak occurs. Finally, compared to Figure 2, Figure A.1 highlights that there
is significantly more heterogeneity in the paths of industrialization in Asia and Latin
America than there is in advanced economies.

             Figure A.1: Industrialization Paths in Latin America and Asia
                                                0.35
                                                                PHL
                                                                MAL
               Manufacturing Employment Share




                                                                ARG
                                                 0.3            BOL
                                                                CHL
                                                                COL
                                                0.25            CRI
                                                                PER
                                                                VEN

                                                 0.2



                                                0.15



                                                 0.1
                                                   0.2    0.3     0.4   0.5       0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9   1
                                                                Non-Agricultural Employment Share




                                                                              1
Appendix B                  Measurement of Growth in Am/As

In this appendix we propose an alternative measure for the growth rate of Am /As and use
it to support our claim that the growth of Am /As likely contains a substantial amount
of error. In the text we directly computed productivity growth using data on real valued
added and employment. In this section we follow the dual approach. In the context of
our model, there is a one-to-one mapping between growth in Am /As and the growth in
ps /pm . Because the GGDC 10-Sector database includes data on nominal value added as
well as real value added measured in 2005 prices, we can use the data to infer the growth
rates of sectoral price indices and use this as an alternative measure of the relative growth
rate of productivity in manufacturing relative to services.26
    There is one limitation to applying this method to our sample of countries. Specifically,
because so many of the Latin American economies in our sample experienced one or more
periods of hyperinflation, the nominal value added numbers are either not available for
the early years or are rounded to zero. The only exceptions to this are Colombia, Costa
Rica and Mexico, so for this exercise we restrict our attention to the nine Asian countries
and these three Latin American countries.27
    The mean gap between the primal and dual measures of Am /As is 0.0094, with a
range of -0.0145 to 0.0389 and a mean absolute gap of 0.0139.28 Figure B.1 plots the
dual measure versus the primal measure for these twelve countries.
    The differences between the two series are large and support the view that measured
differences in sectoral productivity growth rates should reasonably be viewed as noisy
  26
      Note that this approach can only be used to compute measures of relative sectoral productivity
growth. In particular, it cannot be used to provide an alternative measure of growth in Aa . But since
growth in Am /As is a key value the approach offers very relevant information.
   27
      The nominal value added series for the three European countries in our sample only start in 1970
in this database, so they are also not included.
   28
      When we do this same calculation for the US data over the period that we used for our calibration
(1950-1970) the difference between the primal and dual measures is -0.084, indicating that relative prices
changed more than relative labor productivity.



                                                    2
Figure B.1: Measurement Discrepancy in Growth of Manufacturing-Services Relative
Productivity
                                                    0.04                                                             kor

              Am/As Growth Rate-Ps/Pm Growth Rate
                                                    0.03

                                                                                 idn               col
                                                                                                   mex
                                                    0.02


                                                    0.01                               phl
                                                                                                     tha
                                                                                                              jap             chi

                                                        0                                    twn
                                                                                             cri

                                                    -0.01       mal

                                                                            ind

                                                    -0.02
                                                        -0.03    -0.02   -0.01         0         0.01      0.02     0.03   0.04     0.05
                                                                                   Am/As Growth Rate


measures of actual differences. The primal approach yields an estimate that is roughly
one percentage point larger than the dual approach. It is perhaps of interest to see how
Figure B.1 looks if we split the difference and adjust our estimate of the differential growth
rate down by one half of one percent for all countries. The results of this are in Figure
B.2.
   The only point we want to make with regard to this figure is that with this adjustment
there is a larger mass of points that are clustered around the 45 degree line, so that a
simple uniform adjustment in relative productivity growth seems to improve the fit of the
model.




                                                                                             3
Figure B.2: Growth Rates for Manufacturing-Services Relative Productivity: Model and
Adjusted Data
                                           0.06

                                                                                             per
            Growth Rate of Am/As (Model)




                                           0.04

                                                                                bol
                                           0.02                                         bra fra
                                                                                phl   col arg
                                                                                                spa
                                                                                     mex     ita ven
                                                                                            jap
                                               0                                  chl
                                                                                   cri
                                                                         ind
                                                                                                            chi
                                           -0.02                                            tha
                                                                          idn


                                           -0.04
                                                                                      twn             kor
                                                               mal

                                           -0.06
                                               -0.06   -0.04     -0.02            0                0.02     0.04   0.06
                                                        Adjusted Growth Rate of Am/As (Data)




                                                                           4
