                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    "QUICK RESPONSE" ECONOMIC STIMULUS:
           THE EFFECT OF SMALL-VALUE DIGITAL COUPONS ON SPENDING

                                               Jianwei Xing
                                                  Eric Zou
                                               Zhentao Yin
                                                Yong Wang
                                                Zhenhua Li

                                          Working Paper 27596
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w27596


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2020




We thank Panle Jia Barwick, Dan Bernhardt, Karen Brandon, Mark Colas, Mike Kuhn, Shanjun Li,
Nolan Miller, and anonymous referees for helpful comments. We thank Shiping Wang, Fang Wang,
and Zhiyun Cheng at Ant Financial for generous technical support, and Jiming Wang and Junting Chen
for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jianwei Xing, Eric Zou, Zhentao Yin, Yong Wang, and Zhenhua Li. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
"Quick Response" Economic Stimulus: The Effect of Small-Value Digital Coupons on Spending
Jianwei Xing, Eric Zou, Zhentao Yin, Yong Wang, and Zhenhua Li
NBER Working Paper No. 27596
July 2020, Revised in September 2020
JEL No. D12,E42,H30,O31

                                           ABSTRACT

We study a new consumption stimulus model that leverages mobile payment platforms to
dispense massive amounts of small-value, use-it-this-week-or-lose-it digital coupons. We
evaluate the effects of one such program in a large Chinese city using novel data of mobile
platform transactions of 1 million program participants. Exploiting participants' rush to the first-
come, first-served digital portal, we compare spending among those who barely won coupons to
those who barely lost because of minor differences in the timing of their arrival at the portal. We
find that coupons generate an immediate increase in weekly consumption among winners by $3
additional out-of-pocket spending for every$1 in government subsidy. Analysis of business
customer flows suggests that coupons distort consumption toward more expensive options,
leading the program to disproportionately favor big firms that sell pricier goods and services.
Relaxing coupons' minimum spending requirements would alleviate such distributional concern
without sacrificing consumer welfare. We conclude that the coupon model can be a useful
addition to policy makers' stimulus toolbox.

Jianwei Xing                                     Yong Wang
National School of Development                   #5 Jianguomennei Street
Peking University                                Beijing 100732
No.5 Yiheyuan Road                               China
Beijing 100871                                   wangyong123aza@163.com
China
jerryxing@nsd.pku.edu.cn                         Zhenhua Li
                                                 Z Space, No. 556 Xixi Road
Eric Zou                                         Hangzhou
Department of Economics                          China
University of Oregon                             sunny.lzh@alibaba-inc.com
1415 Kincaid Street
Eugene, OR 97403
and NBER
ericzou@uoregon.edu

Zhentao Yin
#5 Jianguomennei Street
Beijing 100732
China
yinzhentao@126.com
1. Introduction
        Fiscal stimulus of consumer demand is a key to curbing recession and accelerating recovery.
Economists and policy makers largely agree that a successful stimulus program should have three general
features. A first component is timeliness: the program should be quickly implementable, with its stimulus
effect emerging swiftly. A second feature involves targeting: the program should put stimulus in the hands
of those who are most likely to spend, and the revenues should reach businesses most in need. The third
important characteristic involves limiting the duration of the stimulus: the program should not be prolonged
and create a long-run fiscal burden.2 In practice, it is challenging for a fiscal program to incorporate all
these features. For example, consider a direct cash stimulus payment, which is a frequently used tool by
policy makers during economic recessions. While a cash stimulus increases consumer spending, its effect
often takes weeks or months to fully emerge; it cannot be precisely targeted to help specific business sectors;
and the fiscal burden of such a stimulus measure is often substantial because cash payments are generally
sizable; yet, only a fraction of such payments goes toward consumption.3

        In this paper, we analyze a new demand stimulus tool: using electronic, conditional discount
coupons for purchase of goods and services (e.g., a coupon that offers $10 off a purchase of more than $30
in any restaurant). A ubiquitous marketing tool used by businesses to boost sales in a short time horizon,
coupons provide consumers a salient, time-limited incentive to spend. Though coupons have traditionally
been administered by individual firms, recent innovations in mobile payment technology enable the
application of coupons to larger-scale, multi-business settings ­ and, thus, enable their use as a government
stimulus tool. We evaluate an innovative, digital coupon-based stimulus model in China that exploited a
fast-growing mobile payment network to generate swift and pronounced spending responses in the wake of
coronavirus lockdown measures that took a toll on the local economy. We estimate the stimulus impact of
one such pioneering program, which was implemented in a large city over a period of six weeks. We analyze
the pros and cons of the mechanism underlying coupons' stimulus effect, and we discuss the policy
implications of our findings.

        The focal city of our study is Shaoxing, a prefecture of China with a population of 5 million. In the
aftermath of a COVID lockdown in January 2020, Shaoxing deployed a digital coupon stimulus program
in an attempt to boost consumer spending, and it was the first time such a city-wide program was



2
 See, for example, Summers (2007); Elmendorf and Furman (2008), Summers (2008), Yellen (2009).
3
 For example, historical U.S. tax rebate programs often provide cash amounts that exceed 1% of average annual
household income. The marginal propensity to consume those rebates is estimated to range between 0.2 and 0.8
(Shapiro and Slemrod, 2003; Johnson, Parker, and Souleles, 2006; Agarwal, Liu, and Souleles, 2007; Shapiro and
Slemrod, 2009; Parker et al., 2013; Broda and Parker, 2014; Kaplan and Violante, 2014).
                                                      2
implemented in Shaoxing's history. Shaoxing had very few COVID-19 cases, but due to stringent and
prolonged stay-at-home orders, the city experienced a sharp and sudden economic downturn, including a
27% plunge in consumer spending in 2020Q1. Rather than sending cash to residents, the city dispensed
massive amounts of small-value digital coupons through a widely used mobile payment platform (Alipay),
which has 2.7 million users in the city and captures over 72% of total consumption. Based on Quick
Response (QR) code technology, these coupons automatically apply a discount when Alipay users make
offline purchases that exceed a minimum amount at eligible merchants. The program operated weekly for
six consecutive weeks. Each Friday, Alipay users competed for free coupons through a digital portal on a
first-come, first-served basis; once won, the coupons appeared in the user's e-wallet, and were valid for
seven days until the following Friday, when another coupon rush began. During its six weeks of operation,
the program dispensed coupons worth roughly 240 million-yuan (about 34 million USD), and over 1 million
Alipay users in the city participated in the program.

        We estimate the causal effect of the coupon program on spending using Alipay's administrative
data on transactions from all users who participated in the program. We exploit the fact that, in each round
of coupon claiming, a large number of users competed for a limited number of coupons, generating a "rush"
to the coupon program portal. As a result, all coupons were claimed in a matter of minutes. The rush nature
of the coupon-claiming process allows us to focus on users who logged onto the portal within a narrow time
window (plus and minus five minutes) around the moment that the last coupon was claimed. Our
identification strategy tracks users who barely won coupons versus users that barely lost due to minor
differences in their log-on times, and compares their purchasing behavior in the subsequent week. We
exploit alternative sources of variation, including repeated cross-sectional comparison of each round's
winners' and non-winners' spending, panel comparison of spending in winning and non-winning weeks for
the same individual, as well as event study designs that utilize both whether-or-not and before-and-after
variation in coupon-winning status. These alternative empirical strategies yield very similar results. This
lends confidence to the identification assumption that users' minor difference in log-on time can serve as a
valid source of exogeneous shocks for the purpose of our study.

        Four sets of results emerge. First, the coupon program was popular among Alipay users. During
the six weeks of its implementation, 1.57 million users participated in the Coupon Rush events, and over
70% of these users won coupons in at least one round. The process of coupon claiming was highly
competitive. In each round, all coupons were claimed in mere minutes.4 Redemption rates are high. Among
the coupon winners, over 85% made at least one coupon-eligible purchase in the following week. Roughly


4
 For example, over 0.4 million users participated in the final Coupon Rush, competing for over 0.28 million sets of
coupons. All coupons had been claimed within 128 seconds.
                                                        3
61% of the total subsidy values were redeemed during the six weeks. This evidence suggests that the rush
mechanism reached people who wanted to use the coupons. We find that redemption rates were highest for
shopping and dining coupons ­ the two hardest-hit sectors during the economic downturn ­ suggesting that
small-value subsidies are effective in stimulating consumption in these sectors.

        Second, winning a coupon led users to significantly increase out-of-pocket spending over the next
seven days (i.e., before coupon's expiration) by 225 yuan (or "¥"). This effect size translates into "returns"
from the government subsidy of over 300%: for every ¥1 of government subsidy, out-of-pocket spending
increased by ¥3.07. This effect size reflects the fact that most coupons have a design of X-yuan off purchase
3X-yuan or more. Consistent with this evidence, we show that most subsidized transactions (i.e., the
transactions involving coupon redemption) have values that "bunch" at the coupons' minimum spending
requirements. The coupon program's effects were slightly larger among certain users: females, those
between the ages of 20 and 40, and those who had higher levels of e-wallet account cash inflows (a proxy
for wealth) in 2019. Overall, we do not find evidence that the stimulus effect concentrated in particular
subgroups. In total, the coupon program has generated 850 million yuan (121 million USD) spending in
six weeks, which corresponds to a recovery of 13% of the Alipay platform-wide spending loss and 8% of
the city-wide consumption loss in 2020Q1.

        Third, we establish that the coupons' stimulus impact is not offset by a reduction in non-coupon-
related purchases. Looking at within-week spending patterns, we find no evidence that coupon winners
reduce unsubsidized spending (i.e., their total spending excluding transactions that involved coupon
redemption). Quite the opposite, winning a coupon increases unsubsidized spending by a mild margin (50
yuan out of a weekly average spending of 1,000 yuan), suggesting that the coupons' stimulus impact spilled
over to unsubsidized purchases. We also assess intertemporal spending patterns, examining whether initial
increases in subsidized spending due to coupons are offset by subsequent spending reductions in later weeks.
We estimate that over 85% of the initial stimulus effect persists through the end of the third week, and over
75% of the effect persists through the end of six weeks when the program ended. Exploring prior spending
patterns, we then show that winning a coupon has a similar stimulus effect for heavy users who are already
making many transactions through Alipay prior to the coupon program. This evidence suggests the stimulus
effect is also not driven by substitutions between different payment venues. Together, our evidence suggests
that coupons generate net increases in out-of-pocket spending that are not subject to substantial
displacement across subsidized and unsubsidized goods, time periods, or different payment venues.

        Fourth, we examine mechanisms underlying coupons' stimulus effect. We combine transaction
data with merchant information to construct measures of customer flows for all merchants. We then analyze
how consumers, depending on their treatment status, flowed to merchants with different characteristics.
                                                      4
Our analysis reveals that coupon winners disproportionally favored large firms (as measured by total
revenue in 2019), and, in particular, firms selling more expensive goods and services (as measured by
revenue per transaction in 2019), when they ended up redeeming coupons. We find no such pattern for non-
winners, or for winners when they make unsubsidized transactions. This finding has two implications. First,
the coupon program likely distorted consumption towards pricier options that the consumers would not
have chosen in the absence of the coupon's minimum spending requirements. Second, because large and
pricier firms take up the vast majority of the market share, most of the government subsidy of the coupon
program necessarily lands in the hands of those firms. Our analysis, however, reveals that the coupon
program disproportionally favors large and pricier firms ­ that is, these firms receive more business from
coupon winners even on a percentage basis. In fact, in both the shopping and dining sectors, firms in the
bottom price decile received almost no benefits from the coupon program. This unequal allocation of the
program's benefits might not be optimal, for example, from an employment recovery perspective if firms
with lower-priced goods and services account for substantial shares in the labor market. To provide further
perspectives on policy solutions to the distributional concerns, we build a conceptual model that captures
consumer spending with coupon treatment. We show that relaxing the minimum spending requirements on
coupons ­ such as issuing larger quantities of smaller-value coupons, or allowing consumers to spread a
coupon's spending requirement across multiple transactions ­ alleviates distributional inequality, while at
the same time preserving, or even increasing, total consumer welfare.

        Our analysis illustrates how digital innovations that are already playing an increasing role in day-
to-day business (e.g., Philippon, 2016) can spur innovative solutions to broader social and economic
problems. Discount coupons are widely used in marketing and retailing (e.g., Leone and Srinivasan, 1996;
DelVecchio, Henard, and Freling, 2006), but their usage as a large-scale fiscal stimulus tool is limited due
to coupons' traditional reliance on physical dispensing venues (e.g., newspapers, magazines, booklets),
which may cause various administrative and security complications. Shaoxing's fully-digitized, Quick
Response (QR) code-based approach features a host of advantages, including low (marginal) cost of
administration, arguably fair coupon assignment, impossibility of coupon forgery, automated coupon
redemption, and, importantly, quick consumption stimulus response. In many ways, these advantages echo
those in prior studies on financial technology ("FinTech") applications in banking and personal finance
settings (Goldstein, Jiang, and Karolyi, 2019; Agarwal and Chua, 2020), including payment services
(Rysman and Schuh, 2017; Agarwal et al., 2020), mortgage screening (Berg et al., 2019; Fuster et al., 2019),
and wealth management (D'Acunto, Prabhala, and Rossi, 2019). Our paper is the first to study the value of
digital payment technology in a fiscal stimulus context.



                                                     5
        Our paper also sheds light on the pros and cons of digital coupons as a policy option that can
supplement conventional stimulus tools, such as cash-based stimulus (Shapiro and Slemrod, 2003; Johnson,
Parker, and Souleles, 2006; Agarwal, Liu, and Souleles, 2007; Shapiro and Slemrod, 2009; Parker et al.,
2013; Agarwal and Qian, 2014; Broda and Parker, 2014; Kaplan and Violante, 2014). Several unique
advantages of the coupon-based stimulus model have become apparent during Shaoxing's economic
recovery from the COVID-19 episode. The "use-it-this-week-or-lose-it" design of coupon expiration
schedule generates immediate increases in spending, which could be critical for businesses that need
immediate liquidity to survive the sudden economic downturn. The coupon program achieves a large
spending stimulus response of ¥2.4 to ¥3 for every ¥1 of government subsidy. Such a rate of return is higher
than most cash payment-based stimulus programs, where estimated consumer spending per dollar of
government subsidy ranges between 0.2 to 0.8. 5 Coupons can be sector specific, and thus can help
businesses that are hit hardest in a recession. Shaoxing's experience also indicates the coupon program can
be tractably administered by the local government, and thus can be tailored to better fit local economic
recovery needs. Finally, there is no need for the government to provide subsidy for coupons that are not
redeemed, which could be an attractive feature for governments with relatively small budgets. A caveat that
we emphasize is that the mechanism underlying coupons' stimulus impact may lead to distributional
inequalities that disproportionally favor large and expensive businesses, which should be taken account into
when designing coupons' minimum spending requirements.6

        Our paper is among the first to provide a rigorous evaluation on the efficacy of the digital coupon-
based stimulus model. A concurrent research project (Liu et al., 2020) evaluates a similar digital coupon
program in Hangzhou. 7 Reassuringly, a part of their analysis also finds large marginal propensity to
consume in response to coupon subsidy. Shaoxing and Hangzhou are among the first cities that pioneered
the digital coupon programs, and in the wake of these initiatives, many cities in China intend to adopt
similar programs. More broadly, consumption stimulus will likely become a first-order policy task facing
many economies affected by the COVID-19 pandemic (see, Baker et al., 2020; Chen, Qian, and Wen, 2020;




5
  Evaluations of other stimulus programs, such as the Food Stamp Program and the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program, show corresponding MPC estimates of similar orders of magnitude (e.g., Hoynes and Schanzenbach, 2016;
Hastings and Shapiro; 2018).
6
  Coupon program's promotion of small-value, repetitive treatment echoes prior literature on delivery methods for
food stamp benefits (Shapiro, 2005; Hastings and Washington, 2010). Our paper is also related to a broader literature
on stimulus programs that helped spur demand in other contexts such as the First Time Homebuyer Tax Credit (Berger,
Turner, and Zwick, 2020), the Cash-For-Clunkers program (Mian and Sufi, 2012; Green, Melzer, Parker, and Rojas,
2020), and the U.K. Stamp Duty Land Tax holiday (Best and Kleven, 2017).
7
  Our project is a part of the dual partnership between Alipay and two separate research teams to provide independent
analysis of coupon programs in two pioneering cities.
                                                         6
Chetty et al., 2020; Cox et al., 2020). We hope that our evidence may inspire new policy approaches for
countries (or local economies) with similar mobile payment infrastructure.

           The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background and a description of
the data. Section 3 explains our research strategy. Section 4 reports our main results on the stimulus impact.
Section 5 explores mechanisms underlying the stimulus impact. Section 6 concludes the paper.




2. Background and Data
2.1. The City of Shaoxing and the Spending Decline during the COVID-19
Pandemic
           Shaoxing, the focal city of our study, is a prefecture-level city located on the eastern coast of China
(Appendix Figure B.1). Data from 2019 show that the city is home to about 5 million people, and it ranks
around 30 in both total GDP and per capita GDP among the 333 prefecture cities in China. In many aspects,
Shaoxing represents a vibrant "second-tier" city on a good growth track. In 2019, it had a per capita GDP
(dispensable income) of 114,317 yuan (53,839 yuan), compared to a national average of 71,932 yuan
(30,733 yuan).8 Shaoxing's real GDP grew by about 7% in 2019, compared to a national growth rate of
6.1%. The city adopts a typical Zhejiang (the province in which Shaoxing is located) growth model that
encourages small businesses, and the bulk production of low-cost, small-value commodities. Shaoxing has
a large textile manufacturing sector; the city is also widely known for its specialty food such as poultry,
traditional wine, tofu, and tea. Shaoxing also emphasizes the role of research and development in growth,
especially in high-tech sectors such as artificial intelligence and next-generation communication
technologies. The city's annual R&D budget exceeds 2.4% of its GDP. In 2018, Forbes China rated
Shaoxing as one of the 30 most innovative cities based on its high rate of generating new patents, and on
local government investment in science and technology.9

           Shaoxing formulated its stimulus plan against the backdrop of a decline in consumption activities
following Zhejiang's provincial shutdown at the onset of concerns about the spread of COVID-19.
Although Shaoxing had few cases at the outset (one active case and no deaths at the time of Wuhan's
lockdown on January 23, 2020), it followed Zhejiang's order to implement a stay-at-home order. All non-
essential businesses shut down; all schools closed; and authorities strictly limited use of all inter-city
highway entries and exits. On February 8, the city government issued a plan for re-opening. The city lifted

8
    Shaoxing has a gross (net) savings rate of 50.8% (23.4%) in 2019, compared to a national level of 44.9% (22.5%).
9
    https://www.forbeschina.com/lists/15
                                                           7
its inter-city highway restrictions on February 18. Shaoxing's active case dropped to zero on March 16,
with a reported total of 42 cumulative cases and zero deaths. By March 25, virtually all businesses were
allowed to re-open.

        Shaoxing's shutdown led to a sharp reduction in consumer spending. The city reported a 26.7%
reduction in sales revenues from consumption goods in 2020Q1 from levels in 2019Q4.10 Figure 1 plots
trends in weekly spending made through the Alipay platform among all coupon program participants,
revealing a similar, 21% drop of spending over the same time frame.11 We do not have official data on other
economic impacts of the COVID-19 shutdown, such as employment tolls. However, due to the short
duration of businesses shutdowns both at the city and the provincial levels, we expect the immediate
economic impact to come largely through spending reductions (e.g., Chetty et al., 2020; Cox et al., 2020).




2.2. The Coupon Program
        On March 25, 2020, the city government of Shaoxing announced the six-week coupon program.12
Below we provide relevant details about the program.

        Alipay Platform. The Alipay platform administered the coupon program. As of 2019, Alipay was
the largest mobile payment platform in the world with over 1.2 billion users worldwide and about 1 billion
users in China. Alipay accounts for 54.3% of third-party payment market in China.13

        Payment functions on Alipay are based on Quick Response (QR) codes, a type of matrix barcode
that most smartphone cameras can scan. Merchants may charge consumers by simply scanning the QR code
associated with the consumer's Alipay e-wallet; alternatively, the merchant could display its QR code on
the cashier register screen, and have consumers scan the code and make transfers. To preserve security, an
Alipay user's QR code is auto-regenerated every minute without the need of Internet connection.

        Alipay was used as the platform for the coupon program largely due to its high market penetration
on both the consumer and the firm sides. We are not able to display detailed market share statistics in the
city of Shaoxing due to business confidentiality, but we can say that during our study period there were at
least 2.7 million Alipay users in Shaoxing (among the population of 5 million city residents), and over 0.6

10
   http://www.shaoxing.com.cn/caijing/p/2812095.html
11
   We report separate trends for shopping, dining, and other categories in Appendix Figure B.2. The decline in
spending is pronounced in all categories.
12
   http://www.sx.gov.cn/art/2020/3/25/art_1228998371_42390812.html This is the first city-wide coupon program
ever implemented in Shaoxing's history.
13
   The next biggest player in the market is WeChatpay (39.9% nationally). Other platforms account for very small
shares of the market.
                                                       8
million registered merchants. On average, an Alipay user spent 41,292 yuan in 2019 (the year before the
pandemic). Shaoxing government's official statistics indicate that annual per capita consumption was
31,109 yuan in 2019. We can thus infer that transactions made through the Alipay platform comprised 72%
of all spending. Each Alipay account is linked to the user's government-issued ID, and, thus, each Alipay
user account represents a unique individual. This feature ensures that each person may obtain at most one
coupon treatment per round.

        Eligibility. All Alipay users could participate in the coupon program. Our data show that 94.2 %
of all participants were Shaoxing residents. All offline merchants were eligible for coupon redemption as
long as they are registered with the Shaoxing city government. Coupons could not be used for online
transactions and could not be transferred across users. Participation and coupon redemption were free for
both individuals and merchants.14

        Coupon Rush. Coupons were dispensed using a "rush" process in which all participants competed
for a limited number of coupons based on a first-come, first-served basis. Six rounds of Coupon Rush events
occurred on six consecutive Fridays: April 3, April 10, April 17, April 24, May 1, and May 8. On each of
these Fridays, users could log onto a digital portal for coupon claiming. The portal was activated at 10:00
a.m., and all users logged onto the portal after that time to obtain coupons, until all coupons were claimed.
Technically, users rushed for coupon "packets," the contents of which varied depending on the log-on time.
For example, in the first round (April 3), the total stock consisted of 80,000 dining coupons, 200,000
shopping coupons, 50,000 gym coupons, 50,000 lodging coupons, 20,000 book coupons, and 20,000
cellphone coupons. The first coupon winner (i.e., the first user that logged onto the Coupon Rush portal
after 10:00 a.m.) obtained a packet with 11 coupons in all 6 categories: 2 dining ([¥30 off ¥90+]15 and [¥70
off ¥210+]), 2 shopping ([¥20 off ¥60+] and [¥30 off ¥90+]), 2 gym ([¥10 off ¥25+] and [¥30 off ¥75+]),
2 lodging ([¥30 off ¥90+] and [¥70 off ¥210+]), 2 book (both [¥25 off ¥50+]), and 1 cellphone (both [¥200
off ¥2,000+]). By the time the 10,001st user logged onto the system, book and cellphone coupons would
have been taken, and his or her packet would thus have contained 8 coupons: 2 dining, 2 shopping, 2 gym,
and 2 lodging. Our primary analysis studies the causal effect of winning a coupon packet, regardless of the
particular coupon composition of a given packet. In the Appendix, we exploit variations in coupon packet
compositions to estimate the marginal effect of different types of coupons.

        To access the Coupon Rush portal, users first entered the "Yue-niu" mobile app, a widely used
local news aggregator in Shaoxing, that contained a link to the Alipay Coupon Rush portal. After logging

14
   Alipay charges merchants a transaction fee of 0.6% of the transaction value. There are no additional fees charged
for coupon redemption.
15
   That is, 30 yuans off a purchase of 90 yuans or more.
                                                         9
onto the portal, the user would have seen a button that contained one of three messages: "Opens at 10" (not
clickable) if the Rush had yet to begin, "Claim at no cost" if the event was ongoing and coupons remained,
and "Out of stock" (not clickable) if all coupons have been taken. Appendix Figure B.3 provides example
screenshots of the three stages of the portal. It is important to note that our data record the time at which
the user logged onto the Alipay portal (the time of the first log-on attempt, if the user tried multiple attempts),
not the time the coupon-claiming button was clicked (which is only clickable at the "Claim at no cost"
stage). Our data show that time of first log-on attempt is a near-perfect measure of whether a user won any
coupon. We find only 11 cases in which the user did not win any coupons even though his or her first log-
in occurred before the coupon supply was exhausted; we find no case in which a user won a coupon when
his or her first log-on time occurred after the supply of coupons ran out.

        We abstract away from two facts that we believe are unlikely to interfere with our analysis. First,
on each Coupon Rush day, there was a separate, 11:00 a.m. Rush for small-value taxi coupons (¥5 off any
transaction) and ride-sharing coupons (¥2 off ¥10+, ¥3 off ¥15+, and ¥4 off ¥20+). These rush events were
administered on a different mobile platform for ride-sharing (DiDi). Second, Shaoxing implemented a
Coupon Rush "comeback" in the week of May 22, two weeks after the end of our study period. We do not
have enough data to look at these comeback events. Both the transportation coupons and comeback events
are separate from the main coupon program, so we do not expect them to have an impact on our empirical
findings.

        Coupon Redemption Rules. Once claimed on a Friday Coupon Rush event, each coupon was valid
for use until the midnight of the following Thursday. The coupon automatically applied to the next eligible
consumption (Appendix Figure B.4 shows an example screenshot). Each coupon could be redeemed only
once, and could only be applied to one transaction. Coupons could only be used for transactions made
through the Alipay platform. Thus, although our data do not capture all spending of the consumer because
transactions can be made through other payment platforms or through cash, our estimates do capture the
total effect of winning coupons.

        Fraudulent Cases. During the coupon program's implementation, there were occasional reports
of merchants "cashing out" coupons by making dummy transactions by coordinating with coupon holders.
Shaoxing's city government and the police department responded with anti-fraud actions, including a
ramped-up use of Alipay's fraud detection algorithm, and unannounced audits. Violating merchants face
severe punishments including removal from the coupon program, and possible prosecution for extensive




                                                        10
fraudulent transactions. We believe the number of fraudulent transactions in our data is unlikely to be
significant.16

         Program Financing. The coupon program budget is about 240 million yuan, or about 0.37% of
Shaoxing's 2019 fiscal budget. For each transaction, the cost is shared between the city government (20%
of the cost) and the sub-city level government of the district where the transaction occurred (80% of the
cost).




2.3. Data and Summary Statistics
         We use administrative data from Ant Financial, the financial technology provider behind Alipay.
A total of 1.57 million Alipay users (54% of all users in the city, 31% of the city population) participated
in Coupon Rush events during the six weeks between April and May, 2020.17 For each participant, we have
data on all transactions made since January 2019. For each transaction, we observe the transaction time,
value, whether a coupon (and what coupon) was redeemed, and information about the merchant associated
with the transaction. We also observe the user's age, gender, and, as a proxy for wealth, his/her weekly
Alipay account cash inflow in 2019.18 For participants in each round of Coupon Rush events, we observe
their log-on time in 5-minute intervals relative to the moment when the last coupon is claimed. We record
the first successful log-on time if there were multiple attempts during a Rush event. 19 Due to privacy
restrictions, we cannot use more granular time information. Our primary empirical strategy compares
individuals who logged onto the Coupon Rush portal within the -5 to 5 minute window. Out of a total of
1.57 million participants, 958,920 fell within this time window. We establish that this 10-minute window
is sufficiently narrow to capture users who "barely" won the coupons and users who "barely" did not
(Section 4.1). Our analysis focuses on the six consecutive weeks (April 3 to May 14, 2020) during which
the coupon program was in place. In several specifications in which we look at longer-term spending
patterns, we add the two weeks of data after the last round of the Coupon Rush (the weeks of May 15 and




16
   We are only aware of three cases of criminal charges on coupon-related fraudulence as of May 2020:
http://www.shaoxing.com.cn/xinwen/p/2805040.html
17
   During the program, 66% of user participated in more than one rounds, and 3% of users participated in all six rounds.
18
   Cash inflows could be direct cash transfers from a personal bank account or cash transfers from other users. Alipay
users' account balances are by default invested in a money market fund; users can use or withdraw money free of
charge on demand.
19
   As previously detailed, each user can win at most one packet of coupons each round, and will win if his/her first
attempt of logging onto the Coupon Rush portal happens before the last coupon is claimed. Repeated attempts thus do
not increase the odds of winning, but they did occur in practice.
                                                          11
May 22). When the data were extracted, we had the data for only the first five days of transactions during
the week of May 22; as a result, we scale up spending in that week by a factor of 7/5.

        While the ratio of Alipay users to city population (58%) and the ratio of coupon program
participants to all Alipay users in Shaoxing (54%) are both fairly high, it is still important to consider
potential selection into our estimation sample. Per city's yearbook data, Shaoxing's 2019 per capita
consumption was 31,109 yuan, or about 600 yuan per week. In 2019, Alipay users conducted transactions
worth on average 794-yuan per week on the platform. By contrast, the coupon program participants'
spending through Alipay was 1,122 yuan per week. This difference suggests that the Coupon Rush process
attracted users with higher-than-average capacity to spend. However, we cannot make precise statements
on the incomes of participants and non-participants, or on consumption propensity differences because the
observed difference in spending may also reflect differential propensities to make transactions through the
Alipay platform. Table 1 shows that Coupon Rush participants are younger (average age of 36.6) than the
city average age (39.1). Females account for a greater proportion of Coupon Rush participants (60.1 percent)
than the proportion of female city residents (49.7).20 We discuss the external validity of our results with
these caveats in mind.




3. Research Strategy
        Our empirical strategy is motivated by two unique features of the coupon program design. First,
each round of coupon claiming exhibits a "rush" that spans only matter of several minutes, which helps us
identify users who obtain coupons (or not) largely by chance. Figure 2 plots the Coupon Rush portal's click
traffic in the hour before and the hour after the rush began on 10:00 a.m. local time for each of the six
rounds. Shaded areas highlight the time window during which there were still coupons available for
claiming. In all six rounds, click traffic began to increase about ten minutes before the event, peaking
exactly at 10:00 a.m. when the portal was activated for coupon claiming.21 Traffic quickly declined but
continued into the "after minutes" as users were still able to log onto the portal, only to find that the coupons
were all gone (Appendix Figure B.3 shows an example screenshot from the Alipay app at three points in
time: moments before the portal was activated, during the rush, and after coupons ran out). In all rounds,


20
   In Appendix Figure B.5, we summarize age profile of the coupon program participants. We find that, relative to the
city population, the population groups aged below 20 and over 60 are underrepresented in the program participants,
while those ages 20 to 40 are overrepresented. This pattern is consistent with higher Alipay usage among the middle-
age groups.
21
   During the second wave, the Coupon Rush portal was overwhelmed with excess traffic, which caused a momentary
connection loss. Traffic quickly resumed once the issue had been fixed.
                                                         12
click traffic dropped to near zero after 10:20 a.m.. Figure 2 also suggests that the competitiveness of the
rush grew over time. The final round, for example, all coupons were claimed within 128 seconds. Second,
once claimed, a coupon expired in seven days, when the next round of Coupon Rush began (Section 2.2).
This design ensures that "treated" and "control" groups are easy to define for each week.

        Our research design compares coupon winning, usage, and next 7-day spending for consumers who
first logged onto the Coupon Rush portal shortly before and after the moment last coupon was claimed. For
the sake of the discussion, we will call this moment "minute zero." Because minute zero is unknown to
participants and the entire Rush only lasts minutes, the extent of users sorting around minute zero is low.
Our key estimation equation is:



      Yit =  +   1(Coupon)it + i + t + it for i  logon time window [-5, 5] minutes                     (1)



where Yit denotes individual i's spending in week t where a week is defined by the 7 days between a Friday
and next Thursday to match the coupon's expiration schedule. 1(Coupon)it is an indicator showing
whether user i won any coupon for the week. i are individual-level covariates. t are week (i.e., round)
fixed effects. Our identification compares users close to the minute-zero cutoff. We focus on individuals
logged on to the rush portal within the -5 to 5 minutes, the finest level of time information available to us.
This sample includes about 958,920 individuals, or about 61% of all users who participated in the program
over its duration. We test robustness with other time windows such as -10 to 10 minutes, all users up to 10
minutes, and all users up to 20 minutes.

        We estimate equation (1) using two approaches. The first approach restricts the sample in each
week to individuals who participated in the rush and logged on within -5 to 5 minutes relative to minute
zero. We construct six such repeated cross sections, and then estimate two regression specifications. One
has no control variables; hence, it simply shows the raw spending difference between coupon winners and
non-winners. The other has individual characteristics (age, gender, weekly account cash inflow in 2019)
and week (i.e., round) fixed effects. In the second approach, we construct a full panel of individuals who
participated in at least one of the six rush events within the -5 to 5 minute window. In the panel data,
1(Coupon)it equals 1 if user i won any coupon in week t, or 0 otherwise (i.e., the user did not win the
coupon, or the user did not participate that week). We consider the panel model as our preferred
specification due to its ability to control for user fixed effects, which allows us to compare spending of a


                                                     13
given user across weeks in which he or she did or did not win a coupon. The panel structure also allows us
to cluster standard errors at the user level to address serial correlations in spending and coupon treatment.

           Our identification assumption is that, among the users who participated in the Coupon Rush events,
those who logged onto the portal within five minutes of the time at which the last coupon ran out are
identical in all dimensions except for the coupon treatment. The main threat to the identification is the
possibility that users with different log-on timings, even if differing by mere minutes, might still be different
in observable or unobservable ways. For example, those who are motivated enough to attempt the Coupon
Rush portal minutes prior to when it opened may have a higher propensity to spend than those who logged
on later. We assess the validity of our identification assumption in several ways.

           First, we compare observable, pre-treatment characteristics, including age, gender, and account
inflows, across the -5 to 0 group (winners) and the 0 to 5 group (non-winners). We then compare cross-
sectional estimation results with and without controls for these characteristics. If there is no substantial
selection on one of these observables, then we expect (1) the characteristics to balance as functions of log-
on minutes, and (2) controlling for these characteristics in regressions is inconsequential for estimation
results.

           Next, we exploit the data's ability to track spending of the same user over time to tackle selection
on unobservables. We conduct panel estimation with user fixed effects, exploiting week-over-week
variation in coupon-winning status for the same user. These specifications therefore control for all
permanent differences in individual characteristics in the cross section. We also conduct event studies,
comparing trends in spending among the winners and non-winners, before and after the Coupon Rush
events. In the spirit of a parallel trends test, these exercises allow us to inspect the two groups' spending
patterns before the event, and the evolution of spending as a consequence of winning (and not-winning)
coupons.

           We report more related tests in the Appendix. For example, we test the impact of future coupon-
winning status as a "placebo" treatment to this week's spending; and we assess robustness of results with
respect to more liberal choice of log-on time windows, e.g., including all users within a -10 to 10 minute
window.

           As we detail in Section 4, these alternative empirical strategies that use different sources of
variation yield very similar results. This lends confidence to the identification assumption that users' minor
difference in log-on time can serve as a valid source of exogeneous shocks for the purpose of our study.
Unless noted otherwise, our preferred specification is the panel estimation version of equation (1) with
individuals who logged on within the -5 to 5-minute window.
                                                       14
          We focus on the impact of coupons on three measures of spending. We define "total spending" as
the sum of all spending made through Alipay in the subsequent week. We define "out-of-pocket spending"
as total spending minus the amount subsidized by the coupon. Thus, if a user spent 1,500 yuan during the
week, and redeemed a dining coupon of [¥30 off ¥90+] in a transaction of ¥100 and a shopping coupon
[¥20 off ¥60+] for a transaction of ¥80, then the user's out-of-pocket spending that week is 1,500 ­ 30 ­ 20
= 1,450 yuan. Finally, we define "unsubsidized spending" as total spending net of the transaction(s)
subsidized by coupons. Thus, to use the previous example, the user's weekly total unsubsidized spending
is 1,500 ­ 100 ­ 80 = 1,320 yuan. We use these different spending measures to shed light on the mechanisms
through which coupons affect consumption behavior.




4. Results
We now present evidence on the causal effect of the coupon program on spending. Section 4.1 reports
statistics on coupon usage. Section 4.2 presents estimates of the effect of coupon winning on the subsequent
week's spending. Section 4.3 examines the degree to which increases in subsidized spending are offset by
unsubsidized spending. Section 4.4 discusses potential substitution of spending across different payment
venues.



4.1. Coupon Redemption
          During its six-week duration, the coupon program gave away over 3.4 million coupons, which
represented subsidies of some 240 million yuan, to more than 1 million users. Redemption rates varied by
coupon categories. (In all, 86% coupons were redeemed for shopping, 69% for dining, 39% for cellphones,
15% for both lodging and books, and 8% for gyms.) At the user level, 86% of coupon winners redeemed
at least one coupon in the subsequent week, and the average subsidy value received by coupon winners was
73.3 yuan (Appendix Table B.1). The coupon program thus features a high "compliance" rate in that most
coupon winners engaged in coupon-eligible transactions before their coupons expired. For simplicity, we
next focus on the "intent to treat" effect of winning coupons, i.e., we compare spending patterns of winners
and non-winners, regardless of actual coupon usage.

          Figure 3 plots the distribution of value of subsidized transactions (i.e., transactions that involve
coupon redemption). In each coupon category, we find that the value distributions exhibit spikes at exactly
the minimum spending requirements levels. To make a comparison, we randomly match each subsidized
transaction with an unsubsidized transaction that occurred at the same merchant on the same day. Figure 3

                                                      15
plots the distribution. Reassuringly, we do not see similar spikes for unsubsidized transactions. The overall
patterns also suggest the distributions of subsidized and unsubsidized transactions are similar except near
the coupon eligibility requirements.22




4.2. The Effect of Winning Coupons on Spending
        As outlined in Section 3, our primary empirical strategy focuses on platform users who "barely"
won with users who "barely" lost due to minor differences in the timing of logging onto the Coupon Rush
portal. To illustrate the idea, Figure 4 summarizes users' coupon-winning status, redemption, and
subsequent week's spending as a function of the user's log-on time relative to "minute zero" (i.e., the
moment when all coupons had been claimed). Panel A shows that users who logged on before time zero
almost always won coupons, whereas those who logged on later than minute zero won coupons with a
probability of zero. 23 This pattern suggests that a user's first log-on time is a near-perfect measure of
whether the user wins any coupon. The redemption rate shows a similar jump from about 0.9 before minute
zero to 0 after that point. The redemption rate for users who logged in even earlier ­ prior to the five-minute
run-up to the coupons' runout time (the "< -5 minute" bin) ­ is slightly lower. Panel B reports average out-
of-pocket spending (total spending minus the subsidy amount) and unsubsidized spending (total spending
minus the transactions that involved coupon redemptions) by log-on time. We find a jump in coupon
winners' out-of-pocket spending relative to non-winners. For coupon winners in the "< -5 minute" bin, the
jump is smaller and proportional to the lower coupon redemption rate among that group. Apart from the
jump in spending around minute zero, spending exhibits an upward-sloping trend for users within 15
minutes of minute zero, suggesting that users who logged on earlier in the rush have lower overall spending
capacity. This pattern motivates us to compare users closest to the minute zero cutoff to tease out the causal
effect of coupons.

        To examine potential selection into treatment based on log-on time, Figure 5 repeats the exercise
in Figure 4, but with observed user characteristics as the outcome variable. We examine three "pre-
treatment" user characteristics that we have available in the database: age, gender, and weekly account cash
inflow in 2019 (a proxy for wealth). Graphical patterns in Figure 5 suggest no apparent difference in


22
   One exception is cellphone-related transactions (panel F) where most unsubsidized transactions concentrate around
the ¥0-200 range; the vast majority of transaction volume is for purchases of prepaid data plans and cellphone
accessories.
23
   We draw coupon status and log-on time information from two separate databases, so the relationship is not entirely
mechanical. As mentioned in Section 2.2, we find very small number of cases in which users did not win coupons
even if the log-on time was before minute zero, and in which users won coupons although the log-on time was after
minute zero. We treat these cases as random errors in coupon status.
                                                         16
characteristics around minute zero. In Appendix Table B.2, we report statistically significant, but small
differences in age, gender, and income in the repeated cross sections. For example, we find weekly cash
inflow in 2019 to be 22.04 yuan (standard error = 6.92 yuan) smaller among coupon winners than among
those who did not win. This represents a nearly 2% difference from the non-winners group mean. We view
the statistical difference as largely a consequence of our large sample size, and we believe any potential
bias that would result from such differences in characteristics would be small.

         To further address potential selection on observable or unobservable user characteristics, we report
regression results from (1) repeated cross-sectional estimations with and without controls for age, gender,
cash inflows, and week fixed effects; and (2) panel data estimation with user fixed effects and week fixed
effects. Table 2 summarizes our main estimation results. As discussed in Section 3, our preferred
specification focuses on users who participated in Coupon Rush events, and arrived within the -5 to 5
minutes window. Columns 1 and 2 present repeated cross-sectional estimation results, where one cross
section consists of winners and non-winners in a given round of Coupon Rush, repeated for six different
rounds. Column 1 includes no control variables. Column 2 includes user characteristics (age, gender, and
average weekly account cash inflow in 2019) and week fixed effects. Both specifications suggest that
coupon winners increased total spending by 300 yuan relative to non-winners. Consistent with an average
coupon subsidy of roughly 73 yuan (Appendix Table B.1), we find coupon winners' out-of-pocket spending
increased by 225 yuan. We find unsubsidized transactions in the winners' group increase by about 30 yuan.
Column 3 reports panel regression estimates with user fixed effects and week fixed effects. Column 3 shows
the estimation results for both total and out-of-pocket spending are remarkably similar with those from
cross-sectional estimations. We find a larger unsubsidized spending increase of 50 yuan in the panel
estimation, which is about a 5% increase relative to the non-winners' group mean.

         Our finding that winning a coupon raises spending even in unsubsidized transactions has important
implications on substitution. It addresses a concern that the increase in out-of-pocket spending might be
offset by a decrease in unsubsidized spending that week. Quite the opposite, we find the effects of coupons
spill over to unsubsidized transactions. In addition, to the extent that there is no evidence of spending
substitution within the Alipay platform, it also lessens the concern about substantial substitution across
platforms.24 Sections 4.3 and 4.4 include more detailed discussions on spending substitution.




24
  This is not the scenario where an individual is at a store or a restaurant where he or she would normally use
WeChatpay (or cash), but need to use Alipay to redeem the coupon for one item at this establishment and so the
individual would then use Alipay for all the items. Because we define unsubsidized spending as spending not involving
the transaction that uses coupon, this scenario would imply the individuals makes a separate transaction at this
establishment using Alipay where he or she could have made the transaction through any payment venue of choice.
                                                         17
         Figure 6 presents a parallel trend test comparing spending of the winners group (-5 to 0 minutes)
and non-winners group (0 to 5 minutes) from ten weeks before to three weeks after the Coupon Rush event.
We choose the 13-week event window to ensure the underlying estimation data is a balanced panel of users
for which we can track spending patterns since the COVID shutdown.25 Event week "0" (i.e., the treatment
week) is the week of the Coupon Rush event. Lines on the graph represent simple averages across users in
the corresponding group. Because some non-winning users at event week 0 could be coupon winners in
previous and/or future weeks (and vice versa), we remove subsidized transactions in computing pre and
post periods for both winning and non-winning trends, so that the trends reflect the net impact of winning
a coupon at the treatment week.26 Panel A (panel B) of Figure 6 suggests that out-of-pocket (unsubsidized)
spending of winners and non-winners tracks each other closely except for a divergence that occurs at the
treatment week, providing strong support to the identification assumption that the two groups are largely
identical except for the treatment. Besides the parallel pre-trends and an obvious jump of winners spending
on the treatment week, there are several other data patterns worth noting. First, trends suggest that coupons
have no longer-term effect beyond the treatment week. This pattern also suggests limited intertemporal
substitution, in which case we would have seen a reduction in winners' spending relative to non-winners
after the treatment week. We present a more formal analysis of intertemporal spending patterns in Section
4.3. Second, trends of the non-winners group are smooth throughout the event window, suggesting little if
any anticipatory spending responses (e.g., users who do not win coupons this round save consumption in
anticipation of potential wins in future rounds).27 Finally, although we examine raw trends in Figure 6, in
Appendix Figure B.6 we report a panel regression analysis with leads and lags terms of coupon-winning
status. This regression yields a stimulus-impact estimate that is similar to the main estimate in Table 2,
column 3, and the leads and lags terms are in general small and statistically insignificant.

         In Appendix Table B.3, we present the marginal effects of different types of coupons by replacing
the 1(Coupon)it indicator in equation (1) with four separate indicators for winning dining coupons,
shopping coupons, gym/travel coupons (which always come as "suite" in a given coupon packet, and, thus,
for which individual effects cannot be estimated separately), and books/digital devices coupons (which also
come in "suite"). Not surprisingly, books/cellphones coupons have the largest spending boost due to the


25
   That is (from Figure 1), the first week of the provincial shutdown is the 10th week prior to the first round of Coupon
Rush, and our data end the 3rd week following the last round of Coupon Rush, hence the balanced 10-week-before, 3-
week-after event window.
26
   In unreported analysis, we have confirmed that parallel trends hold exactly without such adjustments.
27
   The coupon program is widely expected due to the week-ahead announcement of its entire implementation schedule.
Following Hsieh, Shimizutani, and Hori (2010), we note that there are no significant changes in spending during the
week of March 25 when the program is announced. In unreported analysis, we find a similar stimulus effect for the
final round of Coupon Rush event which is not subject to the anticipation concern. The lack of significant anticipation
effect is consistent with coupons' small face value and the highly competitive nature of the Rush events.
                                                           18
cellphones coupon's large minimum spending requirement. Because much of coupon redemption occurs in
the dining and shopping sectors, these two categories comprise roughly 47% of spending stimulus. We also
find precise impacts of coupons on unsubsidized spending, except for gym/travel coupons, for which the
unsubsidized spending effect is close to zero, and statistically insignificant.

         Figure 7 reports heterogeneous treatment effect by age groups (panel A), gender (panel B), and
wealth deciles (panel C). The coupon program's effects are slightly larger for certain groups: those who are
between the ages of 20 and 40, females, and those who are potentially wealthier ­ with the caveat that
account cash inflows are imperfect measures of wealth. Overall, we conclude that the stimulus effect of
winning coupons emerges across the board, and it does not appear to concentrate in particular subgroups of
users.

         Appendix Table B.2 reports additional robustness specifications in which we vary users included
in the analysis samples using alternative log-on time windows (-5 to 5 minutes, -10 to 10 minutes, all users
within 10 minutes, all users within 20 minutes). Our results are similar across the board.




4.3. Substitution Between Subsidized and Unsubsidized Spending
         One potential concern with the impact of the coupon program is that an increase in subsidized
spending may be offset by a decrease in unsubsidized spending. Our findings on an increase in unsubsidized
spending in Table 2 provide the first evidence that such substitution does not occur within the week of
treatment. We next examine the possibility of intertemporal substitution of subsidized and unsubsidized
spending by looking at whether coupon winners compensate for their initial spending increase by reduced
spending in subsequent weeks.

         To operationalize this test, we construct "k-week" spending measures, defined as total, out-of-
pocket, and unsubsidized spending in the k weeks following (and including) the current week. We then use
the k-week spending as the outcome variable in equation (1). On the right-hand side of the equation we
control additionally for the number of coupon-winning weeks in the corresponding look-ahead window.
For example, in our 3-week specification, our outcome variable is the sum of spending in weeks, t, t+1, and
t+2, our key dependent variable is whether the user won coupons in week t, and we control for the number
of weeks (0, 1, or 2) that the user won coupons in weeks t+1 and t+2. Note that, if an initial spending
increase in week 1 is compensated by a decline of spending in weeks 2 and 3, then the 1-week specification




                                                      19
will show a positive effect, while the 3-week specification will show zero impact.28 We only have 2 weeks
of data following the final round of the Coupon Rush, so there are necessarily composition changes as we
expand the look-ahead window. We compare our primary, 1-week specification results to 3-week and 6-
week results. Note that the 6-week data essentially use treatment only from the first three rounds of the
Coupon Rush events.

        Table 3 summarizes the results. Column 1 repeats column 3 of Table 2. Columns 2 and 3 present
3-week and 6-week specifications. We find some evidence that the initial spending increase of coupon
winners is partially offset in the subsequent weeks. Looking at out-of-pocket spending, we find a 12%
reduction in the effect size about 3 weeks into the initial treatment, and a 23% reduction in 6 weeks. We
find a larger reduction in unsubsidized spending, which drops by 50% in the 6-week regression (although
still marginally significant). We interpret our results as suggestive of a mild intertemporal substitution. Still,
our results provide strong indications that the coupon treatment does not increase spending once they are
no longer in effect (i.e., we can strongly reject the hypothesis that the 3-week effect size is larger than the
1-week effect size). That is, the small-value coupons do not have a sustained effect in consumption
stimulation that lingers after the subsidy ends.




4.4. Substitution Across Spending Platforms
        Another potential concern about substitution is that winning a coupon may induce users to make
transactions with Alipay which would otherwise have been made through different venues (such as
WeChatpay or cash payment), thus leading to an overestimation of the coupon program's stimulus effect.
We do not have data on these alternative venues which together account for about 28% of all consumption
in Shaoxing. Rather, we exploit information on Coupon Rush program participants' characteristics and
prior spending pattern to provide indirect tests of cross-platform substitution. The general idea is to hone
in on subgroups that are less likely to exhibit cross-platform substitution because of winning a coupon.

        We first examine heterogeneity of coupon's stimulus effects across individuals with different usage
intensity. For a heavy user who is already making many transactions through Alipay, the coupon treatment
­ which worth about 73 yuan in face value (Appendix Table B.1) ­ should provide a smaller incentive for
cross-platform substitution than an occasional user. To operationalize this test, we group program
participants into deciles by the monthly transaction value on Alipay in 2019. Appendix Figure B.7 shows
that usage intensity varies widely among the coupon program participants. Users in the second-least active


28
  This method is commonly used in the medical and health economics literatures in studying, for example, the impact
of one-time surgical treatment on individuals' medium-run survival.
                                                        20
group spent on average 486 yuan on Alipay, while users in the second-most active group spent an average
7,669 yuan. We then estimate heterogeneous effects of winning a coupon across these spending deciles.
Appendix Figure B.7 reports a similar stimulus impact for active users. In fact, the stimulus impact of
winning a coupon, both in terms of out-of-pocket spending and unsubsidized spending, is remarkably
similar across spending deciles.

         Another way to concentrate on "spontaneous" users is to leave out individuals who signed up for
Alipay just to participate in the Coupon Rush events. We find that dropping users who registered Alipay
after January 2020 (about 3% of all participants) has no impact on our stimulus impact estimates.

         In summary, our examination of active and non-active Alipay users provides no evidence that the
coupon's stimulus impact is subject to substantial degree of cross-platform substitution. There are other
channels of substitution that we cannot assess with our data. For example, we do not have information on
users' family structure and thus cannot directly test for an intra-household substitution where, if one
member of a couple wins the coupon, then the couple will be more likely to use that member's account to
pay for purchases that they might otherwise have put on the other member's account.29




5. Business Impact and Stimulus Mechanism
5.1. Empirical Evidence
         In this section, we use merchant information to cast light on the mechanisms underlying the coupon
program's stimulus impact. We use transaction data to construct customer flow information of all shopping
and dining merchants, which together comprise over 60% of all merchants registered with Alipay in the
city. We then analyze how coupon participants flow among firms of different size, popularity, and price.
Our primary analysis examines shopping merchants. We repeat the same analysis with dining merchants in
the appendix, which shows qualitatively similar results.

         Our merchant data can be considered as a simple reorganization of the transaction database by
coupon-receiving merchants. A merchant in our data is a business that was registered with the Alipay
platform on or before January 1, 2019, and made at least one transaction between the months of April and
May 2020. Alipay's merchant platform is populated by a large group of inactive business users and a small
group of actual users that make frequent transactions. To avoid overstating our effective sample size, and
to minimize the influence of inactive users on our findings, we restrict our sample to the 12% of merchants


29
  We have examined effects of male participants under age 31 and female participants under age 29 ­ those below
the average age of marriage in Shaoxing ­ and found similar stimulus impact relative to the population average effect.
                                                         21
(N=45,067) that collectively accounted for 90% of all revenues in 2019. We observe the firm's customer
pool, defined as consumers who made at least one transaction through Alipay in the merchant-week, for
each merchant on each week between April 3 and May 14, 2020. We observe whether the customers
participated in the week's Coupon Rush event, and if so, whether they won any coupons. Among coupon
winners, we further distinguish those who made subsidized transactions from those who made unsubsidized
transactions in the merchant-week.

         We group merchants into decile bins of baseline (year 2019) revenue. For each bin, we calculate
the composition of customers by coupon-winning and coupon-redeeming status. Figure 8, panel A plots the
results. The dash-circle line shows fraction of customers who participated in the Coupon Rush during the
week, but did not win any coupon ("Non-winners"). In a given week, roughly 3% of total customers are
non-winners. The fraction of customers from non-winners is very similar across firm size bins. Next, we
turn to coupon winners. We divide "winners" into two groups: those who made subsidized transactions,
and those who made unsubsidized transactions. The dash-triangle line of Figure 8, panel A shows that
winning customers who made unsubsidized transactions consist of roughly 8% of weekly customer flow,
and are also quite stable across the various types of merchants. By contrast, the fraction of winner customers
who redeemed coupons rose almost monotonically from near 0% in the smallest merchant-size bin, to above
8% for firms in the top decile bin.

         In the rest of Figure 8, we "decompose" this pattern into heterogeneity by baseline transaction
volume (panel B) and baseline "price" (i.e., revenue per transaction, panel C), where baseline is again
defined using year 2019 data. Panel B shows that winners do not differentially favor more popular
merchants. In contrast, panel C shows that coupon winners, when redeeming coupons, favor merchants that
sell pricier goods. As in panel A, coupon winners or non-winners do not favor pricier options when making
unsubsidized transactions.

         The patterns in Figure 8 suggests a difference-in-differences-style interpretation. We are interested
in how the coupon program affects the distribution of customers across merchants. We ask the question:
what kind of merchants did program participants patronize when they (1) did not win coupons, (2) won
coupons but did not intend to redeem any coupons, and (3) won coupons and intended to redeem coupons.
Presuming that the coupon program has no impact on spending behavior of non-winners, the dash-circle
line of Figure 8 provides a measure of the "natural" distribution of coupon participants customer in the
absence of coupon treatment. 30 The dash-triangle line ­ the distribution of coupon winners who made



30
  Note the line need not be flat. For example, the priciest firms may have a wealthier customer pool that is less
represented in the Coupon Rush participants. If this is the case, the fraction of program participants will appear to be
                                                          22
unsubsidized transactions ­ provides a measure of the natural distribution of coupon winners without the
intention to redeem coupon. Thus, the level difference between the dash-circle and dash-triangle lines
reflects the odds of winning a coupon in the Coupon Rush (0.74 on average, consistent with the summary
statistics of coupon-winning odds in Table 1); the slope difference between the lines reflects the pure effect
of winning a coupon on the customer distribution. We find that the two lines are largely parallel to each
other for firms in the smallest five deciles, while there is a slight uptick in winners flow to larger firms
(especially those with higher transaction volumes, as shown in Figure 8, panel B). This pattern suggests
that the coupon program has, at best, induced a mild shift of unsubsidized spending toward larger firms.
Finally, the sharp slope difference of the connect-triangle line (i.e., share of coupon winners that made
subsidized transactions in the merchant-week) from both non-winners and non-redeeming winners suggests
a tremendous shift of consumer flows to larger firms when customers intend to redeem coupons.

        In Appendix Figure B.8, we repeat the same analysis with dining firms. Different from shopping
firms, dining firms in our data exhibit a wide price spread (top decile spending per transaction is 1,195 yuan,
or about 171 USD per dining transaction, which likely captures luxury options). In the case of the dining
sector, the lines representing both the "non-winners" and "winners, not redeeming coupons" are downward-
sloping. This indicates that individuals who would patronize very expensive restaurants are less represented
among the Coupon Rush participants. However, there remains parallel trend. Once again, we find evidence
of substantial shift toward pricier options when customers intend to redeem coupons.

        The findings in Figure 8 have important implications for both consumers and businesses. On the
consumer side, it suggests that coupons stimulate spending by directing consumption toward pricier options
that the consumers would not otherwise prefer in the absence of the coupons' minimum spending
requirement. On the business side, because larger and pricier merchants comprise the bulk of the market
share, most of the subsidy from coupon benefits necessarily accrues to those merchants. Our analysis
reveals that the coupon program disproportionally favors merchants that are large and sell more expensive
goods, i.e., these merchants receive more business from coupon winners even on a percentage basis. For
example, for both shopping and dining firms, those in the bottom price decile typically receive almost zero
benefits from the coupon program. This unequal allocation might not be optimal, for example, from an
employment stimulus perspective if firms that sell less expensive goods and services also account for
substantial share in the labor market.31


smaller. In our case, however, we do find that non-winners are almost equally represented in the shopping category,
in terms of patronizing firms of different sizes and with different price levels.
31
   We do not have detailed firm size data for Shaoxing. However, in Zhejiang province (where Shaoxing located), a
substantial share of employment belongs to enterprises "below designated size," i.e., firms deemed very small from a
national economic account point of view. For example, retail enterprises below designated size (annual revenue less
                                                        23
        In the next section, we formalize these arguments using a conceptual model of spending with
coupon incentives. We then analyze gains from alternative coupon designs with less stringent minimum
spending requirements.




5.2. A Model of Consumer Choice with Minimum-Spending Coupons
        The empirical finding of consumption distortion and unequal business benefits distribution
motivates the question of what can be done to reduce such distortion, and to improve consumer welfare. In
this section, we present a conceptual model of consumer spending with coupons. To make clear how to
think about distortionary effects, we use the simplest possible setting ­ a one-time shopping decision given
a discount coupon with minimum spending requirement. We use a simple numerical example to show that
our model can rationalize several key empirical findings, including the bunching around minimum spending
requirements (Figure 3), the resulting spending stimulus (Figure 4), and preferences for redeeming coupons
with more expensive merchants (Figure 8). We then use our model to analyze consumer welfare under
counterfactual coupon designs. We note that the optimal design of coupons is beyond the scope of our paper;
the main purpose of the conceptual model is to provide intuitions that facilitate our discussion of the
stimulus mechanism.

        Model Setup. Consider a situation in which consumer i must make a one-time shopping decision
for a consumption occasion. We employ a discrete-continuous framework, in which the discrete choice is
the merchant selected and the continuous choice is the number of units consumed.32 We assume that there
are N merchants with different price levels and are differentiated by quality. The consumer chooses the
preferred choice set n (or merchants) from these N merchants, and the optimal amount of expenditure y
within the choice set. For simplicity, we assume the consumer's preferred choice set contains exactly one
merchant. That is, the consumer first picks the merchant, and then decides how much to spend of that
merchant. The consumer has a non-negative endowment Ei drawn from a set E . We assume consumer
utility follows a Cobb-Douglas function form and the consumer's utility maximization problem is:

                                        max             un (yn , z) = An (yn )n z 
                                   n{1,2,...,N},yn ,z


                                                 s. t. yn + z = Ei


than 5 million yuan and/or with fewer than 50 employees) account for over 76% of industry-wide employment, and
dining enterprises below designated size (annual revenue less than 20 million yuan and/or with fewer than 100
employees) account for over 57% of industry-wide employment.
32
   Our model follows the discrete/continuous consumer choice framework of Hanemann (1984), Dubin and McFadden
(1984), and Hendel (1999).
                                                            24
                                                yi yj = 0  i  j

where An (yn )n is the utility of spending yn yuan in choice set n, and z  is the utility from the numeraire
good. We denote n as a quality index such that n1 > n2 if and only if n1 > n2 and An1 < An2 . These
conditions imply that the first unit of a good with a lower index increases the utility more because of its
lower price, but the marginal utility diminishes faster than higher quality goods. Following Hanemann
(1984), we set yi yj = 0, which ensures that each consumer could only choose one consumption set.

        One can show that the indirect utility function of choice set n for consumer i is:

                                                            
                                                         n n     +
                                      vn (Ei ) = An            E n
                                                      (n + )n + i

and the optimal spending in choice set n is:

                                                 (E )
                                                             n
                                               yn  i =          E
                                                            n +  i

and the consumer's optimal choice set is:

                                       n = argmaxn{1,2,...,N} {vn (Ei )}

        Now consider the impact of a minimum-spending requirement coupon that returns t yuan if the
spending exceeds x yuan. Intuitively, there are two groups of consumers whose choice will be barely
affected. The first group is consumers whose original optimal spending yn
                                                                        
                                                                          is already far above x. For these


high-income consumers, the coupon simply serves as a pure t-yuan increase in endowment which leads to
a small increase in spending without changing the original choice set n . The second group is consumers
whose y
         is far below x. For these low-income consumers, the coupon's payment incentive t is not enough


to cover the disutility of raising consumption to x, and thus it is of their best interest to not use the coupon.
The primary consumers of interest are those fall in between these two groups. For these consumers, their
original consumption choice yn
                             
                               < x, but the coupon incentive t and the utility increase from consuming


potentially higher-quality goods make it welfare-improving to deviate from the original consumption choice
and reach the minimum-spending requirement x (in particular, to reach exactly x for some consumers).

        To formalize these intuitions, it pays to first characterize, in isolation, how the consumer's choice
set is affected by t (what happens to n upon a marginal increase in endowment), and by x (how does the
consumer choose n if he or she has a spending target). Consider the following function:



                                                       25
                                                             
                                                         n+1
                                        vn+1 (Ei ) An+1 n+1   (n + )n +
                          g n (Ei ) =             =                         E n+1 -n
                                         vn (Ei )   A n  n
                                                           n (
                                                               n+1 + )n+1 +


Note that g n () is monotonically increasing, and we let En denote the unique solution of g n (En ) = 1 .
Intuitively, En is an endowment cutoff beyond which consumer upgrades choice set from n to n + 1. 33
Similarly one can define:

                                                    un+1 (x; Ei ) An+1  -
                                         hn (x) =                =    x n+1 n
                                                     un (x; Ei )   An

hn () is also monotonically increasing, with a unique solution xn such that hn (xn ) = 1 . We make the
following two simplifying assumptions to make our theoretical and numerical analyses tractable.

Assumption 1. Non-overlapping "upgrading" cutoffs.

                          E1 < E2 <  < EN-1 < EN and x1 < x2 <  < xN-1 < xN

Assumption 1 implies that the consumer will choose set n if and only if Ei satisfies E-1  Ei < E ;34 if
the consumer aims to spend x, he or she will choose set n if and only if x satisfies xn-1  x < xn .

Assumption 2. Increasing propensity to "upgrade" at higher endowment levels.

                                  vn+1 (Ei +t)                      un+1 (x;Ei +t)
                                 Ei vn (Ei )
                                                    > 0 n and      Ei un (x;Ei )
                                                                                     > 0 n

         Intuitively, Assumption 2 says that consumers with higher initial endowment (and thus closer to
the upgrading cutoffs in the absence of coupon) will find it more attractive to take the coupon's incentive
and "upgrade" their choice set. This assumption ensures that the likelihood of consumers' upgrading to
higher-quality goods within any interval between two endowment (or spending) cutoffs can be ordered
monotonically by consumers' initial endowment levels.

Proposition 1. Under Assumptions 1 and 2, one can find endowment levels E1 < E2 < E3 such that:

     (1) for consumers with Ei < E1, the original spending level is below the minimum requirement
         x, and they do not take up the coupon incentive;


33
   Our setting is similar to Allenby and Rossi (1991) who develop a demand system for different brands of the same
product where the indifference curves of the utility function are linear but rotate in slope as the level of utility increases.
Therefore, as the attainable level of utility increases, the marginal utility of some brands will increase while that of
other brands will decrease.
34
   This assumption ensures that choice set cutoffs depend solely on endowment, and so consumers in the entire
economy can be clearly grouped into different choice sets without overlapping. A more generalized model may relax
this assumption and allows the chosen set to depend on other individual characteristics in addition to endowment.
                                                              26
    (2) for consumers with E1  Ei < E2 , the original spending level is below the minimum
        requirement x , and they take up the coupon incentive to raise spending to exactly x
        ("bunching");

    (3) for consumers with E2  Ei < E3 , the original spending level is below the minimum
        requirement x, and they take up the coupon incentive to raise spending to a level greater
        than x;

    (4) for consumers with E3  Ei , the original spending level is already above the minimum
        requirement x, and they treat the coupon as a pure discount by t;

    (5) for consumers with E1  Ei < E3 , the coupon causes an upgrade to consumption with
        weakly higher quality.

        Proposition 1 predicts a bunching of consumer spending around the coupon's minimum
requirement x, and a shift of consumption towards more expensive choices for a set of consumers whose
choices would not reach x in the absence of the coupon's minimum spending requirement. Having shown
that agents in our model do respond to coupon incentive and favor more expensive goods and services, we
now consider the effect of relaxation of the coupon's minimum spending requirement.

Proposition 2. Relaxing coupon's minimum spending requirement x:

    (1) strictly increases the number of consumers who can use the coupon without upgrading to
        higher choice sets;

    (2) weakly increases the total coupon redemption rate;

    (3) strictly increases total consumer utility of the society.

        Intuitively, relaxation of x reduces choice constraints and improves utility. Note that Proposition 2
does not ensure government revenue neutrality as reduced x might lead to reduced total stimulus amount.
However, more consumers (from lower endowment groups) will be able to reach the minimum spending
requirement, thus increasing the pool of agents who will participate in the coupon program.

        A Numerical Example. Appendix A contains the proofs for Propositions 1 and 2. Here provide a
simple parametrization of our conceptual model, and generate a numerical simulation of Propositions 1 and
2. Note that we do not attempt to "calibrate" the model according to moments in the real data. The numerical
example is used to illustrate the basic intuition underlying our conceptual model of spending with coupons.

                                                     27
In practice, however, we have confirmed that our qualitative conclusions are robust to alternative
parametrization of the model. We set N = 4, with A1 = 7, A2 = 3.9, A3 = 2, A4 = 0.95, 1 = 0.08, 2 =
0.3, 3 = 0.5, 4 = 0.7 and  = 0.2. We assume that consumer endowment follows a gamma distribution
(8,5) with an upper bound of ¥80 and a lower bound of ¥20. The average endowment is ¥40.76. We
simulate a total of 100,000 consumers, and we randomly assign 60% of the consumers with coupons. We
run separate simulations with four different types of coupons; [¥5 off ¥15+], [¥10 off ¥30+] and [¥15 off
¥45+]. Notice that we fix the coupon's ¥t/¥x ratio to be 1/3. That is, on a per-user basis, the stimulus effect
size is exactly 3 if the coupon is redeemed. Our goal is to analyze spending, customer flows, and consumer
welfare with these coupons of different minimum spending requirement.

        Figure 9, panel A displays the distribution of consumer spending under alternative coupons. Note
the figure is analogous to the empirical patterns of Figure 3, the difference being that in our simulation we
can observe transactions even if they do not meet the minimum spending requirement. Panel A provides a
numerical representation of Proposition 1, featuring sharp bunching exactly around the spending
requirements. Having shown that agents in our model do respond to coupons' minimum spending
requirements, we now turn to the analysis of merchant customer flows. Figure 9, panel B provides an
analogous plot to Figure 8, showing the fraction of business customers who made coupon-eligible purchases.
Our simulation results indeed are consistent with the hypothesis of Section 5.1. With the highest minimum
spending requirement coupon [¥15 off ¥45+], only merchants that sell the most expensive goods (choice
set 4) receive business from coupon winners. With coupons that have lower minimum spending
requirements, the same set of agents are more evenly spread across merchants. These simulation results
confirm our conjecture of the mechanism underlying Figure 8's pattern: minimum spending requirements
induce consumers to spend for more expensive options that they would not otherwise prefer. We discuss
policy implications next.




5.3. Policy Implications
        We offer several policy comments based on our empirical evidence and welfare analysis of the
coupon program. First, both our empirical and theoretical analyses suggest that the coupon program leads
to a disproportionate favor for large business that sell more expensive goods and services. Issuing coupons
with smaller minimum spending requirements would alleviate such a distributional pattern, while at the
same time increasing total consumer surplus. In principle, with a fixed budget, a government may issue
more smaller-value coupons to achieve the same amount of spending stimulus achieved by offering fewer



                                                      28
higher-value coupons. Of course, this assumes that the additional coupons will be taken up by consumers.
We believe that this is a reasonable assumption, given the excess demand for coupons (Figure 2).

        Second, our model also casts light on an alternative, potentially easier, solution to distributional
concerns by allowing consumers to spread a coupon's minimum spending requirement across multiple
transactions. For example, one might imagine a coupon that returns ¥30 reimbursement once shopping
spending accumulates to ¥90+. In theory, such a design is equivalent to decomposing the original [¥30 off
¥90+] coupon into a "use-all-or-lose-all" bucket of many small-value components (e.g., 10 coupons each
with [¥3 off ¥9+] face value). Such a coupon design would preserve the stimulus magnitude while reducing
the consumers' incentive to upgrade to a more expensive choice set because the minimum spending
requirement would no longer need to be satisfied in a single transaction.




6. Discussion and Conclusion
6.1. Discussion
        In this section, we briefly summarize the key properties of the coupon program. A tool purely
designed to stimulate spending, the coupon stimulus model does not provide payment assistance and
financial alleviations like many cash payment-based stimulus programs do. However, we hope that several
unique features of the program ­ including its ability to quickly boost spending and to target specific sectors
­ can make it a useful addition to the policy maker's toolbox for economic stimulus.

        Cost and Effectiveness. The coupon program features a small treatment size per person. The
average subsidy value received by coupon winners is 73.3 yuan (Appendix Table B.1), which is about 0.13
percent of the annual per capita income of Shaoxing in 2019. Although a small treatment size per se is not
an advantage of the program, it does allow the program to reach a big swath of the city population while at
the same time remain fiscally feasible to the city government.

        Although the treatment size is small, coupons' spending incentives prove to be effective in
generating quick and strong spending responses. The use-it-this-week-or-lose-it design prompts an
immediate increase in spending. For every 1 yuan of government subsidy, out-of-pocket spending increases
by 3 yuan. From a purely fiscal cost-effectiveness perspective, such a rate of return is much higher than
most cash payment-based stimulus programs, where estimated consumer spending per dollar of government
subsidy ranges between 0.2 to 0.8.35 In total, the coupon program itself generated 850 million yuan (121


35
  This range is based on the marginal propensity to consume (MPC) estimates from the following programs: 1999
Japan shopping coupon program (Hsieh, Shimizutani, and Hori, 2010), the 2001 U.S. tax rebates (Shapiro and Slemrod,
                                                        29
million USD) spending in six weeks. This corresponds to a recovery of 13% of the Alipay platform-wide
spending loss and 8% of the city-wide consumption loss in 2020Q1.

        Targeting. Coupons can be designed to target business sectors that are hit hardest in the economic
downturn, such as shopping and restaurants. On the consumer side, the high coupon redemption rate (89%)
suggests the Rush mechanism helps land coupons into the hands of those actually want to use them.

        Consumption Distortion. Coupons' minimum spending requirements distort consumers toward
pricier goods and services that they would not otherwise choose. Such a choice distortion can be alleviated
by setting low minimum requirements or by allowing separate transactions to add up to the minimum
requirement.

        Scalability. Whether the program's take-up rate and stimulus impact can remain high among a
wider swath of the population (or when coupons are issued in larger quantities) has yet to be determined as
more cities adopt similar programs. We note, however, that a unique nature of the coupon program
financing is that the government can provide subsidy to businesses ex post, meaning it does not need to pay
for coupons that are not redeemed. This feature could open up the possibility of policy experimentations
and lessen the fiscal burden usually associated with traditional stimulus programs for which the government
must provide subsidies ex ante.



6.2. Conclusion
        We have provided an evaluation of one of the first large-scale spending stimulus programs that
employ digital coupons as an economic stimulus tool, and we have offered suggestions about ways in which
the use of such policy measures could be improved. Our findings show that small-value, "use-it-or-lose-it"
coupons provided a significant and immediate spending boost at a low cost. In practice, consumers
"upgraded" consumption toward pricier options to satisfy coupons' minimum spending requirements. Our
results show that this aspect of the program led to potentially undesirable distributional impacts that favored
large firms selling more expensive goods and services. Relaxing coupons' minimum spending requirements
could alleviate such distributional concerns without sacrificing consumer welfare. The program can be
tractably administered through a mobile payment platform, can be done by a local government with a
relatively small budget, and can be tailored to boost spending in specific sectors. We conclude that such a
digital coupon program might be new option to add to the policy makers' toolbox for economic recovery.


2003; Johnson, Parker, and Souleles, 2006), the 2008 U.S. tax rebates (Shapiro and Slemrod, 2009), the 2009 Taiwan
shopping voucher program (Kan, Peng, and Wang, 2017), the 2011 Singapore growth dividend program (Agarwal
and Qian, 2014), and the 2020 U.S. Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act (Chetty et al.,
2020; Baker et al., 2020).
                                                       30
Compared to conventional cash-based stimulus plans that aim for deeper, longer-term recovery, the coupon
model can be especially useful as an instrument to trigger swift spending response against a sudden
economic downturn.




References
Agarwal, Sumit, and Yeow Hwee Chua. "FinTech and household finance: a review of the empirical
literature." China Finance Review International (2020).
Agarwal, Sumit, Chunlin Liu, and Nicholas S. Souleles. "The reaction of consumer spending and debt to
tax rebates--evidence from consumer credit data." Journal of Political Economy 115, no. 6 (2007): 986-
1019.
Agarwal, Sumit, and Wenlan Qian. "Consumption and debt response to unanticipated income shocks:
Evidence from a natural experiment in Singapore." American Economic Review 104, no. 12 (2014): 4205-
30.
Agarwal, Sumit, Wenlan Qian, Yuan Ren, Hsin-Tien Tsai, and Bernard Yin Yeung. "The real impact of
FinTech: Evidence from mobile payment technology." SSRN 3556340 (2020).
Allenby, Greg M., and Peter E. Rossi. "Quality perceptions and asymmetric switching between brands."
Marketing Science 10, no. 3 (1991): 185-204.
Baker, Scott R., Robert A. Farrokhnia, Steffen Meyer, Michaela Pagel, and Constantine Yannelis. Income,
liquidity, and the consumption response to the 2020 economic stimulus payments. No. w27097. National
Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.
Berg, Tobias, Valentin Burg, Ana Gombovi, and Manju Puri. "On the rise of fintechs: Credit scoring using
digital footprints." The Review of Financial Studies 33, no. 7 (2020): 2845-2897.
Berger, David, Nicholas Turner, and Eric Zwick. "Stimulating housing markets." The Journal of Finance
75, no. 1 (2020): 277-321.
Best, Michael Carlos, and Henrik Jacobsen Kleven. "Housing market responses to transaction taxes:
Evidence from notches and stimulus in the UK." The Review of Economic Studies 85, no. 1 (2018): 157-
193.
Broda, Christian, and Jonathan A. Parker. "The economic stimulus payments of 2008 and the aggregate
demand for consumption." Journal of Monetary Economics 68 (2014): S20-S36.
Chen, Haiqiang, Wenlan Qian, and Qiang Wen. "The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on consumption:
Learning from high frequency transaction data." SSRN 3568574 (2020).
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, and Michael Stepner. Real-Time Economics: A New
Platform to Track the Impacts of COVID-19 on People, Businesses, and Communities Using Private Sector
Data. Mimeo, 2020.
Cox, Natalie, Peter Ganong, Pascal Noel, Joseph Vavra, Arlene Wong, Diana Farrell, and Fiona Greig.
"Initial impacts of the pandemic on consumer behavior: Evidence from linked income, spending, and
savings data." University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for Economics Working Paper 2020-82
(2020).

                                                  31
D'Acunto, Francesco, Thomas Rauter, Christoph K. Scheuch, and Michael Weber. Perceived Precautionary
Savings Motives: Evidence from FinTech. No. w26817. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.
DelVecchio, Devon, David H. Henard, and Traci H. Freling. "The effect of sales promotion on post-
promotion brand preference: A meta-analysis." Journal of Retailing 82, no. 3 (2006): 203-213.
Dubin, Jeffrey A., and Daniel L. McFadden. "An econometric analysis of residential electric appliance
holdings and consumption." Econometrica (1984): 345-362.
Elmendorf, Douglas W., and Jason Furman. "If, when, how: A primer on fiscal stimulus." (2008).
Fuster, Andreas, Matthew Plosser, Philipp Schnabl, and James Vickery. "The role of technology in
mortgage lending." The Review of Financial Studies 32, no. 5 (2019): 1854-1899.
Goldstein, Itay, Wei Jiang, and G. Andrew Karolyi. "To FinTech and beyond." The Review of Financial
Studies 32, no. 5 (2019): 1647-1661.
Green, Daniel, Brian T. Melzer, Jonathan A. Parker, and Arcenis Rojas. "Accelerator or brake? Cash for
Clunkers, household liquidity, and aggregate demand." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
(2020, forthcoming).
Hanemann, W. Michael. "Discrete/continuous models of consumer demand." Econometrica (1984): 541-
561.
Hastings, Justine, and Jesse M. Shapiro. "How are SNAP benefits spent? Evidence from a retail panel."
American Economic Review 108, no. 12 (2018): 3493-3540.
Hastings, Justine, and Ebonya Washington. "The first of the month effect: consumer behavior and store
responses." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2, no. 2 (2010): 142-62.
Hendel, Igal. "Estimating multiple-discrete choice models: An application to computerization returns." The
Review of Economic Studies 66, no. 2 (1999): 423-446.
Hoynes, Hilary, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. "US food and nutrition programs." In Economics of
Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, Volume 1, pp. 219-301. University of Chicago Press,
2015.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, Satoshi Shimizutani, and Masahiro Hori. "Did Japan's shopping coupon program
increase spending?" Journal of Public Economics 94, no. 7-8 (2010): 523-529.
Johnson, David S., Jonathan A. Parker, and Nicholas S. Souleles. "Household expenditure and the income
tax rebates of 2001." American Economic Review 96, no. 5 (2006): 1589-1610.
Kan, Kamhon, Shin-Kun Peng, and Ping Wang. "Understanding Consumption Behavior: Evidence from
Consumers' Reaction to Shopping Vouchers." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 9, no. 1
(2017): 137-53.
Kaplan, Greg, and Giovanni L. Violante. "A model of the consumption response to fiscal stimulus
payments." Econometrica 82, no. 4 (2014): 1199-1239.
Leone, Robert P., and Srini S. Srinivasan. "Coupon face value: Its impact on coupon redemptions, brand
sales, and brand profitability." Journal of Retailing 72, no. 3 (1996): 273-289.
Liu, Qiao, Qiaowei Shen, Zhenghua Li, and Shu Chen. "Stimulating Consumption at Low Budget­Evidence
from a Large-Scale Policy Experiment Amid the COVID-19 Pandemic." SSRN 3626518 (2020).


                                                   32
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. "The effects of fiscal stimulus: Evidence from the 2009 cash for clunkers
program." Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, no. 3 (2012): 1107-1142.
Parker, Jonathan A., Nicholas S. Souleles, David S. Johnson, and Robert McClelland. "Consumer spending
and the economic stimulus payments of 2008." American Economic Review 103, no. 6 (2013): 2530-53.
Philippon, T. (2016). The fintech opportunity (No. w22476). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Rysman, Marc, and Scott Schuh. "New innovations in payments." Innovation Policy and the Economy 17,
no. 1 (2017): 27-48.
Shapiro, Jesse M. "Is there a daily discount rate? Evidence from the food stamp nutrition cycle." Journal of
Public Economics 89, no. 2-3 (2005): 303-325.
Shapiro, Matthew D., and Joel Slemrod. "Consumer response to tax rebates." American Economic Review
93, no. 1 (2003): 381-396.
Shapiro, Matthew D., and Joel Slemrod. "Did the 2008 tax rebates stimulate spending?" American
Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 99, no. 2 (2009): 374-79.
Summers, Lawrence. "The State of the US Economy." Presentation at Brookings Institution Forum on
December 19th. (2007).
Summers, Lawrence. "Fiscal stimulus issues [Testimony before the Joint Economic Committee]." (2008).
Yellen, Janet L. "Comments on `the revival of fiscal policy'." Annual AEA/ASSA (2009).




                                                    33
                                                         Figure 1. Consumption Trends, October 2019 - May 2020
                                        2500




                                                                                                   Provincial             Study period
                                                                                                   shutdown
                                                                   "Double 11"
                                                  2000
                           Weekly spending (yuan)




                                                                             "Double 12"
                       500    1000      1500
                                        0




                                                           Oct 4   Nov 1         Dec 6     Jan 3    Feb 7       Mar 6   Apr 3   May 1
                                                           2019                            2020



Notes: This graph shows per user weekly total consumption made through Alipay. Sample restricts to a balanced panel of all 1.57
million users who participated in the Coupon Rush events. The two major spikes correspond to the week of the November 11 Singles'
Day shopping holiday ("Double 11") and its December 12 spin-off ("Double 12"). "Provincial shutdown" indicates the period between
Zhejiang province's COVID-19 shelter-in-place order issuance and Shaoxing city's re-opening date. "Study period" highlights the six
weeks with Coupon Rush events. 1000 CNY  144 USD in 2019.




                                                                                             34
                                                          Figure 2. Click Traffic During Coupon Rush Events
    .15




                                                                      .15




                                                                                                                                         .15
                Round 1                                                           Round 2                                                            Round 3
    .12




                                                                      .12




                                                                                                                                         .12
       .09




                                                                         .09




                                                                                                                                            .09
Density




                                                                  Density




                                                                                                                                     Density
    .06




                                                                      .06




                                                                                                                                         .06
    .03




                                                                      .03




                                                                                                                                         .03
    0




                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                         0
             9:00   9:20   9:40   10:00   10:20   10:40   11:00                9:00   9:20   9:40    10:00   10:20   10:40   11:00                9:00   9:20   9:40   10:00   10:20   10:40   11:00
    .15




                                                                      .15




                                                                                                                                         .15
                Round 4                                                           Round 5                                                            Round 6
    .12




                                                                      .12




                                                                                                                                         .12
       .09




                                                                         .09




                                                                                                                                            .09
Density




                                                                  Density




                                                                                                                                     Density
    .06




                                                                      .06




                                                                                                                                         .06
    .03




                                                                      .03




                                                                                                                                         .03
    0




                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                         0




             9:00   9:20   9:40   10:00   10:20   10:40   11:00                9:00   9:20   9:40    10:00   10:20   10:40   11:00                9:00   9:20   9:40   10:00   10:20   10:40   11:00




         Notes: Graphs show click traffic of Alipay's Coupon Rush portal. Horizontal axis is time in hhmm (am). Panels show the first event
         (Friday, April 3, 2020) through the sixth event (Friday, May 8, 2020). Highlighted area indicates the period between the Coupon Rush
         event activation (10:00 am) and the moment when the last coupon is claimed. Round 2's traffic dips shortly before the activation time
         in a momentary connection loss due to web traffic overload.




                                                                                                    35
                                   Figure 3. Value of Transaction with Coupon Redemption (Subsidized) and without Coupon Redemption (Unsubsidized)

                              A. Dining                                                                                       B. Shopping                                                                                        C. Gym
                   [¥30 off ¥90+] [¥70 off ¥210+]                                                                   [¥20 off ¥60+] [¥30 off ¥90+]                                                                     [¥10 off ¥25+] [¥30 off ¥75+]
            .3




                                                                                                         .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .3
                    Subsidized transactions                                                                         Subsidized transactions                                                                           Subsidized transactions
            .2




                                                                                                         .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .2
     Fraction




                                                                                                  Fraction




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Fraction
            .1




                                                                                                         .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .1
            0




                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                 0-10             50-60             100-110         150-160      200-210   240+               0-5                25-30             50-55           75-80           100-105   120+               0-5                    25-30               50-55              75-80    100+
            .3




                                                                                                         .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .3
                    Unsubsidized transactions                                                                       Unsubsidized transactions                                                                         Unsubsidized transactions
            .2




                                                                                                         .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .2
     Fraction




                                                                                                  Fraction




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Fraction
            .1




                                                                                                         .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .1
            0




                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                 0-10             50-60             100-110         150-160      200-210   240+               0-5                25-30             50-55           75-80           100-105   120+               0-5                    25-30               50-55              75-80    100+
                                                 Transaction value (yuan)                                                                       Transaction value (yuan)                                                                          Transaction value (yuan)




                             D. Lodging                                                                                                     E. Book                                                                                    F. Cellphone
36




                   [¥30 off ¥90+] [¥70 off ¥210+]                                                                                        [¥25 off ¥50+]                                                                             [¥200 off ¥2,000+]
            .4




                                                                                                         .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .8
                    Subsidized transactions                                                                         Subsidized transactions                                                                           Subsidized transactions
            .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .6
                                                                                                         .4
     Fraction




                                                                                                  Fraction




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Fraction
        .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                       .4
                                                                                                         .2
            .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .2
            0




                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                 0-10         50-60           100-110     150-160      200-210   250-260   300+               0-5                    25-30                 50-55           75-80             100+               0-200                       1,000-1,200             2,000-2,200       3,000+
            .4




                                                                                                         .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .8




                    Unsubsidized transactions                                                                       Unsubsidized transactions                                                                         Unsubsidized transactions
            .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .6
                                                                                                         .4
     Fraction




                                                                                                  Fraction




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Fraction
        .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                       .4
                                                                                                         .2
            .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                           .2
            0




                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                 0-10         50-60           100-110     150-160      200-210   250-260   300+               0-5                    25-30                 50-55           75-80             100+               0-200                       1,000-1,200             2,000-2,200       3,000+
                                                 Transaction value (yuan)                                                                       Transaction value (yuan)                                                                          Transaction value (yuan)




           Notes: Graphs show distributions of transaction value by whether a coupon was redeemed ("subsidized transaction"). For each subsidized transaction, we randomly
           match it with a transaction that didn't involve coupon redemption and occurred at the same merchant on the same day ("unsubsidized transaction"). Panels correspond
           to different coupon categories. Coupon specifications (e.g., ¥30 off purchase over ¥90) are listed in the panel title. Vertical dashed lines mark the coupons' minimum
           consumption requirements.
                              Figure 4. Coupon-Winning and Subsequent Week's Spending
                                       A. Coupon-winning and coupon redemption




                                                   1
                                                                                                                Winning
                                                                                                                Redemption



                                                   .75
                                         Fraction
                                            .5     .25
                                                   0




                                                               <-5   -5 to 0   0 to 5    5 to 10   10 to 15   15 to 20   >20
                                                                           Minutes since coupons ran out


                                                           B. Spending in the subsequent week
                                                   1500




                                                                                                              Out-of-pocket
                                                                                                              Unsubsidized
                                                        1250
                                           Spending (yuan)
                                         1000      750




                                                               <-5   -5 to 0   0 to 5    5 to 10   10 to 15   15 to 20   >20
                                                                           Minutes since coupons ran out


Notes: Graphs show coupon-winning, redemption, and subsequent week's spending as a function of relative time of a user's first attempt
to click and log onto the Coupon Rush portal during the event day (0 = the minute when the last coupon was claimed). Over 0.95
million users (out of 1.57 million participants) fall in the "-5 to 0" and "0 to 5" minute bins. "Winning" is the fraction of users winning
at least one coupon. "Redemption" is the fraction of users redeeming at least one coupon. "Out-of-pocket" spending is total spending
minus the portion paid by the coupon. "Unsubsidized" spending is total spending excluding transactions that redeemed any coupon.




                                                                                        37
                                 Figure 5. Coupon Rush Participants' User Characteristics
                                                        A. Age




                                                       45
                                                       40
                                         Age
                                         35            30
                                                       25


                                                                      <-5   -5 to 0   0 to 5    5 to 10   10 to 15   15 to 20   >20
                                                                                  Minutes since coupons ran out


                                                                                      B. Gender
                                                       1
                                                       .75
                                         Fraction female
                                                .5     .25
                                                       0




                                                                      <-5   -5 to 0   0 to 5    5 to 10   10 to 15   15 to 20   >20
                                                                                  Minutes since coupons ran out


                                       C. Account weekly average cash inflow in 2019
                                                       1500
                                         Weekly cash inflows (yuan)
                                          1000         750 1250




                                                                      <-5   -5 to 0   0 to 5    5 to 10   10 to 15   15 to 20   >20
                                                                                  Minutes since coupons ran out


Notes: Graphs show age, gender, Alipay account cash inflow (i.e., a proxy of wealth) as a function of relative time of a user's first attempt
to click and log onto the Coupon Rush portal during the event day (0 = the minute when the last coupon was claimed). Over 0.95
million users (out of 1.57 million participants) fall in the "-5 to 0" and "0 to 5" minute bins.



                                                                                               38
                                    Figure 6. Event-Time Trends in Weekly Spending
                                               A. Out-of-pocket spending




                                                     1500      1200
                                        Weekly spending (yuan)
                                           600       900
                                                     300




                                                                            Winners (-5 to 0 minutes)
                                                                            Non-winners (0 to 5 minutes)
                                                     0




                                                                      -10     -8       -6       -4       -2     0   2
                                                                                      Weeks since coupon rush


                                                                            B. Unsubsidized spending
                                                     1500      1200
                                        Weekly spending (yuan)
                                           600       900
                                                     300




                                                                            Winners (-5 to 0 minutes)
                                                                            Non-winners (0 to 5 minutes)
                                                     0




                                                                      -10     -8       -6       -4       -2     0   2
                                                                                      Weeks since coupon rush


Notes: Graphs show weekly spending as a function of weeks relative to the Coupon Rush event. The underlying data is a balanced panel
of users who participated in each of the six rounds of coupon rush events. For each round, the data include participants who logged onto
the Coupon Rush portal -5 to 0 minutes (winners) and 0 to 5 minutes (non-winners) since the moment when coupons ran out. The lines
represent weekly spending of these two groups of users averaged across six rounds of coupon rush events. Event week "0" represents
the Coupon Rush event. Both winning and non-winning trends control for serial correlation in coupon treatment (i.e., winning coupons
in previous and future rounds) by removing subsidized transactions in pre and post periods. "Out-of-pocket" spending is total spending
minus the portion paid by the coupon. "Unsubsidized" spending is total spending excluding transactions that redeemed any coupon.




                                                                                             39
              Figure 7. Heterogeneous Effects of Winning a Coupon on Subsequent Week's Spending
                                                     A. Age




                                                               400
                                                                                                                                      Out-of-pocket
                                                                                                                                      Unsubsidized




                                           Effect of coupon on spending (yuan)
                                               100          2000       300



                                                                                 <20       20 to 29      30 to 39      40 to 49    50 to 59    60+
                                                                                                               Age groups


                                                                                                       B. Gender
                                                               400




                                                                                                                                      Out-of-pocket
                                                                                                                                      Unsubsidized
                                           Effect of coupon on spending (yuan)
                                               100         200 0       300




                                                                                                  male                            female
                                                                                                                    Gender


                                      C. Account weekly average cash inflow in 2019
                                                               400




                                                                                       Out-of-pocket
                                                                                       Unsubsidized
                                           Effect of coupon on spending (yuan)
                                               100          2000       300




                                                                                           34            189            484         1,127      6,173
                                                                                                Deciles of weekly cash inflow (yuan)


Notes: Graphs report interaction coefficients of coupon-winning and indicators for user characteristics group. "Out-of-pocket spending"
is total spending minus the portion paid by the coupon. "Unsubsidized spending" is total spending excluding transactions that redeemed
any coupon. Panel C horizontal axis shows mean weekly cash inflow within decile bins. Bars show 95% confidence interval constructed
using standard errors clustered at the user level.




                                                                                                               40
            Figure 8. Shopping Merchants' Weekly Customer Distributions by Coupon-Winning Status
                                           A. By revenue in 2019
                                                                                                               Winners,




                                                .1
                                                                                                      redeeming coupons




                                                .08
                                                           Winners,
                                                           not redeeming coupons




                                                     .06
                                             Fraction
                                          .04
                                                             Non-winners




                                                .02
                                                0


                                                                 30.7          56.4        94.0        169       3,050
                                                                        Deciles of y2019 revenue (1000 yuan)


                                                     B. By transaction volume in 2019
                                                .1




                                                             Winners,
                                                .08




                                                             not redeeming coupons
                                                     .06
                                             Fraction




                                                             Winners,
                                                             redeeming coupons
                                          .04   .02




                                                             Non-winners
                                                0




                                                                1,516         2,356       3,503      5,648      51,987
                                                                         Deciles of y2019 customer volume


                                                                    C. By price in 2019
                                                .1




                                                                                                               Winners,
                                                                                                      redeeming coupons
                                                .08




                                                           Winners,
                                                           not redeeming coupons
                                                     .06
                                             Fraction
                                          .04




                                                             Non-winners
                                                .02
                                                0




                                                                 8.6         16.8        24.7        44.0        434.3
                                                                Deciles of y2019 price (revenue per transaction)


Notes: Graphs report distributions of firm's weekly customer distributions by coupon-winning status. "Non-winners" are fraction of
customers that participated in the week's Coupon Rush but did not win any coupon. "Winners, not redeeming coupons" are fraction
of customers that won coupon(s), but did not make any coupon-eligible transactions. "Winners, redeeming coupons" are fraction of
customers that won coupon(s), and made coupon-eligible transactions. "Price" is defined by the firm's average revenue per transaction
in year 2019.




                                                                                     41
 Figure 9. Numerical Example of the Conceptual Model: Alternative Coupon Minimum Spending Requirements
                                          A. Consumer spending
            .4




                                                                                 .4




                                                                                                                                                     .4
                                                        No coupon                                                            No coupon                                                             No coupon
                                                        [¥15 off ¥45+]                                                       [¥10 off ¥30+]                                                        [¥5 off ¥15+]
            .3




                                                                                 .3




                                                                                                                                                     .3
     Fraction




                                                                          Fraction




                                                                                                                                              Fraction
        .2




                                                                             .2




                                                                                                                                                 .2
            .1




                                                                                 .1




                                                                                                                                                     .1
            0




                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                     0
                 15            30           45                                        15            30           45                                       15            30           45
                             Transaction value (yuan)                                             Transaction value (yuan)                                            Transaction value (yuan)



                                                                         B. Merchants' customer distribution
            1




                                                                                 1




                                                                                                                                                     1
                 [¥15 off ¥45+]                                                       [¥10 off ¥30+]                                                      [¥5 off ¥15+]
            .8




                                                                                 .8




                                                                                                                                                     .8
            .6




                                                                                 .6




                                                                                                                                                     .6
     Fraction




                                                                          Fraction




                                                                                                                                              Fraction
            .4




                                                                                 .4




                                                                                                                                                     .4
            .2




                                                                                 .2




                                                                                                                                                     .2
            0




                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                     0




                      1           2           3             4                              1           2           3             4                             1           2           3             4
                          Choice set (4=most expensive)                                        Choice set (4=most expensive)                                       Choice set (4=most expensive)



Notes: This figure shows results from a simulation of our conceptual model with alternative coupon designs. Panel A shows the distribution
of consumer spending. Panel B shows the fraction of customers redeeming coupons by merchant type. See Section 5.2 for more details.




                                                                                                        42
                                                 Table 1. Summary Statistics
                                                                         (1)            (2)             (3)
                     User log-on time window (minutes):                 [-5,5]        (­,20]            All

                     A. Panel

                     Total spending                                 1,035.29         1,038.64   1,057.82
                                                                   [10,634.45]     [10,493.67] [6,662.11]
                     Coupon: any                                        0.324          0.307          0.300
                     Coupon: dining                                     0.134          0.127          0.125
                     Coupon: shopping                                   0.310          0.294          0.287
                     Coupon: gym, travel                                0.051          0.049          0.048
                     Coupon: books, digital                             0.021          0.020          0.019
                     Observations                                     5,753,520     5,944,530       9,390,690

                     B. Repeated cross-sections

                     Total spending                                    1,300.06      1,298.05       1,296.39
                                                                      [6,715.09]    [6,677.17]     [6,669.66]
                     Coupon: any                                        0.744          0.732          0.726
                     Coupon: dining                                     0.305          0.304          0.301
                     Coupon: shopping                                   0.711          0.701          0.695
                     Coupon: gym, travel                                0.117          0.117          0.116
                     Coupon: books, digital                             0.047          0.047          0.046
                     Age                                                36.55          36.52          36.53
                                                                       [11.57]        [11.58]        [11.58]
                     Female                                             0.601          0.599          0.598
                     Weekly cash inflow (y2019)                        1.099.81      1,103.37       1,104.29
                                                                      [3,865.38]    [3,884.62]     [3,903.85]
                     Observations                                     2,473,939     2,567,066       2,590,146

Notes: Panel data (panel A) include all Coupon Rush participants (i.e., users who participated in at least one round of Coupon Rush)
over six weeks. Repeated cross-section data (panel B) include Coupon Rush participants during weeks in which they actually participated
in the event. In panel B column (1), observation numbers are 2,470,699 ("Age"), 2,473,939 ("Female"), and 2,075,636 ("Weekly cash
inflow"). For these variables, similar variations in observations exist for columns 2-3 depending on data availability. Spending variables
are in CNY. 1000 CNY  144 USD in 2019.




                                                                 43
                     Table 2. The Effect of Winning a Coupon on Subsequent Week's Spending
                                                              (1)              (2)             (3)

                           Total spending                   303.61           283.69          299.34
                                                            (11.46)          (11.28)         (5.13)

                           Out-of-pocket spending           224.76           225.36          225.68
                                                            (11.46)          (11.99)         (5.13)

                           Unsubsidized spending             32.16            25.08          49.31
                                                            (11.45)          (11.98)         (5.12)

                           User characteristics                                 
                           User fixed effects                                        
                           Week fixed effects                                        
                           Data structure                repeated CS repeated CS    panel
                           Standard error adjust.           robust      robust   user clst.
                           ¥OOP per ¥1 subsidy               3.07        3.07       3.08
                           No-coupon group mean            1,053.57    1,189.09   1,031.87
                           Observations                   1,679,728   1,679,728  5,753,520

Notes: This table shows regression coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) of spending on an indicator for coupon-winners of
the week. Each cell corresponds to a separate regression. "Out-of-pocket spending" is total spending minus the portion paid by the
coupon. "Unsubsidized spending" is total spending excluding transactions that redeemed any coupon. "User characteristics" include age,
indicator for female, and weekly cash inflow in 2019. "repeated CS" means a repeated cross-section data structure. "user clst." means
the standard error is clustered at the user level. "¥OOP per ¥1 subsidy" shows the amount of out-of-pocket consumption stimuli per 1
CNY of coupon subsidy.




                                                               44
                          Table 3. The Effect of Winning a Coupon on Longer-Term Spending
                                                                  (1)            (2)           (3)
                                                                1-week        3-week         6-week

                               Total spending                   299.34        273.82         240.30
                                                                (5.13)        (9.28)         (13.60)

                               Out-of-pocket spending           225.68        200.30         173.56
                                                                (5.13)        (9.28)         (13.60)

                               Unsubsidized spending            49.31          23.97          20.09
                                                                (5.12)         (9.27)        (13.59)

                               User fixed effects                                     
                               Week fixed effects                                     
                               No-coupon group mean           1,031.87 3,125.67 6,325.56
                               Observations                   5,737,520 5,737,521 2,876,760

Notes: This table shows regression coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) of spending in the next k weeks (including the current
week) on an indicator for coupon-winners of the week. Each cell corresponds to a separate regression. "Out-of-pocket spending" is total
spending minus the portion paid by the coupon. "Unsubsidized spending" is total spending excluding transactions that redeemed any
coupon. Standard errors are clustered at the user level.




                                                                 45
Appendix A. Conceptual Model Details
A.1. Proof of Proposition 1
We make the following observation about consumer spending:

Remark 1. The optimal spending is monotonically increasing in endowment Ei ; total spending increases
for larger n (higher quality).

We characterize the endowment cutoffs E1 < E2 < E3 with the following four groups of consumers.

Group 1. Natural beneficiaries. If a consumer's optimal spending in their original choice set exceeds x
before the introduction of the coupon or with the coupon subsidy, he or she could redeem the coupon
without changing the choice set. The subsidy becomes a lump-sum transfer of endowment. These
consumers are characterized by the following condition:

                                        (E
                                                          o
                                      yo   i + t) =          (E + t)  x
                                                         o +  i

where o denotes the original (no coupon) choice set. According to Remark 1, we could define a cutoff
(lower bound) of this group as E3 which is defined by

                                      (E
                                                      n
                                    yn   3 + t) =        (E + t) = x
                                                     n +  3

where choice set n is defined by En-1  Ei + t < En . Consumers with endowment Ei  E3 belong to
Group 1.

Group 2. Upgraders. For this group of consumers, their spending level is less than the minimum spending
requirement under the current choice set, even with an increase of endowment of t. But if they upgrade to
a higher quality set, it is welfare improving to increase spending above x. These consumers satisfy:

                                         (E
                                                          o
                                       yo   i + t) =         (E + t) < x
                                                         o +  i

  and there exists a choice set j, which satisfies the following conditions:

                                                      j
                                     yj (Ei + t) =       (E + t)  x
                                                     j +  i

                                              j
                            vj (Ei + t) Aj j (o + )o + (Ei + t)j +
                                       =                           1
                               vo (E)    A o  o
                                             o ( + )
                                                    j +     +
                                                          E o
                                                     j              i


                                                         46
From Assumption 1, the with-coupon choice set is thus k = min {j > n}, which is the lowest indexed choice
                                                                   j

set such that the upgrading is welfare-improving. Notice that when endowment gets larger, the expenditure
on the same set j strictly increases. By Assumption 2, there exists a lower bound E2 such that the consumers
with E2  Ei < E3 belong to Group 2.

Group 3. Bunching group. Like group 2, consumers in this group have a spending that is slightly smaller
than the minimum purchase requirement of the coupon even with an increase of endowment of t. But they
may still be willing to increase spending to exactly x in order to redeem the coupon, since the coupon
subsidy could at least cover the welfare loss from the deviating from their optimal choice. Given
Assumption 1, all these consumers will choose set m where xm-1  x < xm , and they satisfy the following
conditions:

                                                              n
                                               (E
                                             yo   i + t) =        (Ei   + t) < x,
                                                              n +

                                                       j
                                       yj (Ei + t) =         (Ei + t) < x,  j  N,
                                                       j +


                              um (x; Ei + t) Am x m (o + )n + (Ei + t - x)
                                            =                       +
                                                                            1,
                                 vo (Ei )     Ao     o n          E o           i


Note Assumption 2 ensures the existence of a lower bound E1 such that all the consumers with E1  Ei <
E2 belong to Group 3.*

Group 4. Non-users. The remaining set of consumers do not belong to any of the above groups, and
increasing consumption to the minimum spending requirement will reduce utility no matter which choice
they pick. Therefore, they choose not to redeem the coupon and keep their original expenditure.

         Note that, overall, coupons induce consumers toward higher quality choice sets (part 5 of
Proposition 1). In particular, group 2 consumers upgrade their choice set to reach the minimum purchase
requirement, i.e., j > o and yj (Ei + t) > x > yo
                                                 (E
                                                    i + t).




*
  We have assumed away the possibility that group 3 consumers will downgrade to a lower-indexed set when given
the coupon treatment. Either of the following two scenarios could rule out the possibility of downgrading: a) The
minimum purchase requirement is sufficiently low such that the optimal expenditure in choice sets with a higher index
than m already exceeds the requirement x; b) consumers whose original choice set has a higher index than m do not
find it welfare-improving to downgrade to choice set m to redeem the coupon.
                                                         47
A.2. Proof of Proposition 2
The consumers who will use the coupon while remaining in the original choice set are characterized by

                                           (E
                                                          n
                                         yn   i + t) =       (E + t)  x
                                                         n +  i

                                             En-1  Ei < Ei + t < En

These conditions still hold when x decreases, so the fraction of consumers who could use the coupon while
keeping their original quality level will not decrease.

Only Group 4 consumers were not able to use the coupon. Therefore, to show that relaxing the minimum
spending requirement x weakly increases the total coupon redemption rate, it suffices to show there will be
no more Group 4 consumers when x decreases. We have shown that the size of Group 1 consumers will
never decrease. Group 2 consumers satisfy:

                                           (E
                                                          o
                                         yo   i + t) =       (E + t) < x
                                                         o +  i

                                          
                                                          j
                                         yk (Ei + t) =       (E + t)  x
                                                         j +  k

                                               
                              vk (Ei + t) Ak k k (o + )o + (Ei + t)k+
                                         =                            1
                                vo (E)     A o o
                                                 o (       +
                                                     k + ) k
                                                                 +
                                                              E o      i

                                                                                    o
The second and third conditions still hold when x gets smaller. If yo
                                                                     (E
                                                                        i + t) =          (Ei + t) < x no longer
                                                                                    o +

holds, those consumers will move to Group 1, who are still able to redeem the coupon.

Group 3 satisfies the following condition:

                         um (x; Ei + t) Am x m (o + )o + (Ei + t - x)
                                       =                       +
                                                                      1
                            vo (Ei )     Ao     o o          E o       i


When x decreases, m will reduce to a lower index. If we could show that x m (Ei + t - x) is
monotonically decreasing in x holding m fixed, then this inequality will still hold if m changes.

Since x > ym
            (E
               i + t), we know


                    m x m -1 (Ei + t - x) m Ei + t - x m Ei + t - ym
                                                                    (E
                                                                       i + t)
                                      -1
                                         =            <                       =1
                    x (Ei + t - x)
                        m                       x            ym (Ei + t)

                       m
where ym
        (E
           i + t) =        (Ei   + t). Taking derivative of x m (Ei + t - x) with respect to x, we get
                       m +

                                                         48
                             m x m-1 (Ei + t - x) - x m (Ei + t - x)-1 < 0

                                                                                          um (x;Ei +t)
That is, a smaller x still makes the consumers who originally belong to Group 3 satisfy                   1. The
                                                                                            vo (Ei )

only reason for Group 3 consumers to deviate is to become Group 1 or 2, and thus the fraction of Group 4
will never increase.

        Parts 3 of Proposition 2 follows the arguments above. When the purchase requirement decreases,
the optimal choice set and expenditure under the original coupon requirement scenario are still attainable.
Therefore, a decrease in x will not decrease the utility level of the consumers. From above, we know that
there will be more consumers who can maintain their optimal choice while redeeming the coupon.
Therefore, the utility level is strictly raised for the entire society.




                                                         49
a




    Appendix B. Additional Figures and Tables




                       50
                         Figure B.1. Location of Shaoxing Prefecture and Zhejiang Province




Notes: This map shows location of Zhejiang province (light blue) and the prefecture-city of Shaoxing (deep blue). Lines are provincial
borders.




                                                               51
                 Figure B.2. Consumption Trends by Major Categories, October 2019 - May 2020
                                     1200




                                                                                                        Shopping
                                                                                                        Dining
                                                                                                        All others
                                              900
                         Weekly spending (yuan)
                       300        6000




                                                    Oct 4   Nov 1   Dec 6   Jan 3   Feb 7   Mar 6   Apr 3   May 1
                                                    2019                    2020



Notes: Consumption by receiving merchants' business category. Sample restricts to a balanced panel of all 1.57 million users who
participated in the Coupon Rush events. The two major spikes correspond to the week of the November 11 Singles' Day shopping holiday
and its December 12 spin-off.




                                                                              52
                              Figure B.3. Example Screenshots of The Coupon Rush Portal




Notes: Screenshots show Alipay app's Coupon Rush portal when logged on before it is activated (left, red button text = "Opens at 10"),
after it is activated but before coupons are all gone (middle, red button text = "Claim at no cost"), and after coupons are all gone (right,
red button text = "Out of stock"). English translations were added by the authors. Source: weibo.com.




                                                                  53
                                Figure B.4. Example Screenshot of Coupon Redemption




Notes: This screenshot shows an example transaction of ¥100 that met the requirement of a [¥30 off ¥90+] coupon. English translations
were added by the authors. Source: weibo.com.




                                                               54
                             Figure B.5. Age Distribution of Coupon Program Participants
                               .4




                                        City population
                                        Coupon program participants
                               .3
                            Fraction
                               .2
                               .1
                               0




                                       <20     20 to 29   30 to 39   40 to 49   50 to 59   60+
                                                             Age groups



Notes: City population age distribution is sourced from Shaoxing's 2019 Yearbook.




                                                               55
Figure B.6. The Effect of Winning a Coupon on Weekly Spending: Leads and Lags of Coupon-Winning Status
                                                 300




                                                                                                           Out-of-pocket
                                                                                                           Unsubsidized
                             Effect of coupon on spending (yuan)
                                  0          100 -100    200




                                                                   -3       -2      -1        0       +1      +2       +3
                                                                   Lags (-) and leads (+) of weekly coupon-winning status



Notes: This figure reports a version of the main panel estimation (equation 1) with additional controls for three leads and three lags of the
coupon-winning indicator 1(Coupon)it . "Out-of-pocket" spending is total spending minus the portion paid by the coupon. "Unsubsidized"
spending is total spending excluding transactions that redeemed any coupon. Bars show 95% confidence interval constructed using
standard errors clustered at the user level.




                                                                                         56
         Figure B.7. Heterogeneous Effects of Winning a Coupon by Monthly Average Spending in 2019
                                                400




                                                                  Out-of-pocket
                                                                  Unsubsidized
                            Effect of coupon on spending (yuan)
                                100          2000       300




                                                                      486         1,671        3,039     5,304   14,950
                                                                            Deciles of monthly spending (yuan)

Notes: Graphs report interaction coefficients of coupon-winning and indicators for user's 2019 monthly average spending on Alipay.
"Out-of-pocket spending" is total spending minus the portion paid by the coupon. "Unsubsidized spending" is total spending excluding
transactions that redeemed any coupon. Horizontal axis shows midpoints of decile bins. Bars show 95% confidence interval constructed
using standard errors clustered at the user level.




                                                                                          57
            Figure B.8. Dining Merchants' Weekly Customer Distributions by Coupon-Winning Status
                                           A. By revenue in 2019




                                                .1
                                                .08
                                                           Winners,
                                                           not redeeming coupons




                                                     .06
                                             Fraction
                                          .04
                                                             Non-winners




                                                .02
                                                                        Winners,
                                                0                       redeeming coupons



                                                                 44.3          98.6         190        402       4,690
                                                                        Deciles of y2019 revenue (1000 yuan)


                                                     B. By transaction volume in 2019
                                                .1




                                                             Winners,
                                                .08




                                                             not redeeming coupons
                                                     .06
                                             Fraction




                                                             Winners,
                                                             redeeming coupons
                                          .04   .02




                                                                                                         Non-winners
                                                0




                                                                1,173         1,802       2,902      5,193      32,343
                                                                         Deciles of y2019 customer volume


                                                                    C. By price in 2019
                                                .1
                                                .08




                                                           Winners,
                                                           not redeeming coupons
                                                     .06
                                             Fraction




                                                             Non-winners
                                          .04   .02




                                                                        Winners,
                                                                        redeeming coupons
                                                0




                                                                19.0         33.0        54.7       122.0        1,195
                                                                Deciles of y2019 price (revenue per transaction)


Notes: Graphs report distributions of firm's weekly customer distributions by coupon-winning status. "Non-winners" are fraction of
customers that participated in the week's Coupon Rush but did not win any coupon. "Winners, not redeeming coupons" are fraction
of customers that won coupon(s), but did not come in to make any coupon-eligible transactions. "Winners, redeeming coupons" are
fraction of customers that won coupon(s), and came in to make coupon-eligible transactions. "Price" is defined by the firm's average
revenue per transaction in year 2019.




                                                                                     58
                        Table B.1. The Effect of Winning a Coupon on Coupon Redemption
                                                         (1)               (2)             (3)
                                                   1(redemption)     ¥redemption      ¥redemption

                       Coupon: any                     0.859             73.31
                                                      (0.0003)           (0.06)
                       Coupon: dining                                                     73.03
                                                                                          (0.08)
                       Coupon: shopping                                                   40.51
                                                                                          (0.03)
                       Coupon: gym, travel                                                15.84
                                                                                          (0.18)
                       Coupon: books, digital                                             94.81
                                                                                          (0.02)

                       User fixed effects                                                   
                       Week fixed effects                                                   
                       Observations                  5,753,520         5,753,520        5,753,520

Notes: Each column shows a separate regression. Outcome variable is if any coupon is redeemed in the subsequent week (column 1),
and the amount of subsidy (columns 2-3). Standard errors are clustered at the user level.




                                                            59
               Table B.2. Effect of Winning a Coupon on Subsequent Week's Spending: Robustness
                                                                (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)
                User log-on time window (minutes):             [-5,5]       [-10,10]       (­,10]        (­,20]

                Panel A: Spending (panel)

                Total spending                                299.34        298.30        296.49         296.62
                                                              (5.13)        (5.13)        (5.09)         (5.09)

                Out-of-pocket spending                        225.68        225.02        223.65         223.77
                                                              (5.13)        (5.12)        (5.08)         (5.08)

                Unsubsidized spending                         49.31          49.58         49.27         49.36
                                                              (5.12)         (5.11)        (5.07)        (5.07)

                User fixed effects                                                            
                Week fixed effects                                                            
                No-coupon group mean spending                1,031.87 1,013.33 1,015.11 1,027.23
                Observations                                5,753,520 5,944,530 6,123,804 6,009,042


                Panel B: User characteristics (repeated cross sections)

                Age                                            -0.846        -0.761        -0.818        -0.786
                                                              (0.020)       (0.018)       (0.018)       (0.017)

                Female                                        0.0116        0.0105        0.0119         0.0133
                                                             (0.0009)      (0.0008)      (0.0008)       (0.0008)

                Weekly cash inflow (y2019)                    -22.04         -35.81        -36.92        -36.75
                                                              (6.92)         (6.54)        (6.51)        (6.20)

                Week fixed effects                                                            
                No-coupon group mean age                      36.44     36.33     36.33     36.29
                No-coupon group mean gender                   0.604     0.602     0.602     0.601
                No-coupon group mean cash                    1,117.8   1,125.2   1,125.1   1,125.3
                Observations                                1,679,728 1,935,402 2,046,857 2,099,168

Notes: This table shows regression coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) of spending on an indicator for coupon-winners of
the week using alternative user log-on time windows. For example, "(­,10]" means all users who logged onto the coupon-claiming portal
within 10 minutes after the moment when all coupons are claimed. Each cell corresponds to a separate regression. "Out-of-pocket
spending" is total spending minus the portion paid by the coupon. "Unsubsidized spending" is total spending excluding transactions that
redeemed any coupon.




                                                                60
                          Table B.3. The Effects of Winning a Coupon by Subsidy Category
                                                                (1)           (2)             (3)
                                                              Total          OOP        Unsubsidized

                           Coupon: dining                    268.09        195.79           51.67
                                                             (10.60)       (10.59)         (10.59)
                           Coupon: shopping                   134.61        94.28           15.28
                                                              (5.97)        (5.96)          (5.96)
                           Coupon: gym, lodging               42.74         27.00           -3.76
                                                             (17.75)       (17.75)         (17.74)
                           Coupon: books, cellphone          1042.84       948.62          217.45
                                                             (22.85)       (22.78)         (22.50)

                           User fixed effects                                                 
                           Week fixed effects                                                 
                           No-coupon group mean              1,031.87 1,031.87             1,031.87
                           Observations                     5,753,520 5,753,520           5,753,520

Notes: Each column corresponds to a separate regression. Each coefficient shows the marginal effect of winning a certain type of coupon
on subsequent week's spending. "OOP" spending is total spending minus the portion paid by the coupon. "Unsubsidized" spending is
total spending excluding transactions that redeemed any coupon. Standard errors are clustered at the user level.




                                                                61
