                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE LEVERAGING OF SILICON VALLEY

                                          Jesse Davis
                                         Adair Morse
                                         Xinxin Wang

                                      Working Paper 27591
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27591


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2020




We thank Greg Brown, Diane Denis (discussant), Mike Ewens, Paolo Fulghieri, Juanita
Gonzalez-Uribe, Radha Gopalan (discussant), Will Gornall, Arpit Gupta, Yael Hochberg, Yunzhi
Hu, Josh Lerner, William Mann (discussant), Erwan Morellec (discussant), Ramana Nanda,
Manju Puri (discussant), David Robinson, Luke Stein (discussant), Rick Townsend (discussant),
Daniel Wolfenzon (discussant), Dong Yan (discussant), Alminas Zaldokas (discussant), Wenrui
Zhang (discussant), and seminar participants at the Private Markets Research Conference, NYU
WAPFIN Conference, UNC, UT Dallas Finance Conference, Duke I&E Research Symposium,
BYU Red Rock Conference, NBER Entrepreneurship, Australasian Banking Conference, NZFM
Conference, MFA, Southern California PE Conference, Stanford-Berkeley Joint Seminar, Global
Entrepreneurship and Innovation Research Conference (Darden), EFA, WFA for helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jesse Davis, Adair Morse, and Xinxin Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Leveraging of Silicon Valley
Jesse Davis, Adair Morse, and Xinxin Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 27591
July 2020
JEL No. G24,G32,L26,O3

                                         ABSTRACT

Early-stage firms utilize venture debt in one-third of financing rounds despite their general lack
of cash flow and collateral. In our model, we show how venture debt aligns incentives within a
firm. We derive a novel theoretical channel in which runway extension through debt increases
firm value while potentially lowering closure. Consistent with the model's mechanism, we find
that dilution predicts venture debt issuance. Empirically, treatment with venture debt lowers
closure hazard by 1.6-4.4%and increases successful exits by 4.3-5.3%. Back-of-the-envelope
calculations suggest $41B, or 9.4%of invested capital, remains productive due to venture debt.


Jesse Davis                                     Xinxin Wang
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill     University of North Carolina - Chapel Hill
4116 McColl Building                            4115 McColl Building
Chapel Hill, NC 27599                           Chapel Hill, NC 27599
Jesse_Davis@kenan-flagler.unc.edu               xinxin.wang@anderson.ucla.edu

Adair Morse
University of California, Berkeley
545 Student Services Bldg, #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
morse@haas.berkeley.edu
1     Introduction

Entrepreneurial ventures foster technological development, drive competition, and create
economic growth. Because early-stage entrepreneurs are almost always liquidity-constrained,
the financing of entrepreneurial ventures is an essential determinant of real economic effects.
Economic theory would generally predict that external debt is an unlikely vehicle for the
financing of early-stage startups given their general lack of cash flow and collateral.1 Despite
this, the venture debt market has grown rapidly in recent years. Tykvov´
                                                                       a [2017] finds that
nearly a third of venture-backed companies utilize venture debt, supported by our evidence
herein. In this paper, we provide theoretical foundations on the optimal use of venture debt
and the implications for firm outcomes, which we then take to a survival and exit analysis
across 92,236 rounds of financing.
    To understand how venture debt is utilized, consider the example of EValve, a medical
devices startup. It raised a total of $117 million dollars in both equity and debt finance
and was ultimately acquired by Abbott for $410 million in 2009. Shortly after raising $12
million dollars in a Series B equity round, EValve raised $4 million in venture debt from
Western Technology Investments. After, EValve raised a Series C round of $20 million
dollars followed by another debt round of $10 million dollars (again from WTI).2 When
asked why the company took on debt, Ferolyn Powell, Evalve's CEO stated "by allowing us
to hit a critical milestone with that extra run time, ... our experience was that it paid for
itself by increasing valuation and avoiding dilution."3
    Venture debt is generally structured as a short-term (three-year) loan. While a small
portion of the payoff comes from warrants for company stock, venture debt is primarily a
debt vehicle. This is a notable departure from the now-ubiquitous convertible note contract
(the standard early-stage seed financing contract), whose primary feature is its conversion
    1
      Hochberg et al. [2018] and Gonz´alez-Uribe and Mann [2017] do document a role for intellectual property
in lending to start-ups; however, the startup ecosystem contains many firms without such assets (or assets
of sufficient value), leaving the ubiquity of venture debt a puzzle.
    2
      http://splitrock.com/2004/05/25/evalve-raises-20-million/
    3
      https://www.wsgr.com/news/medical device/pdf/venture-debt.pdf



                                                     1
to equity at a later stage. It also does not resemble traditional debt loans in that it is a debt
instrument for venture equity-backed companies that commonly lack either collateralizable
assets or cash flows.4 Instead, venture debt is secured (with uncertainty) by future rounds
of equity finance. Industry proponents argue that venture debt's primary role is to provide
capital to extend the runway of a startup, allowing them to achieve the next milestone
while minimizing equity dilution for both the founders and equity investors. The argument,
however, that venture debt is used to avoid dilution is inconsistent with Modigliani and
Miller [1958], who show that the value of the firm should be unaffected by whether the
firm is financed using debt or equity. Our model captures the crucial intuition that venture
debt helps startups avoid dilution but deviates from M&M by introducing a principal-agent
problem between an entrepreneur and an insider (incumbent) venture capitalist.
       In the model, a startup owns an intangible asset of uncertain quality. We analyze the
firm's financing and strategy decisions within a staging interval. The firm is owned by an
entrepreneur ("he") and an insider venture capitalist ("she"): both are risk-neutral. At the
start of the stage, the firm must raise capital to avoid closure, e.g., to pay employees or cover
expansion expenses. Within the stage, the firm observes a signal about the likelihood it will
achieve its milestone. At the end of the stage, the firm's current valuation is revealed, and
the firm raises the next round of capital needed for survival, if possible.
       The venture capitalist decides which securities to issue (equity and/or venture debt) and
when to raise capital. She can either raise the capital required to reach the next stage
or she can extend the startup's runway and raise what is needed to observe the milestone
signal. After the signal is revealed, the firm raises any remaining required capital and the
entrepreneur implements the firm's strategy. The firm has access to a set of strategies
that increase both expected firm value and the riskiness of the firm's valuation. When the
entrepreneur chooses chooses the firm's strategy, he accounts for the strategy's impact on
   4
    While venture debt is distinct from traditional bank loans, the latter has also been documented to be
an important source of capital for young firms. Robb and Robinson [2014] finds that nascent firms heavily
rely on external debt and that firms with bank finance have greater likelihood of success.




                                                   2
both the value of his equity claim as well as the non-pecuniary utility he derives from his
control rights. This additional, non-pecuniary utility creates a wedge between the venture
capitalist's and entrepreneur's incentives.5 When the entrepreneur's stake is excessively
diluted, and when the marginal benefit of risk-taking is low, he chooses the low-risk (low-
value) strategy. In contrast, the VC always prefers the high-risk (high-value) strategy and
so makes her financing decisions to incent the entrepreneur to choose the value-maximizing
strategy.
    We show that venture debt can help the VC achieve her objective through two channels,
thus providing us with a foundation for how debt can increase value in early-stage firms.
First, we show that by issuing debt at the start of the stage, the venture capitalist can
increase the entrepreneur's skin-in-the-game. As a result, his payoff is more sensitive to
his strategy choice, which increases the marginal benefit of risk-taking. This result is the
standard levered equity channel of debt. While this channel is well-known in the literature,
the application of this channel to the staged finance ecosystem is unique to our model.
    Second, we derive a novel theoretical channel through which runway extension, in com-
bination with debt, can increase firm value: the "anti-dilution" channel. By extending the
runway, the venture capitalist delays raising capital with the hope that the signal reveals
good news. If positive information is revealed, the remaining required capital can be raised
less expensively. This reduces the dilution experienced by the entrepreneur, thereby incen-
tivizing him to implement the high-risk (high-value) strategy. On the other hand, extending
the runway also creates the possibility of failure if good news fails to materialize. Even with
this potential downside, we show that, in some cases, venture debt is strictly preferable from
the venture capitalist's perspective. We emphasize the distinction between the two channels:
a runway loan can align incentives even after the debt has been repaid because it allows the
firm to raise (relatively) cheap equity when good news is revealed.
   5
     This wedge utilizes the well-documented fact that while both venture capitalists and entrepreneurs seek
to maximize firm value, venture capitalists often prefer higher volatility in their investments relative to
entrepreneurs. Qualitatively similar results would arise in the canonical setting where the entrepreneur
bears some private cost (e.g., effort) from implementing the high-value strategy.



                                                     3
   The model generates several testable predictions, setting up our empirical analysis and
facilitating our interpretation of the role of leveraging for the innovation economy. Because
venture debt aligns the entrepreneur's incentives with the firm's, it increases both the ex-
pected value of the firm, conditional on survival, and long-term survival rates. Runway
extension generates additional closure risk since the realization of a low milestone signal
may lead the firm to shut down before the end of the stage. The model also provides insight
into the conditions under which venture debt is most likely to be utilized. First, all else
equal, venture debt is more likely to be optimal when the entrepreneur faces high potential
dilution. Second, we expect to see venture debt utilized by firms when the required runway
is shorter as this increases the benefit of delaying the capital raise until good news has been
revealed.
   We gather 92,236 Crunchbase rounds of financing and track these rounds over 449,134
round-survival year observations, using the lack of news information as a supplement to
identify closures. As in the theory, we differentiate between venture debt used to extend the
runway (runway loans), and debt used in conjunction with equity (levered equity). In our
baseline model, applying a loglogistic survival model, we find that the use of levered equity
and runway loans positively increases the odds of survival. This estimate levels firms on
quality by the level of current and prior investment, the pre-money valuation, the number
of employees, year, industry, and reputation of the investor firm. The effect is robust across
seed and series A-C rounds. This baseline effect has a 3.8 times greater effect on the log odds
of survival for levered equity as compared to runway loans, consistent with the prediction
that runway loans create an added layer of closure risk.
   Despite the baseline efforts to control for quality, residual concerns remain that selection
into treatment might drive our results. Thus, we implement what is referred to in biostatistics
as a frailty survival model. Frailty models allow for estimation of "how frail" a subject is
in selecting into treatment for a medical therapy, and is a standard biostatistic way of
absorbing subject-level heterogeneity for parametric survival function estimation. In our



                                              4
case, since we have multiple rounds of financing per company, we can apply such a model
to implement a "within" analysis to disentangle firm-level selection from treatment. We
use such language throughout, with the caveat that there may be other time-varying firm
attributes that correlate with the choice of capital structure. However, for robustness, we
also show that an estimation of the frailty model that accounts for frailty at the firm-capital
structure level yields similar results.6
    Our main survival estimation shows that selection accounts for 60% of the effect, on
average, across debt types and staging. Nevertheless, the issuance of debt positively and
significantly impacts survival even after controlling for frailty. The treatment of levered
equity results in a 0.044 lower hazard of closure each year, and the treatment of runway
loans results in a 0.016 lower hazard of closure each year. The optimal use of early-stage
leverage suggests an increase in the productive risk-taking within the innovation economy
as venture debt provides a valuable channel through which closure is reduced for early-stage
firms. A back of the envelope calculation applying the predicted survival function by stage
and survival time suggests that, of the $439 billion in invested capital in our sample, an
additional $41.1 billion remains productive because of the change in strategy induced by
debt.
    Next, we show that conditional on surviving, firms that raise capital through levered eq-
uity or runway loans have better exit outcomes. Following the spirit of our proportional odds
survival model, we model exits in an ordered logit with the descending order: IPO, acquisi-
tion with price, acquisition without price disclosure, and ongoing. In addition, we consider
a mixed logit (random effects) model of any exit relative to ongoing. Interpreting this latter
model, which again allows us to alleviate selection by controlling for firm-level heterogeneity,
we find that levered equity (runway loan) increases the likelihood of an acquisition or IPO
exit by 0.71% (0.88%). Given that only 16.52% of the startup-round observations eventually
   6
     For example, a lingering concern may be that time-varying firm quality affects both capital structure
and survival. The firm-capital structure frailty model accounts for this unobserved heterogeneity by allowing
the frailty (the random factor) to vary not only across firms, but across the capital structure (runway loan,
levered equity, equity) of a particular firm.



                                                     5
exit via acquisition or IPO, this corresponds to a 4.3% (5.3%) percentage increase.
   We discuss several alternative mechanisms that could potentially push startups to utilize
venture debt, including asymmetric information. We argue that the patterns of utilization
and the impact on outcomes do not necessarily arise given such frictions: for instance, we are
unlikely to find a reduction in closures if startups are utilizing venture debt and engaging in
risk-shifting. However, in light of these alternatives, we bolster our support for the proposed
mechanism by analyzing whether the model's proposed mechanism is consistent with the
data. We show that, consistent with the model's predictions, potential dilution is a strong
predictor of the decision to raise venture debt instead of venture equity. A one standard
deviation increase in dilution increases the likelihood of levered equity issuance, sample-
weighted across series, by 1.83%, which is a 3.89% increase relative to the sample mean.
Similarly, dilution significantly and positively predicts the use of runway loans in early-
stage rounds. Both entrepreneurs and investors value "skin-in-the-game" and the additional
capital provided by a venture loan allows startups to achieve more progress before raising
additional equity. Further, if good information is revealed about the firm's prospects, runway
extension through venture debt minimizes the dilution that occurs relative to securing all
required external capital at an earlier time.
   Our evidence also supports the model's intuition of venture debt as a tool for extending
the firm's runway. Theoretically, as the required runway shrinks (i.e., as the required time
until information about the firm's prospects are revealed), venture debt becomes a more
valuable product. While we cannot obtain an ex-ante measure of this required runway,
we show that the expected time until the next round of financing decreases after venture
debt issuance. After controlling for the firm's prior use of capital, the use of a runway
loan decreases the days until the next round of financing by 13.3%, sample-weighted across
stages, or 46 days. This suggests that, consistent with industry intuition, such firms are
using venture debt as an extension (having failed to reach a needed milestone) and that they
return to the market after more information is revealed about the firm's future prospects.



                                                6
   Our research adds to the current finance literature in several areas. While equity is
the dominant form of financing for high-growth startups (Kortum and Lerner [2000], there
is a growing literature documenting the use of venture debt. The existing literature has
focused on determinants of the lending decision. Hellmann et al. [2008] argue that banks
use their venture capital investments to build relationships for their future lending activi-
ties. de Rassenfosse and Fischer [2016] finds that venture capitalist backing is a substitute
for startups cash flow in the lending decision while Hochberg et al. [2018] documents that
venture capitalist credibility is an important driver of venture lending. Gonz´
                                                                              alez-Uribe and
Mann [2017] provides contract-level data on venture loans and finds that intellectual capital
and warrants are important features. These results support the earlier market survey by
Ibrahim [2010] who finds that venture debt provides additional runway between early-stage
rounds and are repaid through future equity raises. Similarly, his research also points to the
importance of intellectual property as collateral for the loan. Missing from this, however, is
a consideration of the risk implications of the leveraging of venture capital funded startups.
Our paper documents the impact of venture debt on startup outcomes comparable to the ex-
tensive literature studying the effect of venture equity on firm outcomes (e.g. Lindsey [2008],
Chemmanur et al. [2011], Puri and Zarutskie [2012], Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf [2013], Kerr
et al. [2014], Bottazzi et al. [2016] and Bernstein et al. [2016]).
   Secondly, our paper contributes to the broader literature on venture capital contracting
and the financing of high growth startups. Kaplan and Str¨
                                                         omberg [2003, 2004], Hsu [2004],
Cumming [2008], and Bengtsson and Sensoy [2011] explore VC contracting and the economics
behind contractual terms. Gornall and Strebulaev [2020]shows the importance of contractual
terms in firm valuation. Ewens et al. [2020] model the endogenous matching between venture
capitalists and entrepreneurs and the resulting equilibrium contract terms. Our paper, on
the other hand, documents a different mechanism for accessing financial markets and thus,
a different set of incentives for investors and entrepreneurs.
   On the theoretical side, several papers have highlighted how staged financing can improve



                                                7
firm value in the presence of moral hazard, including Wang and Zhou [2004] and Bergemann
and Hege [1998].7 Our model shares the existing literature's emphasis on the importance
of moral hazard and staging. However, we prove the existence of a new theoretical channel
through which debt, in combination with runway extension, can preserve the entrepreneur's
skin-in-the-game, aligning his incentives with the firm's. This runway extension channel
also sets our model apart from the existing theoretical literature, e.g., Innes [1990], that
emphasizes the security design benefits of debt in the presence of moral hazard. This channel
is also distinct from the benefits of convertible debt, as analyzed in Cornelli and Yosha [2003],
Schmidt [2003], and Yang and Zeng [2019].8 Recently, both Fulghieri et al. [forthcoming]
and Malenko and Tsoy [2020]) have shown that equity financing may be preferable for early-
stage firms who then turn to debt financing when they mature.9 We note that, while venture
debt commonly follows an equity round, these debt rounds are then followed by more equity
financing, a feature that is difficult to reconcile with the predictions of either paper.10
        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We describe the institutional details
in 2. We present the model and develop testable empirical predictions in Section 3. Section 4
describes data sources, sample construction, and presents the main empirical results. Section
5 concludes the paper. All proofs are found in Appendix A.



2         The Venture Debt Market

While debt has traditionally been an important source of external finance for public corpo-
rations, the prominence of debt in the high-risk innovation economy has largely been tied to
    7
     Other papers have considered these features separately: both Casamatta [2003] and Repullo and Suarez
[2004] focus on the financing implications of a two-sided moral hazard problem in which both the venture
capitalist and the entrepreneur can exert effort to improve firm value, while Neher [1999] and Dahiya and
Ray [2012] focus on how stage financing can improve firm outcomes.
   8
     While convertibility features prominently in start-up financing, such securities are typically utilized later,
relative to venture debt, in the firm's life cycle. Moreover, as we discuss below, the warrants included with
venture debt typically constitute a very small portion of the security's value.
   9
     These papers are related to a longer literature establishing conditions under which equity can be optimal
for financing, including Fluck [1998] and Fulghieri and Lukin [2001].
  10
     Specifically, from the perspective of these papers, the difficulty is in explaining the issuance of debt
(which is utilized by mature firms) between equity rounds (which is utilized by early-stage firms).



                                                        8
the fluctuations in the role of fixed assets. Going back in time, trade-related venture assets
such as ships, mills, and resource-processing equipment attracted the interest of creditors
looking for high-yield, risky investments. These assets provided creditors with collateral and
a positive expected cash flow in a determinant time horizon. In the 1970s, venture debt
again rose to prominence with the rise in equipment breakthroughs in the semiconductor,
communications, computer hardware, and military technology industries.
       In the innovation economy of today, however, many startups lack tangible collateral
and positive (if any) cash flow in the short term. In a frictionless market, existing models
suggest that startups characterized by high failure rates, lack of collateralizable assets, and
no cash flows generally do not have access to debt markets.11 Thus, the emergence of a large
market of early-stage venture debt is a bit of a puzzle: what enables startups to overcome
these hurdles? If we look to industry for guidance, it is commonly argued that startups use
venture debt in order to avoid dilution from equity issuance. These arguments purport to
show that the firm faces no downside from delaying their capital raise and potential upside
if positive information is revealed. Yet, under the seminal theory of Modigliani and Miller,
absent any frictions, the value of the firm should be unaffected by whether the firm is financed
by debt or equity. Further, delaying the startup's capital raise also creates the risk that good
news will not be revealed: this would be a negative signal about the firm's prospects that
make raising equity more costly. Taken together, this suggests that understanding the role
of venture debt requires a new model that (i) reconciles the motivation of industry insiders
with economic theory while (ii) incorporating the unique features of venture debt, which we
detail next.12
  11
     Exceptions exist, including some theories that suggest frictions such as asymmetric information or dis-
agreement. As we discuss in our empirical analysis below, however, the predictions of such theories are
largely inconsistent with the firm outcomes we observe in the data. Moreover, asymmetric information, is
generally unable to generate the observed pattern of financing (equity followed by debt followed by equity)
absent strong assumptions on the cyclicality of the information environment.
  12
     It is important to distinguish venture debt from commonly used convertible notes in seed rounds. Al-
though technically the convertible note is debt, the key features of these seed contracts are the features
governing the price of conversion of the note capital to equity shares at the first equity round of finance.
Venture debt, however, is primarily a debt vehicle, albeit with some warrants to provide upside payoffs. The
warrants generate a small fraction of expected payoffs.




                                                     9
2.1       Venture Debt Contracts

Venture debt is structured as short-term loans with sizes ranging from $1-10 million, interest
rates of 10-15%, and term of 24-36 months. As a debt obligation, venture debt is senior
in the priority structure and thus, repaid first in the event of a liquidation or exit. Loans
may include warrants of approximately 5-15% of the loan size, but remain primarily debt
instruments. Ibrahim [2010] 's survey provides a depiction of venture loan contract terms.
       The first unique feature of venture debt is that the source of cash to repay the loans is not
revenues, but rather is the next round of equity financing. According to Silicon Valley Bank,
"Venture debt emphasizes the borrower's ability to raise additional capital to fund growth
and repay the debt." Thus, the decision to provide venture debt capital rests not directly
on the ability of the venture to generate cash flows from revenues, but the ability of the
firm to hit a milestone to convince equity investors to provide stage financing.13 According
to Stephen Levin from Leader Ventures, "such milestones are important in venture debt
because they serve as the basis for a relationship that lenders ideally look for as providing
identifiable targets that can be achieved using debt."
       The second unique feature of venture debt is that because of its reliance on the next
equity financing round, the ability of a startup to raise venture debt relies on the reputation
of VCs in a repeated game (Hochberg et al. [2018]). The insider VC actively participates
in requesting a loan from the venture debt provider. As Andy Hirsch, a venture finance
transaction lawyer, states, "with those seed-stage and Series A companies, lenders look at
the track records of the VCs and assess the company's trajectory as to the likelihood that
there's going to be a Series B; that's really what they are lending against."
  13
    Venture capital valuation is typically based on achieving milestones. Series A, B, C, etc refers to both the
round of financing as well as the development stage of the startup. As the startup achieves major milestones
such as product development or revenue growth, it is rewarded with an increase in valuation. This implies
that raising outside capital immediately following a milestone leads to the least amount of equity dilution.




                                                      10
2.2    Venture Debt Providers

The majority of venture lenders in the United States are either banks or specialty debt funds
(or a similar incentive structure of ever-green vehicles). Top banks participating in venture
lending include Silicon Valley Bank, Square 1 Bank, and Bridge Bank. Investment banks
and financial service companies like Goldman Sachs, Comerica Bank, and Wells Fargo have
also moved into the space. Banks have lower cost of capital, but also face a higher aversion
to risk, stemming from regulation. Ibrahim [2010] attributes banks' incentive to lend to
being able to secure the startup's future banking needs, in line with the relationship banking
literature (see, for example, Hellmann et al. [2008]).
   Venture debt funds include firms such as Horizon Technology Finance, Lighter Capital,
Trinity Capital Investment, and Western Technology Investment. Debt funds are structured
similarly to venture capital funds. They raise capital from limited partners such as institu-
tional investors, endowments, and wealthy individuals. Although their payoff structure is
less risky that venture capital, their investment portfolio is considered riskier than that of
venture banks. Compared to venture banks, debt funds charge higher interest rates, are less
likely to implement financial covenants, and can demand more warrants and other equity-like
add-ons.
   One final feature of industry practice, which we do not model explicitly, is necessary for
the existence of the venture debt market. In our model, firms earn a competitive interest rate
on the loans they make. In practice, many have observed that the price of debt is lower than
would be expected given the failure risk of startups. This is true because of three features.
First, many venture debt (VD) issuers gain future banking services from those startups that
they funded. Second, VD lenders have warrants on the equity of the startup, especially the
VD issuers who are not banking services providers. Third and most importantly, venture
debt contracting is a repeated game between VCs and VD lenders, implying that the VC is
only going to recommend startups to VD lenders if the VC expects survival. We note that
while we do not incorporate these features into our model, their impact would be independent



                                              11
of the economic channel we analyze. Moreover, it is straightforward to show that allowing
for a lower interest rate actually strengthens the impact of the channel we propose.14



3        Model

Our model of the use of venture debt emphasizes the unique features of startup financing.
First, in staged finance, additional rounds of investment are necessary for continuation, as
the firm has not yet reached a maturity where revenues alone can support growth. Thus,
the next round of finance becomes the source of cash to pay off existing debt. Second, the
entrepreneur controls the firm's strategy. While he holds an equity stake, we allows his
strategy choice to depend upon the utility he derives from his control rights. This creates
a potential misalignment with the insider venture capitalist (VC), who always prefers high-
risk/high-value strategies. Third, as is common in practice, it is the VC who controls the
financing decisions due to the drag-along rights found in the previous term sheets.15 The
VC can utilize venture debt to increase the entrepreneur's "skin-in-the-game," which can
incentivize the entrepreneur to choose the VC's preferred strategy.
       Within this unique setting, we analyze the impact of venture debt using both the standard
"levered equity" debt product as well as a novel "runway extension" product. Consistent
with industry intuition but new to the theory literature, this latter channel improves firm
value by allowing the firm to "extend the runway to realize a milestone" signal. We consider
venture debt's impact on startup valuation as well as firm closure rates. Finally, we generate
predictions about the utilization of venture debt given the model's proposed mechanism.
  14
     If early-stage firms are able to borrow at a lower interest rate, this reduces their cost of capital which
would reduce dilution and the risk of closure.
  15
     This is consistent with both the survey evidence from Ibrahim [2010] and Sage [2010].




                                                      12
3.1       Startup Valuation

The model begins at any stage s  {1, ..., N }. We analyze the events within a single staging
interval, i.e., those which occur between stage s and the next stage s + 1. At each stage,
the startup must raise capital from outside investors to continue operations.16 We assume
these required investments {X1 ..., Xs , Xs+1 , ..., XN } are necessary for continuation (to pay
employees and to produce goods or services) and hence treat them as exogenous, given the
firm's industry and product. If the startup fails to make the required investments, it will
shut down with no liquidation value.
       The startup owns an intangible asset which at stage s + 1 has valuation Ys+1 = Y .
Y is a constant which reflects some underlying characteristics of the intangible asset. The
realization of the multiple,  , reflects both the within-stage resolution of uncertainties about
the product and market value as well as information about the startup's likelihood of growth
or closure in the future. In our model,  is revealed at the end of the staging interval,
immediately before the VC needs to raise capital Xs+1 . The distribution of the multiple ( )
is driven by two factors ­ the milestone achievement signal (p) and the riskiness of the firm's
strategy ( ).
       Information on the likelihood of achieving a milestone (p) is revealed in between the
two stages, at s . For example, this information is akin to the firm receiving market signals
from their product launch. For tractability, we model this milestone signal as binary: p 
{ph , pl } , with 0  pl  ph  1,and assume that P [p = ph ], which lies between zero and one,
is known before raising capital at stage s. If the milestone is not achieved before s + 1, which
happens with probability 1 - p, then  = 0 and the firm is shuttered. Otherwise, the firm
hits the milestone and
  16
    The entrepreneur cannot self-finance: he has no wealth or outside labor income. The results would be
unchanged if future equity capital came from the inside venture capitalist, but for ease of exposition (and
consistent with practice), we focus on this setting.




                                                    13
                                        
                                         +          with probability 
                                        
                                  =                 with probability p -             .                         (1)
                                        
                                         - 
                                                    with probability (1 - ) 

         1
where    2
             <  < 1. The riskiness of the firm's strategy,   [0, h ] (where h  pl ), is
chosen after the milestone achievement signal is revealed. The notion is that the startup
either targets a more secure, smaller market ( = 0), or the startup adjusts its product and
revenue model to go after a "unicorn-like" market disruption ( = h ). The latter is much
                                                         1
riskier but yields a higher expected valuation (since  > 2 ). Both the market potential and
firm risk-taking are non-verifiable and thus non-contractable.17 Given ,  determines the
startup's benefit from risk-taking, while  captures the relative likelihood of success of the
risky strategy.18


3.2      Startup Financing and Firm Strategy

The firm is owned by an entrepreneur and an insider VC, both of whom are risk neutral.
Before raising capital at stage s, the insider VC owns a fraction  of the startup, the en-
trepreneur owns 1 - , and no debt is outstanding.19 The assumption that the startup has
no existing debt on its balance sheet simplifies the analysis without affecting the economic
mechanisms analyzed. The price of any equity or debt issued is set such that outside investors
  17
      We also take as given that the entrepreneur cannot be relieved of his role ­ for instance, he may possess
unique human capital, specific to the firm's asset.
   18
      The likelihood that the firm hits the milestone at s + 1, i.e., p, is exogenous and is unaffected by the
firm's within-stage risk-taking,  . However, in practice, p (and its distribution) is likely affected by previous
strategic choices made by the firm. Consistent with this, we interpret  as affecting the firm's valuation
at s + 1, which incorporates its ability to hit future milestones. In a previous version of this paper, we
restricted ourselves to a setting in which the strategy taken was a mean-preserving spread with respect to
                                               1
the distribution  , or equivalently, i.e.,  = 2  . We showed that, when the firm faced the risk of closure at s +1,
such risk-taking can increase the expected value of the firm. Specifically, under our assumptions regarding
the firm's financing requirements, the value of equity was convex in  - as a result, a mean-preserving spread
over the distribution of  increased the expected value of equity.
   19
      The existence of additional investors from previous financing rounds would not change any of the model's
predictions.




                                                        14
break even in expectation, conditional on the information available on that date.20


3.2.1     VC's Financing Decision

The VC decides the startup's capital structure, specifically choosing the extent to which the
startup takes on leverage. Her objective is to maximize her payoff at stage s+1, by setting
the optimal capital structure. At stage s, the startup must raise Xs to survive to the next
stage. The VC can raise the required investment by issuing only equity or use venture debt
in one of two forms:

   1. "Levered equity" venture debt : The startup raises the entire Xs immediately by issuing
        equity along with zero-coupon debt with face value D to be repaid at the start of stage
        s + 1.

   2. "Runway extension" venture debt : The startup extends their runway at the beginning
        of stage s by raising a fraction, Xs ( < 1) of the required capital immediately via a
        loan with face value L > 0. The remaining investment, (1 - )Xs , in addition to the
        required loan repayment, are raised at s after the milestone signal has been revealed.21
        In this case, D = 0.

Let s denote the percentage of the firm sold at stage s to new equity investors, with pro-rata
dilution between the VC and entrepreneur. At stage s +1, the startup must raise its required
investment, Xs+1 , to survive; moreover, if it issued "levered equity" venture debt, it must
also raise sufficient extra capital (D) to repay lenders. Without loss of generality, we assume
the startup does this through the equity market, and thus the startup sells a fraction:


                                                      Xs+1 + D
                                            s+1 =              ,                                            (2)
                                                        Ys
  20
     This is equivalent to assuming (i) competitive capital markets, (ii) risk-neutral investors and (iii) a
perfectly elastic supply of the risk-free asset.
  21
     In a previous version, we also allowed the entrepreneur to extend the runway using equity. We showed
that while this can also be valuable to the venture capitalist, it is not always sufficient to raise firm value,
at which point the VC chooses to use venture debt as we model it here.



                                                      15
of its equity. We assume that, if the firm has successfully reached its milestone, it will be
able to raise the next round of capital at s + 1.22 The VC chooses the firm's capital structure
to maximize the expected payoff from her equity claim at stage s + 1,


                                       (1 - s ) E [(1 - s+1 ) Ys+1 ] .                                     (3)


3.2.2      Entrepreneur's Risk Strategy Choice

The entrepreneur chooses the firm's strategy. In addition to the value of his equity stake, we
assume that the entrepreneur receives non-pecuniary utility from his control rights. Consis-
tent with practice, this occurs if the entrepreneur is sufficiently diluted, i.e., if    . We
model the value of these rights in a stylized fashion, so that at s , after the firm has reached
its milestone, the entrepreneur chooses the firm's strategy,  , to maximize


                     (1 - ) (1 - s ) E [(1 - s+1 ) Ys+1 | p,  ] + bP  >  | p,                              (4)
                               entrepreneur's expected payoff          value of control rights

where b > 0 parameterizes the relative utility received from the entrepreneur's control rights.
This non-pecuniary utility is a source of potential misalignment between the entrepreneur
and the VC. To highlight the role of this friction, we focus on settings where ~ - <  < ~ .23
       It is straightforward to see that the venture capitalist always prefers to take risk, since


                  E [(1 - s+1 ) Ys+1 |p,  ] = p (~
                                                  Y - (Xs+1 + D)) + Y (2 - 1)  .                           (5)
                                                                                     >0

For the entrepreneur, however, this risk-taking increases the likelihood that he will be diluted
  22
     This implies that s+1  1: investors would not contribute funds that exceeded the firm's valuation.
This assumption is consistent with practice - milestones are defined, at least in part, to convey the valuation
necessary to reach the next round. We note that this places an implicit constraint on the amount of venture
debt the firm can issue at stage s, consistent with both practice and our empirical analysis, below.
  23
     If the entrepreneur's control rights were preserved when  =       ~ -  , then the firm's strategy would
not affect the entrepreneur's control rights. If the entrepreneur's control rights were only preserved when
=     ~ +  , then the entrepreneur could only preserve these control rights by taking risk. In both settings,
given his risk-neutrality and since the risky strategy is a positive NPV investment, the would always choose
 = h , regardless of the VC's issuance decision at stage s.




                                                        16
and forced to forfeit his control rights, since


                                    P  >  | p,  = p + ( - 1)  .                                            (6)
                                                                  <0


With this, we state the entrepreneur's trade-off conditions and his optimally chosen strategy.

Lemma 1. Let  (s ) be the entrepreneur's optimal choice of risk as a function of his equity
stake. Then,  (s ) = h if and only if


                                                           b       1-
                                 (1 - ) (1 - s )                             .                             (7)
                                                           Y      2 - 1

Otherwise, he optimally sets  (s ) = 0.

       Intuitively, the entrepreneur only chooses to risk-up (i.e., set  = h ), if he has suffi-
cient "skin-in-the-game", (1 - ) (1 - s ), i.e., if he holds a large enough stake in the firm.
The threshold for taking risk trades off the marginal benefit of risk-taking, Y (2 - 1),
against the marginal utility the entrepreneur's receives from preserving his control rights,
b (1 - ). In the next section, we explore how the use of venture debt can favorably alter the
entrepreneur's incentives by preserving his equity claim.
       The key friction in our model is the private cost borne by the entrepreneur from risk-
taking: if b were zero, the VC and entrepreneur's incentives would always align. We have
chosen to model this private cost as the potential loss of control rights from risk-taking, which
we think captures an important friction within early-stage startups. However, we emphasize
that our results do not rely on this particular modeling assumption and can be generalized to
many other types of private costs.24 For instance, our predictions are robust to an alternative
in which the high-value strategy is not risky ( = 1) but the entrepreneur must bear some
private cost in implementing it, as in the canonical models of moral hazard. While this
  24
    In a previous version of this paper, we also considered an alternative private cost: the disutility experi-
enced by the entrepreneur when the high-value/high-risk strategy leads to increased closure at s + 1. While
we believe that such strategies can play an important role within a given early-stage startup, our empirical
analysis (which shows a reduction in closure) suggests that their aggregate impact is more muted.



                                                      17
cost is often referred to as the "effort" required to implement the new strategy, given our
setting, alternative interpretations are equally appropriate. For example, pursuing the high-
value strategy may force the entrepreneur to forfeit other objectives he valued. These could
include the abandoning the pursuit of a previously-targeted market, letting sustainability
goals lapse, or even a reduction in the entrepreneur's status within the start-up as new
leaders are introduced.


3.3     Financing Solution using "Levered Equity"

Understanding the entrepreneur's propensity to take risk, we now show how the VC uses her
financing decision to influence the strategy, , chosen by the entrepreneur.
   The venture capitalist must raise the required capital (Xs ) at the start of stage s. If she
chooses to issue "levered equity" venture debt, then she issues debt with face value D (to
be repaid at s + 1) plus the raises the additional necessary capital via equity, which requires
the firm to sell an ownership fraction


                                            Xs - P [ > 0] D
                                  s =                            .                         (8)
                                        E [(1 - s+1 ) Y |  (s )]

Note that debt investors must break even in expectation. Since the firm can only repay D if it
successfully achieves its milestone before stage s + 1, debt investors only supply P [ > 0] D
in financing at the start of stage s. Equity investors contribute the rest of the required
capital, Xs - P [ > 0] D, and demand a fraction s of the firm, given their expectation of
the firm's value, E [(1 - s+1 ) Y |  (s )].
   Recall that the VC's objective is to induce the entrepreneur to take risk. If (7) holds when
D = 0, Lemma 1 tells us that the entrepreneur is going to choose the high-risk/high-value
strategy: venture debt cannot improve the startup's value. Suppose instead that this is not
the case. As we show in the proof of Proposition 1, as the face value increases, the firm can
                    s
sell less equity:   D
                        < 0. Thus, the entrepreneur's equity stake, (1 - ) (1 - s ) grows as D




                                                 18
increases. If sufficient debt can be issued, this relaxes the entrepreneur's IC constraint, (7),
inducing him to choose the high-risk/high-value strategy. This theoretical channel is closely
related to well-known security design benefits of debt when a principal is faced with a moral
hazard problem and leads directly to the following proposition.

Proposition 1. If an all-equity issuance at stage s leads to the low-risk strategy, the VC
always prefers to issue "levered equity" venture debt, sometimes strictly.

   Our model provides a unique insight on the relationship between debt and the desirability
of managerial risk-taking. The need to meet a valuation threshold (or milestone), induced
by the entrepreneur's desire to maintain his control rights, creates a setting that rewards any
mechanism (in our case, leverage) that increases the entrepreneur's appetite for risk. This
stands in contrast to the use of levered equity within a mature firm.
   As discussed in our model setup, the parameter  is a proxy for stage s + 1 beliefs about
the expected value of the startup. This proxy accounts not only for beliefs about market
potential but also future rates of closure. From this perspective, then, not only can "levered
equity" venture debt increase the expected value of the firm, but it can also decreases the
firm's likelihood of closure. Somewhat surprisingly, however, we show that the issuance of
"levered equity" venture debt can also reduce closure at stage s. In some cases, when the
firm's prospects for success are sufficiently poor, it will not be able to raise capital at all
unless the entrepreneur chooses to take risk. In such settings, the use of venture debt (instead
of equity) can induce such risk-taking, thereby preventing the firm from closing at stage s.
We formalize this intuition in the proof of the following proposition.

Proposition 2. The issuance of "levered equity" venture debt increases the expected value
of the firm, conditional on survival, and decreases closure both contemporaneously and at
future stages.




                                              19
3.4    Financing Solution using "Runway Extension"

If the VC instead chooses runway extension, the startup raises a fraction, Xs ( < 1) of
the required capital immediately (at the start of stage s) via a loan with face value L. Then,
after the milestone signal is realized (i.e., p is revealed at s ), the startup must issue equity
to raise the remaining capital ((1 - ) Xs ) along with the required debt repayment in order
to continue operations. Given the information provided by the milestone, this implies that
equity investors demand a fraction


                                             (1 - ) Xs + L
                             s (p) =                                                         (9)
                                       E [(1 - s+1 ) Y | p,  (s )]

of the firm's equity at s . Crucially for this channel, the revelation of the milestone signal
affects the price equity investors are willing to pay for a stake in the firm, which then affects
the entrepreneur's stake in the firm, (1 - ) (1 - s (p)). Waiting for information to be
revealed alters the extent to which the entrepreneur is diluted which can affect, therefore,
his choice of strategy.
   Consider a setting in which the entrepreneur's chooses the low-risk strategy if the VC
chooses to issue equity (only) at stage s. If the VC decides to extend the runway, the firm
can raise the remaining required capital after p, the milestone signal, is realized. There are
two possible scenarios:

  1. If a low milestone signal (p = pl ) is revealed, this signals a higher probability that the
      firm will not reach its milestone by s + 1; as a result, outside equity investors at s
      will demand a larger stake in the firm. This implies that the entrepreneur's marginal
      benefit from risk taking is even lower than at s since his equity is even more diluted
      than it otherwise would have been. Thus, if p = pl , the entrepreneur does not alter his
      strategy and continues to choose  = 0.

  2. If a high milestone signal (p = ph ) is revealed, then outside equity investors will demand
      a smaller stake in the firm since they are more optimistic about the firm receiving


                                               20
      financing at s + 1. This implies that the entrepreneur will emerge with higher skin-in-
      the game. If sufficiently high, then by Lemma 1, the entrepreneur will optimally choose
      to take the high risk strategy, i.e.,  = h , when p = ph . In expectation, therefore, the
      VC benefits from extending the runway and waiting for information to be revealed.
      Venture debt increases the expected value of the firm at the start of stage s.

The proof of the following lemma shows this result formally.

Proposition 3. If (i) the issuance of "levered equity" venture debt leads to the low-risk
strategy and (ii) the firm can raise capital at s when the milestone signal is revealed, the
VC always prefers to extend the runway, sometimes strictly.

   Our model offers a unique observation on the relationship between debt and the timing
of managerial risk-taking. The novel channel, described above, implies that the issuance of
debt can help solve problems of moral hazard, even when the debt is no longer outstanding.
By altering the entrepreneur's skin-in-the-game, staging in combination with information
revelation can align the VC and entrepreneur's interests so that firm value is maximized.
We emphasize that this "anti-dilution" channel is distinct from the standard manner in which
debt aligns incentives: in this case, debt allows the VC to raise more equity at a higher price
(i.e., when p = ph ) which, in turn, maximizes the entrepreneur's skin-in-the-game. This
mechanism holds even when the debt has already been repaid.
   There is, however, a potential downside to extending the runway with a milestone loan
emerges. In some cases, when the firm realizes a low milestone signal (p = pl ), the venture
capitalist is unable to raise capital. In order for the firm to successfully raise capital at s , it
must be the case that s (p)  1. This implies that, in order for the firm to receive financing
without taking risk,


                                         (1 - ) Xs + L
                                    p                    p.                                    (10)
                                             Y - Xs+1 ]
                                           [~

If a sufficiently large runway extension loan must be issued at date zero, and pl < p, the


                                                21
firm defaults when the milestone is missed. This risk notwithstanding, in some settings, the
expected value of the firm increases despite this default because of the risk-taking induced
when the p = ph . As a result, the VC may rationally choose to extend the runway even
when the information revealed at s potentially leads to closure.
   Finally, as in the setting above, we show that using venture debt to extend the runway
can be necessary to avoid closure at stage s. In some circumstances, the firm cannot raise
the entire Xs at stage s, even when utilizing a combination of debt and equity. However, we
show that the firm can raise the capital required to observe the realization of the milestone
signal (Xs ) and, if good news arrives (p = ph ), the firm can raise the remaining capital
required to reach the next stage. Thus, as with "levered equity" venture debt, extending the
runway can prevent closure at stage s while also reducing closure in the future (captured by
the increase in the expectation of  ).

Proposition 4. (1) The issuance of "runway extension" venture debt increases the expected
value of the firm, conditional on survival, and can decrease closure both contemporaneously
and at future stages.
(2) Runway extension venture debt can increase closure when the milestone signal is realized,
i.e., at s when p = pl .

   As a result, all else equal, the latter statement implies that we expect to runway extension
to generate relatively higher closure rates when compared to "levered equity" venture debt.


3.5    Venture Debt Utilization

Finally, we establish conditions under which venture debt is more likely to be utilized. The
core benefit of venture debt is that it preserves the entrepreneur's stake in the firm, which can
lead the entrepreneur to make decisions in the firm's best interest. All else equal, increased
dilution at the start of stage s (driven by 1 - , Xs , and E [p]) makes it more likely that
the entrepreneur will choose the low-risk strategy, conditions under which venture debt is a



                                               22
valuable alternative for the VC. Further, as the required runway () decreases, the firm is
able to raise more capital after information about the milestone is revealed which amplifies
the benefit of delay (and therefore, venture debt).

Corollary 1. All else equal, venture debt is more likely to be utilized when
      (1) A firm's initial dilution (1 - ) and required investment (Xs ) increases and
      (2) the required runway () and expected milestone signal (E [p]) are small.



4       Empirical Analysis
Our empirical analysis analyzes the impact of the capital structure of early-stage investments
on startup survival and firm value conditional on survival, as predicted by the theoretical
model. Then we examine conditions under which startups choose to take on venture debt to
provide evidence of the proposed model mechanism.


4.1       Data
Our main source of data is Crunchbase, one of the most comprehensive datasets of early-
stage startup activity.25 Crunchbase tracks startup financings using crowdsourcing and news
aggregation and provides detailed information on startups, funding rounds, and investors, all
linkable with disambiguated firm and investor identification numbers. The firm characteris-
tics of interest from Crunchbase include: founding date, industry categories, current status
(ongoing, inactive), and exit outcomes (IPO, acquired, closed). We also have round level
data on each financing event. The round level characteristics include: announcement date,
investor name and type, investment amount, firm valuation, and stage of financing (Series
A, B, C, etc.).
      Our sample initially consists of 123,374 funding rounds with non-missing round invest-
ment amount from 1999 to 2016. We limit the sample to 2016 to allow for three years of
ex-post performance. We also restrict our sample to early-stage investments, defined as Seed
and Series A - C rounds. Thus, we drop Series D and later rounds (6,458 observations). To
 25
      For more information on the use of this dataset, refer to Wang [2017].



                                                      23
focus on equity and debt investments, we drop 5,038 observations with the type of round con-
sisting of: grants, post-IPO, initial coin offering, assistance, and product crowdfunding. We
also drop pre-seed investments, those with money raised less than $10,000 (854 observations),
and financing rounds with pre-money valuation of less than $100,000 (2,438 observations).
Finally, we drop a handful of duplicate observations and collapse when multiple investors
participate in a round. Our final sample is 92,236 unique rounds of funding, reflecting 54,000
startup firms. When we turn these funding rounds into a panel of survival, we have 449,134
yearly observations from funding round to exit (or to being truncated to ongoing status at
the end of our data pull in 2018).
       To identify which rounds are equity only, levered equity, or runway loans, we first start
with Crunchbase's categorization of equity or debt. When Crunchbase uses these terms, we
can categorize the money raised cleanly as debt, equity, or a mixture. We code convertible
notes as equity. When the type of capital is missing, we instead use the investors' financing
histories to predict security type. We code an investor as a debt investor if it is among
the main venture debt providers listed in Wikipedia as of 2018 or if the majority of other
investments by this investor are coded debt. Venture debt investors consists of specialized
funds such as Lighter Capital and banks such as Silicon Valley Bank. Consistent with our
data, Lighter Capital bills itself as the "largest provider of non-dilutive debt capital to early
stage startups". In our sample, Lighter Capital has financed 200 debt deals while Silicon
Valley Bank is a close second with 181 debt deals.26
       Lastly, we need to identify the financing stage. The series is usually identified in Crunch-
base. When missing, we utilize the idea that startup capital is raised in sequential rounds
of financing as startups mature to assign the stage of financing. For example, we classify
the first round of financing as a seed round and the second round of financing as a Series A
round, irrespective of capital structure. For debt rounds, since series is not a debt concept,
  26
    We do not have contract-level data on the loans providing interest rates or associated warrants. However,
we take comfort in knowing from Gonz´   alez-Uribe and Mann [2017] that the contracts of venture loans are
relatively standard across firms.




                                                     24
we assign staging as the would-be round had the firm issued an equity round instead.


4.2     Summary Statistics

Table 1 presents round-level summary statistics, dividing all statistics into stage. As Panel
A reports, more observations are in seed rounds (50%) than series A (27%), series B (16%),
or series C (7%), as one would expect with firm failure. Equity financing make up the bulk
of Seed rounds (78.5%), but this decreases across the stages with levered equity becoming
increasingly more common. This heavy bias toward equity at the Seed round reflects the
risk and uncertainty in valuing early-stage companies. Across all rounds, equity is utilized
in 67% of rounds, levered equity in 19%, and runway loans in 14%.
   Panel B reports the industry distribution. We utilize Crunchbase product market de-
scriptions and industry categories to classify firms into five broad industry sectors (biotech-
nology/pharmaceuticals, software, energy, finance, and other). Compared with later-stage
institutional investor databases such as VentureXpert, our sample skews towards high-tech
companies with software and biotechnology/pharmaceuticals representing 60% and 19.3%,
respectively.
   The employee size distribution of Panel C reflects the growth of firms over time. Very
early stage rounds go pervasively to companies with 1 to 10 employees (43.9%) or 11 to 50
employees (40.2%). By the time companies progress to Series C, only 8.6% have less than
10 employees.
   Panel D of Table 1 presents round level characteristics by both series and capital struc-
ture. The average (median) seed round financed with equity raises $700,000 ($383,000) while
the average (median) seed round financed with levered equity raises $1.5 million ($1.2 mil-
lion). This difference in capital raised suggest differences in the underlying quality of the
firm.
   In addition to the employment indicators and current and prior investments, our empirics
include two other measures of company quality. First, we use an estimate of the value of



                                              25
the company. In VC investing language, a "post-money" valuation is company valuation
implied by the equity stake given up in an investment. For example, a $2 million investment
for 10% of the company implies the company is worth $20 million post-money. The "pre-
money valuation" is the valuation accruing to founders and prior investors as implied by the
valuation of the current investment (i.e., the post-money minus the investment). Ideally, we
would level firms using this value measure. However, these notions do not apply to debt, and
furthermore many observations do not reveal pre-money or, equivalently, the equity stake
provided for the investment round. For rounds involving debt or missing values of pre-money,
we use the average pre-money valuation for the industry-year-series in Pitchbook.27 This
calculation for debt rounds amount to saying approximately how much equity a company
would have to give up in that industry and that year if the founders had chosen to issue with
equity alone. Even taken together, these are imperfect measures of quality, which is why we
also show within-firm analysis.
       Across all series, the startups raising levered equity appear "better" in terms of pre-money
valuation. For example, in seed rounds, levered equity investment have average (median)
pre-money valuations of $6.0 million ($4.7 million) compared to $2.9 million ($1.6 million)
for equity investments. Runway loan investments, however, are quite similar in size and
valuation to equity rounds. This ranking pattern across capital structures is apparent in
every financing stage.
       The final row of summary statistics is the proportion of financing rounds that include
at least one high volume investor, a measure both of firm size, quality, and reputation of
the VC. We define a high volume investor as an investor that has financed an above-median
number of deals in the prior year. There is large heterogeneity depending on financing stage
and security type. Across all three security types, the likelihood of raising money from high
volume investors is larger for later stage rounds where the amount of capital needed is much
  27
     One potential way to disentangle models of effort versus risk-taking (discussed in Section 3.2) would be
to study the impact of venture debt on the dispersion of next-round firm valuations. However, we are unable
to do this with the limited data on valuations.




                                                     26
larger. Across all stages, the likelihood of raising money from high volume investors is larger
for levered equity and runway loans suggesting that both specialization and reputation is a
key component of the venture debt ecosystem.


4.3     Univariate Outcomes: Survival and Exits

We now turn to univariate resolution of companies results­ survival and exits ­ by capital
structure. We begin by studying survival in section 4.3.1 and exits in section 4.3.2.


4.3.1   Univariate Survival

Closures are notoriously hard to identify in startups. One distinct benefit of Crunchbase for
our research is that it collects and aggregates all relevant startup data from the greater Web.
If a startup receives press coverage regarding executive employee change or new strategic
partnership, for instance, Crunchbase will incorporate this information and timestamp the
event. Given that many startups rarely (and potentially endogenously) self-report closures,
this provides us with a way to distinguish inactive firms from ongoing firms. In addition to
those explicitly classified as closed in Crunchbase, any firm that goes without an "update"
for two years (and remains without an update until the end of our sample) is classified as
inactive.
   Table 2 reports closure and exit rates by capital structure and series. In our sample, 37%
of all financing rounds result in startup closure. While this statistic seems low at first glance,
relative to the adage that six or seven out of ten startups will not survive, the deviation stems
from two factors. First, most of the surviving firms have not had any resolution because of
the recent timing of their entry into the dataset. Second, this statistic measures closure for a
given round of financing, not a given firm. As expected, we observe that the rate of closure
decreases as firms mature. For example, the likelihood of closure is 45% after a seed round
while only 21% after a series C round.
   It is also immediately clear from Table 2 that survival rates differ depending on capital



                                               27
structure. Survival rates are higher for levered equity and runway loans, irrespective of stage.
For instance, in seed rounds, firms financed with equity have a 48% likelihood of closure while
firms financed with levered equity have only a 23% likelihood of closure. Across all series,
firms that are financed with equity have higher closure rates than firms financed with levered
equity or runway loans.
   To put more perspective on these univariate patterns, we plot the Nelson-Aarlen non-
parametric cumulative hazard function by the capital structure of the round in Figure 1.
The x-axis is survival time measured as the lapse of time since the round funding year. At
each year, the interpretation of the graph is the cumulative failure risk, conditional on having
survived to that year. The high year-15 cumulative hazard not only picks up the high total
failure, but also the fact that, by that time, successful firms have been truncated out of the
sample with exit. Thus, the failure rate continues to increase, even past the early years,
capturing the selection of firms that are not able to exit by an M&A or IPO.
   Figure 1 makes clear that the survival of startups after a levered equity round is much
higher than that for startups receiving an equity-only round. This difference in hazards is
large from the first year and increases slowly for about a decade. Figure 1 also illustrates that
firms receiving runway loans face more promising survival relative to those getting all-equity
financing, but to a much lower degree when compared to a levered equity round.
   It is important to note that we are not controlling for any round-level differences in this
specification, and these results do not make any statement as to whether the firms receiving
different securities are simply different. This selection story is, however, interesting in itself
as it speaks to the use of venture debt. To disentangle selection and treatment, we do a
more complete survival analysis in section 4.4.


4.3.2   Univariate Exits

Table 2 also reports the resolution of the firm conditional on survival by capital structure.
The majority of firms in our sample are still ongoing. Among those that have exited, any



                                               28
patterns across differences in capital structure are not nearly so stark as with closures. On
average, 74% of our sample rounds are in startups that are still alive at the end of our
sample period, 17% have exited via an undisclosed-price acquisition, and 6% have exited via
a price-disclosed acquisition. The venture literature has noted that when prices are disclosed
or leaked, the acquisition is usually a premium acquisition. Finally, 4% of rounds resulted
in a firm that has successfully gone public.


4.4     Empirical Results

4.4.1   Survival Function

The cumulative hazard figures, described above, suggest that capital structure may impact
firm survival. In this section, we develop a more formal survival test, taking into account
selection into capital structure type.
   We begin by discussing the choice of the survival function for analysis. Let us denote a
survival function by S (t):


                              S (t) := 1 - F (t) = P (T > t)     for t > 0,              (11)


where F (t) and f (t) are cumulative and probability distribution functions over failure, and
t and T are the time lapse since the funding round and firm closure time, respectively. S (t)
indicates the cumulative probability that closure has not yet occurred by time t. The survival
function dictates a hazard function h(t), given by

                                                       f (t)
                                            h(t) =           ,                           (12)
                                                       S (t)

which captures the immediate risk of failure given that the firm has survived until time t.
   Having a well-specified parametric survival analysis depends on the survival function
chosen, as the hazard varies over time in unique ways. For example, in medicine, some




                                                  29
treatments increase in effectiveness as time elapses while others decrease. Two of the most
commonly-utilized parametric survival functions are the Weibull and loglogistic distributions,
both offering a flexibility in survival patterns. The Weibull hazard function is monotonic
over time for a given (estimate) shape parameter, which determines the direction of the
survival pattern. The hazard of failure is either increasing over time, decreasing over time,
or constant (in which case it becomes the exponential distribution, the specification of the
much-used Cox proportional hazard model). In contrast, the loglogistic provides a functional
form over which the shape of the hazard can increase and then decline. In practice, it is
intuitive that the hazard of closure for a startup should be higher in the near term and then
decline as the startup continues to demonstrate its viability. However, rather than impose
one of these forms, we allow the data to determine that decision.
       Figure 2 reports diagnostics to assess the fit of the models. Panel A plots the AIC and
log-likelihood statistics from the models, demonstrating that across all stages, the loglogistic
fits better than the Weibull, as it exhibits the smallest AIC and largest log likelihood. The
difference is particularly pronounced in the seed stage.28 A characteristic of the loglogistic
is that it is a proportional odds model, which provides both another test for goodness of fit
and an ease in interpreting coefficients of interest. To see this, define the odds ratio of failure
            1-S (t)                                                              1
as OR=       S (t)
                    .   The survival function for the loglogistic is S (t) =   1+t
                                                                                   ,   where the  is the
parameterization of predictor variables and the  is the estimated shape parameter. Thus,
                                  1-S (t)
taking logs, logOR = log           S (t)
                                            = log (t ) = log () +  log (t). Utilizing this formulation,
the Lee (2003) goodness-of-fit check for a loglogistic survival model is that logOR should be
linear in a plot against log (t). Figure 2, Panel B graphs this plot by staging, showing that
the log odds ratio is, indeed, almost precisely linear in the log of time.
  28
    In an additional, unreported test, we apply the Schoenfeld test of proportional hazard, used to test
that variables follow a proportional hazard effect on survival as would be implied by the well-known Cox
proportional hazard model. The results show that we can reject that our capital structure variables and
most of the quality controls follow a proportional hazard, except in series C estimations.




                                                      30
4.4.2   Treatment versus Selection Methodology

Our objective with a more complete survival model is to level startups on quality at the
time of the financing round and then follow over time the effect of the treatment (i.e., the
capital structure) on survival, as in medical trials. The primary concern with this statement
is, of course, that there may be selection into treatment. Startups may sort into capital
structure for a host of reasons (risk, expected future multiplier on the idea, etc.). We are
interested in this selection effect as much as the treatment; thus, we do not want to discount
any magnitude differences due to selection. However, to make clear the role of the capital
structure choice, we undertake two approaches to disentangle selection from treatment.
   First, we control for quality using observable variables. Financial researchers are in the
habit of thinking this approach is incomplete, and indeed it is. Signals are very sparse in
early-stage investing, and the trajectory is at least partially determined by successes in the
past as the company steps from milestone to investment to milestone and so on. Thus,
for startups, two important variables that proxy for startup quality at a given financing
round are the startup's current investment and the cumulation of prior investments. We
also include an indicator for whether the investor is a high-volume investor, a proxy for VC
reputation. We also include the pre-money valuation at the current round, but note that
this variable is a (potentially) noisy estimate itself. Importantly, we include the year of the
fundraising, to capture the perceived opportunity space and supply-demand environment.
We also include the number of employees (in fixed effect buckets as shown in Table 1),
to capture the completeness of the team. We include industry fixed effects, to capture a
number of differentials including the size of the potential market and the capital-intensity
of the startup's path. Finally, to account for differences across rounds, we estimate these
specifications separately for each staging.
   Despite our inclination that these covariates of quality will empower a level survival
analysis across capital structure treatments, it is possible that an omitted quality variable
still differentiates those rounds treated with equity from ones treated with a debt capital



                                              31
structure. For guidance in dealing with this issue, we return to the medical science literature.
In medicine, those receiving one treatment might be more or less failure-prone ("frail") than
those receiving another treatment. Scientists, specializing in medical survival statistics, thus
developed techniques to account for individual heterogeneity, leveling individuals on frailty.
A frailty model specifies an individual (or in our case, a firm) unobservable multiplicative
effect  on the hazard. The resulting hazard conditional on frailty is: h(t|) = h(t). If a firm
has a frailty >1, the firm is more frail, which acts multiplicatively on the firm throughout
the lifespan. We estimate  as a gamma distribution, one of two standard specifications
to understand and parameterize firm-specific risk.29 In our setting, we include the frailty
parameter to absorb any underlying, static heterogeneity within each firm. To do this, we
pool our data across stagings so that we have multiple observations to estimate the firm-level
frailty term.


4.4.3    Survival Results

Table 3 examines the role of capital structure on startup survival after each stage of financing.
In all columns, we control for the covariates described immediately above. Columns 1-
4 present the estimates of the loglogistic model with standard errors clustered by firm.
Columns 5-7 present the frailty model estimates, with observations pooled across stages
(with stage fixed effects) so that we can estimate a model with firm frailty heterogeneity
removed to parse out treatment from selection.
    Columns 1-4 show that, compared to the offset equity-only rounds, survival is higher for
rounds financed with leverage equity (with a coefficient ranging between 0.384 and 0.500
depending on the series) and runway loans (with coefficients ranging from 0.118 to 0.217).
Translating these log odds to odds ratios by simple exponentiation and taking the weighted
average across rounds, we find that levered equity is associated with a higher survival odds
  29
     The first economics incorporation of frailty models was, to our knowledge, Lancaster (1979). His Econo-
metrica article uses frailty methods to estimate the length of time that unemployed job seekers stayed out of
work. His underlying frailty heterogeneity (and the future thousands of citers of this work) include rational
variables such as opportunity wage level as well as behavioral parameters of preferences and search intensity.



                                                     32
of 1.57 relative to equity-only investment (i.e., 57% higher in odds each year). Likewise, the
survival odds of runway loans is 1.16 compared to equity-only rounds.
   Our preferred frailty model is that of column 7. (For robustness, we compare levered
equity and runway loans in isolation to equity rounds in columns 5-6, and find similar
results.) Column 7 reports that the treatment effect of levered equity is 0.197 in higher log
odds of survival, or an increase in 22% in odds ratio of survival compared to equity rounds
at any point in time. For runway loans, the treatment of a runway loan implies a modestly
higher survival log odds of 0.056, or a 6% increase in the odds ratio of survival relative
to equity only. The coefficients on levered equity and runway loans in column 7 are still
economically and statistically significant after controlling for firm-specific risk.
   The frailty model allows us to absorb unobserved firm-level heterogeneity. Comparing
the sample-weighted average coefficient estimate over columns 1-4 to the capital structure
coefficient estimates in column 7, we find that selection accounts for 56% of the levered
equity effect, leaving 44% for a treatment effect. For runway loans, the selection: treatment
breakdown is 64% : 36%. To further account for time-varying firm attributes that corre-
late with the choice of capital structure, we re-estimate the model in column 8 with frailty
estimated at the firm-capital structure level instead of just the firm-level. The firm-capital
structure frailty model utilizes variation across rounds of the same firm and the same capital
structure investment type (runway loan, levered equity, equity). Thus, any residual quality
that is time-varying for a firm and correlated at the point of time of investment with the
capital structure choice will be absorbed. As column 8 shows, the results are both quanti-
tatively and qualitatively similar. If anything, the results are economically larger, but we
conservatively interpret the column 7 results in all of our magnitude calculations.
   In short, firms with better ex-ante expected survival positively select into investments
utilizing debt, even conditional on observables and investor reputation. Selection is the
primary driver of the magnitude differences in survival. Nevertheless, the infusion of debt
impacts survival, increasing the odds ratio by 22% and 6% for levered equity and runway



                                               33
loans respectively. These positive capital structure effects align directly with our model's
predictions, where the VC uses leverage to align the entrepreneur's actions so that firm value
is maximized. The observation that the overall treatment effect of improving survival is 3.6
times greater for levered equity as compared to that for runway loans also aligns with the
model. For the runway loan structure, the risk that bad information may be revealed before
the firm is able to reach its next milestone implies that the runway loan creates increased
closure risk relative to the levered equity product.
   With an understanding of the selection and treatment breakdowns of the Table 3 results,
we can move to our main economic magnitude prediction ­ an interpretation of magnitudes
in terms of the treatment effect on probability of failure. In the survival model, the effect on
probability of closure varies over survival times. The four panels of Figure 3 depict plots of
the predicted hazard over survival time, from the estimates in columns 1 to 4 of Table 3, by
capital structure type. We use the non-frailty model so that we can plot these relationships
by staging. The black (darkest) line is that of equity-only investment; the red (medium) line
is of levered equity investment; and the yellow (lightest) line is for runway loan investment.
After the first two years of raising capital, hazard is decreasing over time, reflecting the idea
that the longer a firm survives, the lower the risk of closure. While the likelihood of closure
in any given year is the highest for rounds financed exclusively with equity irrespective of
series, the relative hazard between equity and levered equity rounds decrease as startups
mature, consistent with incentive alignment being most valuable in the early-stages of the
startup's life cycle.
   The staging patterns are intuitive in the yearly closure risk being largest for seed rounds
in particular. Since we cannot disentangle selection versus treatment within stages, we
interpret magnitudes in Figure 4, where we pool the predicted hazards from columns 1 to 4.
Figure 4 shows that, weighted across stagings, the overall hazard of closure is 0.101 (0.044)
lower for levered equity rounds (runway loans) as compared to the hazard following equity
rounds. Applying the percentage selection-treatment breakdown from the frail model implies



                                               34
that the treatment of levered equity results in a 0.044 lower hazard of closure each year, and
the treatment of runway loans results in a 0.016 lower hazard of closure each year.
   For each stage and each capital structure type, we calculate the percentage change in
investment that remains productive (does not close) according to the predicted survival
function from Table 3. We then impose our selection-to-treatment breakdown, allowing only
44% and 36% of the magnitude of our prediction to be a treatment effect, to arrive at a
predicted percentage of capital salvaged from closure. Finally, we simply apply this salvage
rate to the overall money raised in each of the stages. We find that, of the $439 billion in our
dataset, spread across Seed - Series C, our estimates imply that the use of debt in the capital
structure of investments resulted in survival of an additional $41.1 billion, or 9.4% of funds.
Our theory and the empirical evidence supports the idea that this capital is value improving.
Yet, in this back-of-the-envelope calculation, we try to be conservative in interpretation in
that the mechanism of debt changing strategies that increase survival may forestall some
optimal creative destruction.30


4.4.4    Exits Conditional on Survival Results

Table 4 examines eventual exit outcomes for startups conditional on survival. In columns
1-4, we implement an ordered logistic regression where the dependent variable is exits in the
following descending order: IPO, priced acquisition, acquisition with undisclosed price, and
ongoing. We chose this specification to mirror that of the log logistic survival model in its
odds ratio interpretation.31 Each observation is a financing round. We again control for the
natural logarithm of the amount of capital raised, the natural logarithm of prior investment,
the natural logarithm of the pre-money valuation, high volume investor dummy, employee
quintiles, and industry and year fixed effects. The interpretation of coefficients in an ordered
  30
     For example, it may be that startup ideas that have failure sooner (creative destruction) cause more
productive uses of future investment rounds into other companies.
  31
     We can implement a survival-time analysis with the "hazard" of an IPO, for example, being the de-
pendent variable that takes duration into account. Our results are not materially different than in the
one-observation per round results which we present instead.




                                                   35
logit is the effect of an independent variable on moving the outcome from one level to the
next; i.e., from ongoing to acquisition, from acquisition without price to acquisition with
price, or from acquisition with price to IPO. The ordered logit model parameterizes an equal
proportional odds ratio effect across these orderings.
   Columns 1 and 2 shows that debt increases positive outcomes at an early stage. For firms
financed with levered equity as opposed to equity only in the Seed and Series A round, we
find a 0.437 and 0.278 increase in the log odds of being in a higher level of exit, respectively.
Similarly, for firms financed with runway loans as opposed to equity only in the Seed and
Series A round, we find a 0.194 and 0.266 increase in the log odds being in a higher level of
exit. Alternatively, we can interpret the coefficients using odds ratios. For example, we find
that for firms financed with runway loans in the Series A round, the odds of exiting through
acquisition with undisclosed price, acquisition with price, or an IPO versus ongoing (i.e.
positive exit) is 1.305 times that of firms financed with equity. In Series B and C, the effect
of levered equity is economically and statistically insignificant while runway loans continue
to have a positive effect on the likelihood of exit. Notice, however, that the effect of levered
equity on outcomes monotonically declines from Seed to Series A, and then is insignificant
in Series B and C. Levered equity does not increase value in later stages, consistent with
an interpretation of our model being about early-stage innovation strategy choices. Runway
loans continue to have a positive effect on the likelihood of exit; the delay-for signal effect
appears to persist.
   To consider robustness to the constant proportional odds effect and to draw direct in-
ference with respect to the probability to exit, we report the marginal effects results from
a logistic specification in columns 5-9. The dependent variable is an indicator equal to one
if a startup eventually achieves an acquisition or IPO. As column 5 shows, we find that the
likelihood of an acquisition or IPO increases by 5.04% (2.11%) if the startup raises levered
equity (runway loan) in the seed round. Column 6 reports that, following a series A round,
the likelihood of an ultimate acquisition or IPO increases by 5.36% (5.53%) if the startup



                                               36
raises levered equity (runway loan).
    The most important column is perhaps that of column (9), where we implement a mixed
(random effects) logit model to absorb firm effects. We pool the Seed, Series A, B, and C
rounds and including series fixed effects. The random effects model allows us to control for
unobserved heterogeneity under the assumption that the heterogeneity is constant over time
and not correlated with the independent variables. We find that the treatment effect of lev-
ered equity (runway loan) is to increase the likelihood of a positive exit by 0.71% (0.88%). As
in our survival analysis, selection accounts for the a portion of the magnitude of the outcome
(comparing columns 5-8 to column 9). Yet, debt capital structures still have a treatment
effect on the likelihood of successful exits in a statistically and economically meaningful level.
Given that only 16.52% of the startup-round observations eventually exits via acquisition
or IPO, our column 9 result translates into a 4.3% (5.3%) percentage increase in exit from
the treatment of debt. For levered equity, a comparison with Table 2 and the results in
columns 1-8 of Table 4 shows that this result is entirely driven by the use of levered equity
in seed rounds increasing acquisitions without price disclosures. Overall, our results suggest
that levered equity and runway loans lead to more favorable firm outcomes. This pattern
is consistent with our theory that these products are utilized to preserve entrepreneurial
"skin-in-the-game" so that incentives are aligned within the firm.


4.4.5    Alternative Mechanisms

One alternative hypothesis suggested for the use of venture debt is hidden (or asymmetric)
information. Theoretically, in such settings, debt is often optimal as it minimizes the discount
outside investors require to provide capital. For similar reasons, when insiders and outsiders
disagree about the firm's growth potential, debt is generally optimal.32 While these channels
may play a role in the use of venture debt, it struggles to explain the pattern that the vast
majority of debt rounds are subsequently followed by an equity round, then debt round,
 32
    We note that disagreement about other aspects of the firm's value, for example, its value in liquidation,
may actually make debt suboptimal when there is a difference of opinions.



                                                     37
and so on. Such an alternating pattern is not found in capital structure theories based on
asymmetric information.33
       Moreover, it is unclear that these mechanisms should lead to a reduction in closures and
an increase in successful exits. One story, which could reconcile these observed outcomes, is
that venture debt is utilized when the entrepreneur and insider VC know, but cannot credibly
convey, that good news about the firm is likely to be revealed soon. We note, however, that
the presence of an insider VC implies that it would be better, in general, for the insider to
contribute their own capital rather than bear the discount required by outsiders, especially
when the capital required to get to the information revelation is modest.
       Another alternative hypothesis around our closure results, consistent with practice, is
that venture debt is commonly associated with "high-quality" venture capitalists. In this
case, reduced closure is not a function of the treatment but is, instead, a selection story:
high-quality VCs, who expect to need debt financing in the future, only encourage higher-
quality startups to borrow, since the VC is engaged in a multi-period reputation game with
the lender. Figure 5 presents evidence that, to the extent that this is true, it does not explain
the patterns we observe. Utilizing financing volume as a measure of VC reputation/quality,
the figure illustrates two effects. First, demonstrating that volume is a proxy for reputation,
"high-volume" investors exhibit lower hazard rates across all three types of capital structure.
Second, we show that the relative hazard rates do not depend upon whether the VC is high-
or low-volume, consistent with a treatment effect of venture debt.34
       Finally, one concern that arises with the utilization of debt in an early-stage startup, given
their inherently risky nature, is risk-shifting. For one, this concern supports the utilization of
venture debt by start-ups that are backed by high-quality/high-volume venture capitalists.
Since such VCs are implicitly putting their own reputations on the line, we are less likely to
  33
     As described in our literature review, there are now several papers which predict that equity can be
the optimal security in the presence of asymmetric information. However, these papers do not predict the
equity/debt/equity pattern that is almost universally found in practice.
  34
     While we note that the hazard rate of runway loans with low-quality financiers is higher after year two
than equity-only, this effect is outweighed, cumulatively, by the reduction in year one.




                                                    38
observe risk-shifting by such firms. The relative impact of venture debt, however, does not
depend upon the type of venture capitalist backing the firm, suggesting that risk-shifting
is not driving our positive exit results. Moreover, risk-shifting in the presence of debt also
implies increased risk of closure which, as we argued above, is not borne out in the aggregate
data.
   To be clear, we do not mean to suggest that these alternatives cannot play a role in the
utilization of venture debt but simply that they do not tell the whole story. To strengthen
this argument, in the following section, we provide further evidence that is consistent with
and novel to the model's proposed channel.


4.4.6   Mechanism Results

Next, we establish conditions under which which firms are more likely to issue venture debt
to provide evidence of the proposed model mechanism. Recall that, pursuant to Corollary
1, a startup is more likely to take on venture debt (i) when the current dilution increases
and (ii) the required runway decreases.
   We first consider whether the choice of capital structure is affected by the dilution of
the round. Specifically, Table 5 reports estimates from a mixed logit model with firm-level
random effects, where, in columns 1-4, the dependent variable is the choice of levered equity
as opposed to an equity round, dropping the runway loan rounds. The main independent
variable of interest is the natural logarithm of dilution, which we calculate as the log of
the current investment divided by the post-money valuation. We control for the total prior
investment, the pre-money valuation, whether the investor is high volume, and employee
quintile, industry and year fixed effects.
   Consistent with the predictions of the model, as dilution increases, the likelihood of issu-
ing venture debt becomes more likely. A one standard deviation increase in dilution increases
the likelihood of levered equity issuance, sample-weighted across stages, by 1.83%, which is
a 3.89% increase relative to the sample mean. Similarly, an increase in prior investments



                                              39
(a potential proxy for past dilution) is also positively associated with increased issuance of
venture debt. Finally, as expected given the structure of the venture debt market, firms
backed by high volume (reputation) investors are more likely to issue venture debt. This is
consistent with the notion, discussed above, that venture debt is feasible in part due to the
backing of high-quality VCs which help to ensure that borrowers do not risk­shift or engage
in other inefficient investments.
       In Table 5, columns 5-8, we estimate the potential determinants of runway loan issuance
where, as above, the alternative issuance strategy is equity only. The key difference, however,
is that for the runway loans, we estimate a model in which our current dilution proxy
is forward dilution. In the model, the variable of interest is the total dilution the firm
potentially faced under an equity only issuance. This is not captured by the dilution created
with runway extension: the firm borrows less ( < 1) in order to borrow the remaining
required capital after positive information is revealed.35 Instead, we utilize a measure of
dilution that accounts for both the current and next round's investment, capturing the total
amount of investment required to get to the next stage.
       As expected, this is generally positively associated with the choice of venture debt, though
only with statistical significance for the seed round and Series C. As with the levered equity
product, an increase in prior investment (past dilution) makes a runway extension loan more
likely and high reputation investors are more likely to pave the way for runway extension.
Interestingly, in this case, and in contrast to the setting with levered equity, an increase in
pre-money valuation negatively predicts the use of the runway extension product. This is
consistent with the idea that firms which have struggled to reach prior milestones and are
waiting for good information to be revealed are more likely to need a runway extension.
       Finally, in Table 6, we report estimates of the future duration runway until the next
round, i.e., how long does the startup go until the next funding round. We implement two
  35
    The model suggests (as we discuss below) that if the firm can extend their runway with a small amount
of capital, runway loans are more attractive. This would be consistent with a negative relationship to the
original log dilution measure, which we find in unreported results.




                                                   40
models of duration, a linear mixed model (random effects) in the odd numbered columns and
an AR(1) mixed model in the even columns. Our decision to incorporate the lagged term
reflected a concern that there might persistence in the duration, whereby some companies
take longer to meet milestones because of early-stage hurdles in innovation. Alternatively,
firms may simply differ in their burn rate and so including lagged duration allows us to
account for this heterogeneity. We also include the aforementioned control variables and
fixed effects. Using theAR(1) model, we find that the issuance of a runway loan decreases
the days until the next round of financing by 13.3%, sample-weighted across stages, or 46
days.
   The model suggests that as the required period of time until the firm reaches (or fails
to reach) its next milestone falls, runway debt becomes more attractive. Suppose a startup
needs to raise a fixed amount of capital. The sooner information about the product is
revealed, the less money the startup has to raise at the unconditional, relatively expensive
price today, and the more money it can potentially raise at the relatively cheap price if it
achieves its milestone. As we show in our theoretical analysis, this is exactly when venture
debt is most valuable. Of course, obtaining an ex-ante estimate of the required runway is
not feasible and so we adopt the alternative perspective: conditional on the product chosen,
how long until the next funding round?
   We find that the impact of runway extension on forward duration is negative. Even
controlling for past burn rates only modestly attenuates its impact on time until next fi-
nancing round. In contrast, with levered equity, controlling for the past burn rate leads
to a statistically insignificant effect for early-stage (Series A or earlier) firms. Finally, and
unsurprisingly, we find that the forward duration is increasing in the current investment level
since this provides more leeway for the firm before it goes back to investors.




                                               41
5     Conclusion

In this paper, we provide theoretical foundations and empirical evidence on the optimal
use of venture debt and its implications for firm outcomes. In the model, an entrepreneur
chooses the startups strategy, trading off the financial benefits of risk-taking with the utility
he forfeits if he loses his control rights. If the entrepreneur's equity is too diluted, he favors a
low-risk, low-value strategy. Yet, we show that venture debt can increase the entrepreneur's
"skin-in-the-game" which incents the entrepreneur to choose a high-risk (high-value) strategy.
Debt can play this role both in a "levered equity" structure, where equity and debt are issued
concurrently, and in a "runway loan" structure, where the firm delays equity financing until
a milestone is (potentially) met.
    Empirically, firms financed with levered equity (runway loans) have a 22% (6%) increase
in the odds ratio of survival relative to equity financing. We further find that the use of
levered equity (runway loans) results in a 4.3% (5.3%) percentage increase in the likelihood of
acquisition or IPO. Moreover, consistent with the model mechanism, we show that venture
debt is more likely to be utilized when expected dilution is high and when the required
runway is short. Our analysis demonstrates that the introduction of venture debt has not
only changed the start-up financing landscape, but has also created a valuable channel
through which financing decisions can improve outcomes for early-stage firms. A back of
the envelope calculation suggests that the use of venture debt saves $41.1 billion, or 9.4% of
invested capital, by preventing closure in early-stage firms.




                                                42
References

Ola Bengtsson and Berk A. Sensoy. Investor abilities and financial contracting: Evidence
  from venture capital. Journal of Financial Intermediation, 20:477­502, 2011. 1

Dirk Bergemann and Ulrich Hege. Venture capital financing, moral hazard, and learning.
  Journal of Banking & Finance, 22:703­735, 1998. 1

Shai Bernstein, Xavier Giroud, and Richard Townsend. The impact of venture capital mon-
  itoring. Journal of Finance, 71(4):1591­1622, 2016. 1

Laura Bottazzi, Marco Da Rin, and Thomas Hellmann. The importance of trust for in-
  vestment: evidence from venture capital(opens in new window). The Review of Financial
  Studies, 29:2283­2318, 2016. 1

Catherine Casamatta. Financing and advising: Optimal financial contracts with venture
  capitalists. Journal of Finance, 58(5):2059­2085, 2003. 7

Thomas Chemmanur, Karthik Krishnan, and Debarshi Nandy. How does venture capital
  financing improve efficiency in private firms? a look beneath the surface. Review of
  Financial Studies, 24:12:4037­90, 2011. 1

Francesca Cornelli and Oved Yosha. Stage financing and the role of convertible securities.
  Review of Economic Studies, 70:1­32, 2003. 1

Douglas Cumming. Contracts and exits in venture capital finance. The Review of Financial
  Studies, 21:1947­1982, 2008. 1

Sandeep Dahiya and Korok Ray. Staged investments in entrepreneurial financing. Journal
  of Corporate Finance, 18:1193­1216, 2012. 7

Ga´
  etan de Rassenfosse and Timo Fischer. Venture debt financing: Determinants of the
  lending decision. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 10:235­256, 2016. 1



                                              43
Michael Ewens, Alexander S. Gorbenko, and Arthur G. Korteweg. Venture capital contracts.
  2020. 1

Zsuzsanna Fluck. Optimal financial contracting: Debt versus outside equity. Review of
  Financial Studies, 11:383­418, 1998. 9

Paolo Fulghieri and Dmitry Lukin. Information production, dilution costs, and optimal
  security design. Journal of Financial Economics, 0:1­40, 2001. 9

Paolo Fulghieri, Diego Garc´
                           ia, and Dirk Hackbarth. Asymmetric information and the pecking
  (dis)order. Review of Finance, forthcoming. 1

Juanita Gonz´
            alez-Uribe and William Mann. New evidence on venture loans. Working Paper,
  2017. 1, 1, 26

Will Gornall and Ilya A. Strebulaev. Squaring venture capital valuations with reality. Journal
  of Financial Economics, 135:120­143, 2020. 1

Thomas Hellmann, Laura Lindsey, and Manju Puri. Building relationships early: Banks in
  venture capital. The Review of Financial Studies, 21:513­541, 2008. 1, 2.2

Yael Hochberg, Carlos Serrano, and Rosemarie Ziedonis. Patent collateral, investor commit-
  ment, and the market for venture lending. Journal of Financial Economics, 103(1), 2018.
  1, 1, 2.1

David Hsu. What do entrepreneurs pay for venture capital affiliation?,. Journal of Finance,
  59:1805­1844, 2004. 1

Darian Ibrahim. Debt as venture capital. The University of Illinois Law Review, pages
  1169­1210, 2010. 1, 2.1, 2.2, 15

Robert Innes. Limited liability and incentive contracting with ex-ante action choices. Journal
  of Economic Theory, 52:45­67, 1990. 1



                                             44
Steven Kaplan and Per Str¨
                         omberg. Financial contracting theory meets the real world: An
  empirical analysis of venture capital. Review of Economic Studies, 70:281­315, 2003. 1

Steven Kaplan and Per Str¨
                         omberg. Characteristics, contracts, and actions: Evidence from
  venture capitalist analyses. Journal of Finance, 59(2177-210), 2004. 1

William Kerr, Josh Lerner, and Antoinette Schoar. The consequences of entrepreneurial
  finance. Review of Financial Studies, 27:20­55, 2014. 1

Samuel Kortum and Josh Lerner. Assessing the impact of venture capital on innovation.
  Rand Journal of Economics, 31:674­692, 2000. 1

Laura Lindsey. Blurring firm boundaries: The role of venture capital in strategic alliances.
  Journal of Finance, 63(3):1137­1168, 2008. 1

Andrey Malenko and Anton Tsoy. Asymmetric information and security design under knigh-
  tian uncertainty. Working Paper, 2020. 1

Franco Modigliani and Merton Miller. The cost of capital, corporation finance and the theory
  of investment. American Economic Review, 48(3):261­297, 1958. 1

R Nanda, W Sahlman, and N Keller. Western technology investment. HBS No. 817-019,
  2016.

Ramana Nanda and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf. Investment cycles and startup innovation.
  Journal of Financial Economics, 110(2):403­418, 2013. 1

Darwin Neher. Staged financing: An agency perspective. Review of Economic Studies, 66:
  255­274, 1999. 7

Manju Puri and Rebecca Zarutskie. On the lifecycle dynamics of venture-capital- and non-
  venture- capital-financed firms. Journal of Finance, 67:6(2247-93), 2012. 1




                                             45
Rafael Repullo and Javier Suarez. Venture capital finance: A security design approach.
  Review of Finance, 8:75­108, 2004. 7

Alicia Robb and David Robinson. The capital structure decision of new firms. The Review
  of Financial Studies, 27:153­79, 2014. 4

Scott Sage. The rise of venture debt in europe. Technical report, Winston & Strawn, 2010.
  15

Klaus M. Schmidt. Convertible securities and venture capital finance. Journal of Finance,
  43:1139­1166, 2003. 1

Tereza Tykvov´
             a. When and why do venture capital-backed companies obtain venture lend-
  ing? Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 52(3):1049­1080, 2017. 1

Susheng Wang and Hailan Zhou. Staged financing in venture capital: Moral hazard and
  risks. Journal of Corporate Finance, 10:131­155, 2004. 1

Xinxin Wang. Catering innovation: Entrepreneurship and the acquisition market. Working
  Paper, 2017. 25

Ming Yang and Yao Zeng. Financing entrepreneurial production: Security design with
  fleixble information acquisition. Review of Financial Studies, 3:819­863, 2019. 1




                                             46
A     Proofs

Proof of Lemma 1
First, we confirm:

                                     Xs+1 + D                                Xs+1 + D
     E [(1 - s+1 ) Y | p,  ] =        1-         +  ) Y + (p -  )
                                               (~                       1-              ~Y      (13)
                                     (~
                                       + ) Y                                    ~Y
                                            Xs+1 + D
                            + (1 - )    1-               - ) Y
                                                       (~                                       (14)
                                              - ) Y
                                            (~
                                Y - (Xs+1 + D)] +  [(2 - 1) Y ]
                          = p [~                                                                (15)

The first term is positive since, conditional on reaching the milestone, the firm can raise cap-
ital at s +1 (and note that this happens with probability p) The second term is positive since
      1
> 2     , capturing the expected increase in firm value, given  . Rewriting the entrepreneur's
objective function yields
            (1 - ) (1 - s ) (p [~
                                 Y - (Xs+1 + D)] +  [(2 - 1) Y ]) + b (p + ( - 1)  )        (16)
This is linear in  , implying a corner solution:    {0, h }. The entrepreneur's utility is
weakly increasing in  as long as
                        (1 - ) (1 - s ) [(2 - 1) Y ] - b (1 - )  0                   (17)
Thus, as long as (7) holds, the entrepreneur chooses   = h which completes our proof.




Proof of Proposition 1
                                  s
First, we need to show that       D
                                      < 0. At the start of stage s, given the information available,

                           Xs - P [ > 0] D
                  s =                                                                          (18)
                       E [(1 - s+1 ) Y |  (s )]
                                          Xs - E [p] D
                     =                                                   =                     (19)
                               Y - Xs+1 ] +  (s ) [(2 - 1) Y ] - E [p] D
                       E [p] [~
                s
                   < 0                                                                         (20)
                D
                             Y - Xs+1 ] +  (s ) [(2 - 1) Y ]
                Xs < E [p] [~                                                                  (21)

This is always true since, if the firm could successfully raise equity at stage s without debt,
           Xs
s = E[p][~ Y -Xs+1 ]
                     < 1. Thus, increasing the amount of debt issued lowers s which increases
the left-hand side of the IC constraint. Thus, if there exists some D such that

                                               Xs - E [p] D
             (1 - ) 1 -                                                                        (22)
                                    Y - Xs+1 ] +  (s ) [(2 - 1) Y ] - E [p] D
                            E [p] [~
                                                                b       1-
                                                                              ,                (23)
                                                                Y      2 - 1


                                                   47
then the issuance of venture debt will induce the entrepreneur to choose the high-risk/high-
value strategy which is strictly preferred by the VC.




Proof of Proposition 2
Suppose the firm cannot raise capital via pure equity at the start of stage s, i.e., Xs >
        Y - Xs+1 ). In this case, the logic above still hold since it is feasible for (21) to hold
E [p] (~
as long as risk-taking is sufficiently beneficial, i.e. if h [(2 - 1) Y ] is sufficiently large. By
the same logic, if there exists some D such that (7) holds, then the issuance of debt to be
repaid at the start of stage s + 1 will allow the firm to raise capital instead of closing.
Note that levered equity venture debt is only issued if it leads to  (s ) = h which implies
that it increases E [Y ]. As discussed in the main text,  serves as a proxy both for stage
s + 1 beliefs about increased future market value as well as a decrease in the likelihood of
closure (going forward). Thus, in our setting an increase in E [Y ] suggests lower future
closure rates.




Proof of Proposition 3
We begin by rewriting (7) to establish a threshold milestone achievement signal; specifically,
if the firm issued runway extension debt then the entrepreneur chooses the risky strategy as
long as

                                Xs                          b      1-
  (1 - ) 1 -                                                                 =                (24)
                     Y - Xs+1 ] + h [(2 - 1) Y ]
                 p [~                                       Y     2 - 1
                                                                  Xs
                                                               b        1-    - h [(2 - 1) Y ]
                                                       (1-( (1-  )Y )( 2-1 ))
                                                     p
                                                                        Y - Xs+1 ]
                                                                      [~
                                                                                            (25)
                                                       pe                                     (26)

Because the statement of the proposition includes the condition that the agent is able to
obtain financing at s regardless of the milestone reached, this threshold for risk-taking
applies ex-ante under all-equity financing (and replacing p with E [p] ) and once the milestone
is realized. Under this same assumption, we can also write the threshold over which the agent
can raise capital with no risk-taking as
                                              Xs
                                      p               p                                    (27)
                                          ~ Y - Xs+1
                                          
Note that it is always the case that ph > E [p] > pl . The assumption that the VC can
raise capital regardless of the milestone implies that pl > p and we adopt that assumption
throughout the rest of the proof. It is straightforward to see that pe can be higher or lower


                                                48
than p: for instance, if b = 0, pe < p, but as b increases, so does pe (and for sufficiently high
b, it must be the case that pe > p). In what follows, we show the implications of an increase
in pe increases for the VC's expected earnings.
    If pl > pe , then the entrepreneur always takes risk and is indifferent between equity
financing and extending the runway. To see this, note that with equity financing the VC
earns in expectation,

                                   Xs
            1-                                          E [(1 - s+1 ) Ys+1 |  = h ] =                     (28)
                     E [(1 - s+1 ) Ys+1 | ps ,  = h ]
                                                (E [(1 - s+1 ) Ys+1 |  = h ] - Xs ) =                     (29)
                                      (E [p] [~ Y - Xs+1 ] + h [(2 - 1) Y ] - Xs )                        (30)

while with a runway extension she earns

                         [P [p = ph ] (E [(1 - s+1 ) Ys+1 | p = ph ,  = h ] - Xs )] +                     (31)
                      [(1 - P [p = ph ]) (E [(1 - s+1 ) Ys+1 | p = pl ,  = h ] - Xs )] =                  (32)
       ([P [p = ph ] ph + (1 - P [p = ph ]) pl ] [~
                                                   Y - Xs+1 ] + h [(2 - 1) Y ] - Xs ) =                   (33)
                                       (E [p] [~ Y - Xs+1 ] + h [(2 - 1) Y ] - Xs ) .                     (34)

Thus, she is indifferent between the two issuance policies. Suppose instead that E [p] > pe >
pl . Then nothing changes if the VC issues equity but extending the runway generates a lower
payoff:

                      Y - Xs+1 ] + h [(2 - 1) Y ] - Xs ) + (1 - P [p = ph ]) (pl (~
   [P [p = ph ] (ph [~                                                             Y - Xs+1 ) - Xs )] =   (35)
                                                    Y - Xs+1 ] + P [p = ph ] h [(2 - 1) Y ] - Xs ) ,
                                           (E [p] [~                                                      (36)

since P [p = ph ] < 1. On the other hand, if ph > pe > E [p], then issuing equity only yields

                                (E [(1 - s+1 ) Ys+1 |  = 0] - Xs ) =                                      (37)
                                                 Y - Xs+1 ] - Xs ) .
                                        (E [p] [~                                                         (38)

In this case, extending the runway is strictly preferred because the payoff is (36). Thus,
holding fixed E [p] while increasing P [p = ph ] (for instance by lowering pl ) makes venture
debt more valuable. Finally, if pe > ph , then the VC is once again indifferent because her
payoff with runway extension is reduced to

                        Y - Xs+1 ) - Xs ) + (1 - P [p = ph ]) (pl (~
     [P [p = ph ] (ph (~                                            Y - Xs+1 ) - Xs )] =                  (39)
                                                         (E [p] [~  Y - Xs+1 ] - Xs ) .                   (40)




Proofs of Proposition 4


                                                     49
We first consider the case when the firm cannot obtain financing if it is revealed that p = pl ,
i.e. p > pl . Under this assumption, the firm must issue debt with face value P[        Xs
                                                                                       p=ph ]
                                                                                              to
account for this risk. As a result, the venture capitalist must raise Xs 1 +  1- P[p=ph ]
                                                                                P[p=ph ]
                                                                                            at
 
s which implies that her expected payoff becomes
                                                                1 - P [p = ph ]
         P [p = ph ] E [(1 - s+1 ) Ys+1 | ph ,  ] - Xs 1 +                         .      (41)
                                                                  P [p = ph ]
There are two scenarios to consider.
    First, suppose that pe > E [p] > p. In this case, the firm can obtain financing at the start
of stage s but the entrepreneur will choose the low-risk strategy. If extending the runway
leads to default when p = pl , then venture debt can only be valuable if the entrepreneur
chooses the high-risk strategy when p = ph . In this case, the VC's payoff becomes

                             Y - Xs+1 ] + h [(2 - 1) Y ]] - Xs (P [p = ph ] +  (1 - P [p = ph ])))
          (P [p = ph ] [ph [~                                                                        (42)
This exceeds the payoff under equity financing as long as
                          Y - Xs+1 ] + h [(2 - 1) Y ]] - Xs (P [p = ph ] +  (1 - P [p = ph ])) >
        P [p = ph ] [ph [~                                                                           (43)
                                                                               Y - Xs+1 ] - Xs 
                                                                       E [p] [~                      (44)
                                    P [p = ph ] h [(2 - 1) Y ] + Xs ((1 - ) (1 - P [p = ph ])) >     (45)
                                                               (1 - P [p = ph ]) pl [~
                                                                                      Y - Xs+1 ]     (46)

It is straightforward to see, for instance, that this must hold when pl  0. It is also clear that
this is more likely to hold when the required investment (Xs or Xs+1 ) increases, when the
required runway () decreases, or when the benefits of risk-taking ( , or h ) increase. Now
we must establish the condition under which the entrepreneur actually chooses the high-risk
strategy. The threshold has changed since the financing terms are different. We must now
write the IC constraint as

                    Xs 1 +  1- P[p=ph ]
                             P[p=ph ]                             b             1-
        1-                                                                              =            (47)
                  Y - Xs+1 ] + h [(2 - 1) Y ]
             ph [~                                           (1 - ) Y          2 - 1
                                                                  1-P[p=ph ]
                                                         Xs 1+
                                                                   P[p=ph ]
                                                                                 - h [(2 - 1) Y ]
                                                         1-( (1-b
                                                                  )Y   )( 21- 
                                                                            -1 )
                                                  ph                                                 (48)
                                                                           ~ Y - Xs+1
                                                                           
                                                      > pe                                           (49)

Because the firm must raise more money if it reaches the milestone, the threshold for taking
the high-risk strategy is higher than before. However, it is clear that as   0, for instance,
that this threshold approaches pe . Suppose that   0, pl  0 and pe  E [p]. Then it is
surely the case that the entrepreneur chooses  = h if p = ph and the VC prefers runway
extension (despite the risk of closure if p = pl ). Finally, we note that (48) is more likely to
hold when the required runway () decreases, or when the benefits of risk-taking ( or h )
increase.




                                                    50
    Second, suppose that p > E [p]. In this case, the firm cannot obtain financing at the start
of stage s using equity. Extending the runway must lead to default when p = pl , but we
will show that venture debt can be valuable if p = ph , regardless of whether or not the firm
chooses the high-risk strategy. If the entrepreneur chooses not to take risk then the VC's
expected payoff would be
                                                               1 - P [p = ph ]
                                  Y - Xs+1 ] - Xs 1 + 
                 P [p = ph ] ph [~                                                        (50)
                                                                 P [p = ph ]
Moreover, investors are willing to provide equity at s as long as

             Xs 1 +  1- P[p=ph ]
                      P[p=ph ]
                                    1 =                                                   (51)
                     Y - Xs+1 ]
                ph [~
                                            Xs     P [p = ph ] +  (1 - P [p = ph ])
                                  ph                                                      (52)
                                        ~ Y - Xs+1
                                                               P [p = ph ]

The firm's inability to raise equity at s implies only that
                                                      Xs
                                        E [p] <                                           (53)
                                                  ~ Y - Xs+1
                                                  

Note that since ph > E [p] if   0 and p  E [p], then both (52) and (53) will hold, i.e.,
the firm can only obtain financing through the issuance of venture debt, thereby preventing
closure at stage s. Finally, as discussed in the proof of proposition 2, runway extension with
venture debt is associated with higher E [Y ], which is associated with lower rates of closure
in the future.




Proof of Corollary 1
These results were established in previous proofs. We establish that a shorter required
runway () allows venture debt to prevent closure and makes runway extension more valuable
in the proof of proposition 4). An increase in initial dilution (1 - ) and required investment
(Xs ) and a decrease in E [p] make it more likely that pe > E [p], i.e. the VC cannot get the
entrepreneur to choose the high-risk strategy. Proposition 1 show that the use of venture
debt in this case is always optimal, sometimes strictly.




                                                  51
Appendix Figure 1: Predict Hazard of Closure by Series, by high/ low volume (reputation) investors



                                                                    Seed                                                                                                   Series A
     0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30




                                                                                                             0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30
               Hazard of Closure




                                                                                                                       Hazard of Closure
                                          1            2            3             4                 5                                             1            2            3             4                 5
                                                              Survival Years                                                                                          Survival Years

                                              Hi Vol Equity Only               Lo Vol Equity Only                                                     Hi Vol Equity Only               Lo Vol Equity Only

                                              Hi Vol Levered Eq.               Lo Vol Levered Eq.                                                     Hi Vol Levered Eq.               Lo Vol Levered Eq.

                                              Hi Vol Runway Loan               Lo Vol Runway Loan                                                     Hi Vol Runway Loan               Lo Vol Runway Loan




                                                                   Series B                                                                                                Series C
     0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30




                                                                                                             0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30
               Hazard of Closure




                                                                                                                       Hazard of Closure




                                          1            2            3             4                 5                                             1            2            3             4                 5
                                                              Survival Years                                                                                          Survival Years

                                              Hi Vol Equity Only               Lo Vol Equity Only                                                     Hi Vol Equity Only               Lo Vol Equity Only

                                              Hi Vol Levered Eq.               Lo Vol Levered Eq.                                                     Hi Vol Levered Eq.               Lo Vol Levered Eq.

                                              Hi Vol Runway Loan               Lo Vol Runway Loan                                                     Hi Vol Runway Loan               Lo Vol Runway Loan




Plotted are the hazard functions of closure by series by high and low volume financiers. The estimation is
akin to that of Table 3, Columns 1-4, but subsampled by high and low volume financiers.




                                                                                                        52
Appendix Table 1: Mechanism Variables Summary Statistics


This table presents the summary statistics for the dilution and runway variables in our sample. We report statistics by series and by capital structure. Observations are
rounds of financing. The sample period is 1999-2016. Dilution is defined as the current investment divided by the post-money valuation.We add 1 when we take the
logs. Forward dilution is the dilution of the next round, if any. Duration is the time in days until the next financing round.



                                                   Equity Only                                 Levered Equity                                Runway Loan
                                      Mean      St Dev Median        Obs.           Mean      St Dev Median        Obs.           Mean      St Dev Median        Obs.
                                                                                                   Seed
Dilution                              0.200     0.042     0.202     36,502          0.201     0.027      0.202     5,015          0.201     0.038      0.202     4,962
Forward Dilution                      0.199     0.043     0.186     13,576          0.210     0.032      0.223     2,486          0.203     0.046      0.223     2,366
Forward Runway Duration Days           433       385       346      13,849           395       293        338      2,509           369       325        295      2,413
                                                                                                  Series A
Dilution                              0.268     0.033     0.260     14,789          0.272     0.031      0.267     5,594          0.273     0.029      0.270     4,099
Forward Dilution                      0.211     0.026     0.202     6,328           0.214     0.027      0.210     3,197          0.214     0.025      0.210     2,314
Runway Duration Days                   558       459       442      6,379            527       377        456      3,212           471       365        384      2,328
                                                                                                  Series B
Dilution                              0.232     0.028     0.223      7,267          0.239     0.034      0.234     4,519          0.234     0.025      0.224     2,695
Forward Dilution                      0.181     0.028     0.174      3,099          0.187     0.031      0.181     2,541          0.183     0.027      0.174     1,424
Runway Duration Days                   528       461       416       3,160           605       438        521      2,592           491       368        414      1,445
                                                                                                  Series C
Dilution                              0.190     0.028     0.182      2,842          0.200     0.036      0.191     2,541          0.191     0.026      0.182     1,411
Forward Dilution                      0.189     0.028     0.181       204           0.182     0.027      0.174      301           0.197     0.037      0.201      124
Runway Duration Days                   473       409       367       1,341           577       436        492      1,401           428       368        345       812




                                                                                     53
Figure 1: Cumulative Hazard of Closure
                                                1
     Nelson-Aarlen Cumulative Hazard of Failure
    0       .2      .4       .6      .8




                                                    0   1   2     3       4   5     6      7      8      9    10   11      12     13    14      15
                                                                                        Survival Years

                                                            Equity Only           Leveraged Equity (dashed)             Runway Loans (dotted)
                                                            95% CI                95% CI                                95% CI




This figure depicts the Nelson-Aarlen cumulative hazard of failure over survival years. Observations are at
the round-year level. Note that the observations at risk do not stay constant, as rounds get truncated out of
the sample when they experience an exit other than closure.
.




                                                                                          54
Figure 2: Diagnostic Tests for Survival Analysis
                           80,000




                                                                                                                          0
                                                  70,598
                                                           67,807                                                                                                                         -3,194 -3,162




                                                                                                                          -10,000
                                        60,000




                                                                                                                                                                          -7,815 -7,698
       Akaike's Information Criterion Statistic




                                                                                                                    LogLikelihood
                                                                                                                                                        -15,146 -14,942




                                                                                                                       -20,000
                      40,000




                                                                    30,365 29,957




                                                                                                                          -30,000
    20,000




                                                                                    15,702 15,469

                                                                                                                                              -33,867
                                                                                                    6,459   6,395                   -35,263




                                                                                                                          -40,000
                           0




                                                      Seed             Series A        Series B       Series C                           Seed              Series A         Series B         Series C
                                                                    AIC_Weibull              AIC_Loglogistic                                  Loglikelihood_Weibull               Loglikelihood_Loglogistic




Panel A
Depicted are the Akaike's information criterion (AIC) statistic and the loglikehood from parametric survival
models of the Weibull distribution (dark/blue) and thel Loglogistic distribution (light/gold) by staging. A
smaller AIC statistic and a larger loglikelihood statistic indicate a better goodness-of-fit. The estimations
include the controls used in the main estimation (Table 3).




Panel B
Panel B follows Lee (2003) and plots the log odds ratios from a loglogistic survival. The log odds ratio,
even in a model without covariates, should be linear in log time. We fit the no covariate survival model and
plot log odds ratio against log time for each stage.

.



                                                                                                                           55
Figure 3: Predicted Hazard of Closure by Series



                                                                Seed                                                                                   Series A
     0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30




                                                                                             0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30
              Hazard of Closure




                                                                                                      Hazard of Closure
                                          1           2           3        4       5                                              1           2           3        4       5
                                                            Survival Years                                                                          Survival Years

                                              Equity Only                 Runway Loan                                                 Equity Only                 Runway Loan

                                              Levered Equity                                                                          Levered Equity




                                                               Series B                                                                                Series C
     0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30




                                                                                             0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30
              Hazard of Closure




                                                                                                      Hazard of Closure




                                          1           2           3        4       5                                              1           2           3        4       5
                                                            Survival Years                                                                          Survival Years

                                              Equity Only                 Runway Loan                                                 Equity Only                 Runway Loan

                                              Levered Equity                                                                          Levered Equity




This figure shows the hazard functions of closure by stage, corresponding to the estimation in Table 3,
columns (1)-(4).




                                                                                        56
Figure 4: Predict Hazard of Closure across All Series


                    0.225                          Across All Series
                                                                                                          Predicted hazard
                                                                                      Survi-   Equity    Levered   Runway
                                                                                      val      Only      Equity    Loan
                                                                                      Time
                    0.200



                                                                                           1     0.222     0.056    0.148
                                                                                          2      0.181     0.061    0.135
                    0.175




                                                                                          3      0.128     0.053    0.106
                                                                                          4      0.113     0.046    0.090
      0.075 0.100 0.125 0.150




                                                                                          5      0.098     0.043    0.077
                                                                                          6      0.088     0.041    0.070
           Hazard of Closure




                                                                                          7      0.076     0.042    0.062
                                                                                         8+      0.057     0.040    0.047
                                                                                      Total      0.152     0.051    0.108
                    0.050
                    0.025
                    0.000




                                1   2          3        4       5           6    7
                                                      Survival Years

                                        Equity Only                     Runway Loan
                                        Levered Equity




This figure shows the hazard functions of closure pooled across all series, constructed as the weighted
average of the predicted hazard from Table 3, columns (1)-(4). The weights are the number of round-year
observations from each series.




                                                                       57
Figure 5: Predict Hazard of Closure across All Series, by high/low volume (reputation) investors


                                                                                       Across All Series
                                                                                                                             High Volume Investors: Predicted hazard
     0.000 0.025 0.050 0.075 0.100 0.125 0.150 0.175 0.200 0.225

                                                                                                                            Survi- Equity     Levered Runway
                                                                                                                            val     Only      Equity      Loan
                                                                                                                            Time
                                                                                                                                  1   0.179      0.052       0.096
                                                                                                                                  2   0.129      0.057       0.084
                                                                                                                                  3   0.080      0.048       0.067
                                                                                                                                  4   0.065      0.040       0.061
                                                                                                                                  5   0.062      0.038       0.056
                                                                                                                                  6   0.066      0.036       0.054
                            Hazard of Closure




                                                                                                                                  7   0.070      0.040       0.054
                                                                                                                            8+        0.060      0.038       0.044
                                                                                                                            Total     0.112      0.047       0.072


                                                                                                                              Low Volume Investors: Predicted hazard
                                                                                                                            Survi- Equity     Levered Runway
                                                                                                                            val     Only      Equity      Loan
                                                                                                                            Time
                                                                                                                                  1   0.231      0.065       0.170
                                                                                                                                  2   0.192      0.074       0.158
                                                                                                                                  3   0.138      0.069       0.123
                                                                                                                                  4   0.122      0.062       0.103
                                                                                                                                  5   0.104      0.054       0.086
                                                                   1        2      3       4       5       6     7     8+         6   0.091      0.049       0.077
                                                                                         Survival Years                           7   0.076      0.046       0.065
                                                                                                                                8+    0.056      0.042       0.049
                                                                       Hi Vol Equity Only             Lo Vol Equity Only
                                                                                                                            Total     0.160      0.061       0.123
                                                                       Hi Vol Levered Eq.             Lo Vol Levered Eq.
                                                                       Hi Vol Runway Loan             Lo Vol Runway Loan




This figure shows the hazards functions of closure pooled across all series and split by high and low volume
financiers. We pool the predicted hazard by taking the weighted average of all series where the weights are
the number of round-year observations from each series.




                                                                                                               58
Table 1: Summary Statistics

This table reports summary statistics for the sample used in our analysis. Observations are rounds of financing. The sample
period is 1999-2016. Panel A presents the distribution of observations across series, conveying how many rounds, rounds per
firm, and how many yearly observations this translates into for the survival analysis. We also display the counts and
percentage of levered equity, runway loans, and equity financing by series. Panel B reports the industry distribution by series.
Panel C reports the number of employees across series, as reported in quintiles to Crunchbase.


Panel A: Capital Structure Deal Prevalence
                                  Seed              Series A             Series B             Series C              Total
Observations
Overall Rounds:                       46,480              24,481              14,481                6,794               92,236
 Representing # of Firms:             36,360              22,104              12,988                6,110               54,000
 Representing # Rounds/Firm:           1.3                1.1                  1.1                    1.1                   1.7
 # of Round-Years in Lifespan:        202,744            131,422              77,984               36,984              449,134

                             Counts     %       Counts      %        Counts      %        Counts      %       Counts      %
Equity Only                  36,503   78.5%     14,788    60.4%      7,267     50.2%      2,842     41.8%     61,400    66.6%
Levered Equity                5,015   10.8%      5,594    22.9%      4,519     31.2%      2,541     37.4%     17,669    19.2%
Runway Loan                   4,962   10.7%      4,099    16.7%      2,695     18.6%      1,411     20.8%     13,167    14.3%


Distribution of Funding Year
                  25%ile         2012                 2009                 2008                2009                 2008
                  50%ile         2014                 2013                 2012                2012                 2011
                  75%ile         2015                 2015                 2015                2014                 2013

Panel B: Industry Distribution
                                  Seed              Series A            Series B             Series C              Total
                             Counts     %       Counts      %        Counts     %         Counts     %        Counts     %
Biotech / Health             6,705 14.4%        5,521 22.6%          3,660 25.3%          1,929 28.4%         17,815 19.3%
Energy                        506     1.1%       539      2.2%        434     3.0%         211     3.1%        1,690   1.8%
Finance                      1,779    3.8%       791      3.2%        456     3.1%         150     2.2%        3,176   3.4%
Other                        6,907 14.9%        2,876 11.7%          1,557 10.8%           625     9.2%       11,965 13.0%
Software / AI                29,221 62.9%       14,216 58.1%         8,112 56.0%          3,796 55.9%         55,345 60.0%
Unknown                      1,362    2.9%       538      2.2%        262     1.8%          83     1.2%        2,245   2.4%

Panel C: Size Distribution
                             Seed                   Series A            Series B             Series C               Total
                       Counts     %             Counts      %        Counts     %         Counts     %        Counts      %
Employees 1 to 10      20,388 43.9%             4,228 17.3%          1,589 11.0%           583     8.6%       26,788 29.0%
          11 to 50     18,675 40.2%             10,755 43.9%         5,248 36.2%          2,217 32.6%         36,895 40.0%
          51 to 100     2,180    4.7%            3,409 13.9%         2,724 18.8%          1,512 22.3%          9,825 10.7%
          101 to 250     981     2.1%            1,786    7.3%       1,554 10.7%           851     12.5%       5,172    5.6%
          251 to 500     325     0.7%             734     3.0%        775     5.4%         483      7.1%       2,317    2.5%
          501 to 1000    206     0.4%             542     2.2%        593     4.1%         350      5.2%       1,691    1.8%
          1001 to 5000    94     0.2%             234     1.0%        250     1.7%         146      2.1%        724     0.8%
          5001+           40     0.1%              92     0.4%        108     0.7%          60      0.9%        300     0.3%
          Unknown       3,591    7.7%            2,701 11.0%         1,640 11.3%           592      8.7%       8,524    9.2%




                                                                59
Table 1, continued

Panel D presents the summary statistics for the control covariates in our sample. We report statistics by series and by capital structure. Current investment is amount of
capital raised in the current financing round. Prior investments is the sum of all prior capital raised by the startup. The pre-money valuation is the valuation accruing to
founders and prior investors as implied by the valuation of the current investment. This is an estimate, as we use observed numbers when available and apply Pitchbook
year-industry averages for missing values. High volume investor are those who have financed an above-median number of deals in the prior year.


Panel D: Firm and Investment Characteristics
                                                  Equity Only                                   Levered Equity                               Runway Loans
                                    Mean     St Dev P 25      P 50       P 75       Mean    St Dev P 25     P 50         P 75       Mean St Dev P 25 P 50            P 75
                                                                                                  Seed
Observations                       36,503                                           5,015                                           4,962
Current Investment ($ 1,000)        700      1,037     125      383     1,000       1,497    1,967    525      1,200    2,000        620 1,474       100      250   750
Prior Investments ($ 1,000)         233      1,500      0        0        0          376     2,009     0         0       100         452 3,474        0        0     0
PreMoney Valuation ($ 1,000)       2,893     4,933     541     1,591    3,885       5,964    7,958 2,147       4,669    7,894       2,481 5,868      461     1,051 3,000
High Volume Investor (0-1)          0.11     0.32       0        0        0         0.58     0.49      0         1        1          0.17 0.38        0        0     0
                                                                                                  Series A
Observations                       14,788                                           5,594                                           4,099
Current Investment ($ 1,000)        4,380 5,932       1,400    3,000 5,000          8,004 8,714 3,000          5,600     9,600      5,048    6,349 1,200 3,358 6,500
Prior Investments ($ 1,000)         1,044 3,778         0        0    750           1,803 5,700      0           0       1,735      1,663    5,965   0     0   1,000
PreMoney Valuation ($ 1,000)       12,375 25,523      3,750    7,800 14,365        21,707 24,198 8,389        14,933    25,636     13,614   19,742 3,241 8,836 16,777
High Volume Investor (0-1)           0.21  0.41         0        0      0            0.68  0.47      0           1         1         0.33     0.47   0     0     1
                                                                                                Series B
Observations                        7,267                                           4,519                                           2,695
Current Investment ($ 1,000)       10,220 12,541      2,000 5,998 13,000           15,876 13,079 7,200        12,000    20,000     11,247   13,047 2,000 7,500 15,000
Prior Investments ($ 1,000)         5,071 9,396         0    2,300 5,923            8,790 12,035 1,800         5,500    10,800      6,607   10,681 310 3,490 8,000
PreMoney Valuation ($ 1,000)       34,572 44,506      6,977 18,808 43,669          52,987 54,256 22,687       38,284    65,224     40,084   92,620 6,977 22,953 48,493
High Volume Investor (0-1)          0.25   0.43         0      0     0               0.76  0.43      1           1         1        0.38     0.49    0     0      1
                                                                                                Series C
Observations                        2,842                                           2,541                                           1,411
Current Investment ($ 1,000)       10,133 13,182      2,000 5,000 12,092           20,712 15,806 10,000       16,000 27,500        10,775   13,553 1,585 5,567 15,000
Prior Investments ($ 1,000)        15,686 18,562      4,340 10,000 20,000          22,212 19,702 10,000       17,305 28,400        18,851   20,249 6,073 13,000 24,150
PreMoney Valuation ($ 1,000)       46,923 95,284      8,493 22,518 51,600          89,567 87,346 34,885       65,783 115,779       48,361   71,511 6,957 22,548 60,174
High Volume Investor (0-1)           0.22  0.41         0      0      0              0.85  0.36      1           1      1            0.37    0.48    0      0      1




                                                                                      60
Table 2: Survival and Exit
This table reports the univariate statistics for closure and exits by capital structure and series. Observations are rounds of
financing. The sample period is 1999-2016. When explicit closure is not available in the data, we classify any firm that goes
without a funding round or news update for two years as closed. Survival is defined as ongoing, undisclosed-price
acquisition, price-disclosed acquisition, and IPO.

                                                                            All Rounds
                                          Seed             Series A          Series B           Series C            Total
                                         Percent           Percent           Percent            Percent            Percent
Closed                                    45%                33%              27%                21%                37%
Survival                                  55%                67%              73%                79%                63%

Resolution Condition on Survival
 Ongoing                                 85.0%              69.6%             61.3%              56.3%               74%
 Acquistion without Price                12.1%              19.8%             21.9%              22.7%               17%
 Acquistion with Price                   1.9%                6.5%             10.0%              11.9%                6%
 IPO                                     1.0%               4.1%              6.8%               9.2%                4%
                                                                               Equity
                                          Seed             Series A          Series B           Series C            Total
                                         Percent           Percent           Percent            Percent            Percent
Closed                                    48%                37%              33%                28%                43%
Survival                                  52%                63%              67%                72%                57%

Resolution Condition on Survival
 Ongoing                                 86.7%              74.2%             67.1%              62.7%              79.3%
 Acquistion without Price                10.5%              17.1%             19.0%              19.8%              14.0%
 Acquistion with Price                   1.7%               4.8%              7.6%               9.1%               3.8%
 IPO                                     1.1%               3.9%              6.4%               8.4%               3.0%
                                                                          Levered Equity
                                          Seed             Series A          Series B           Series C            Total
                                         Percent           Percent           Percent            Percent            Percent
Closed                                    23%                19%              18%                14%                19%
Survival                                  77%                81%              82%                86%                81%

Resolution Condition on Survival
 Ongoing                                 78.7%              65.3%             56.0%              51.0%              64.3%
 Acquistion without Price                18.2%              22.1%             24.0%              24.3%              21.9%
 Acquistion with Price                   2.8%               8.5%              12.8%              15.1%               9.1%
 IPO                                      0.3%               4.2%              7.3%               9.6%               4.8%
                                                                          Runway Loans
                                          Seed             Series A          Series B           Series C            Total
                                         Percent           Percent           Percent            Percent            Percent
Closed                                    46%                34%              28%                21%                36%
Survival                                  54%                66%              72%                79%                64%

Resolution Condition on Survival
 Ongoing                                 82.0%              61.1%             57.0%              54.7%              65.9%
 Acquistion without Price                14.3%              25.0%             25.4%              24.6%              21.7%
 Acquistion with Price                   2.2%               9.2%              10.9%              11.0%              7.6%
 IPO                                     1.5%               4.7%              6.7%               9.7%               4.8%


                                                               61
Table 3: Survival Results
This table reports the loglogistic estimates for the effect of capital structure on survival. Observations are at the round-year
level. The sample period is 1999 - 2018. We follow firms from the financing round year until positive exit (M&A or IPO),
closure, or 2018, whichever comes first. The dependent variable is an indicator variable equal to one if a firm is still ongoing
in that year. Columns (1) to (4) divide the estimation by series. Standard errors in brackets are clustered at the firm level.
Columns (5) to (8) are pooled across series, including a series fixed effects, and implemented via a loglogistic frailty survival
function, where frailty is estimated at the firm level in columns (5) to (7) and at the firm-capital structure level in column (8).
All specifications control for the natural logarithm of the amount of capital raised, the natural logarithm of prior investment,
the natural logarithm of the pre-money valuation, and an indicator variable for whether the investor is a high volume investor.
We also include employee quintiles at the time of fundraising, industry fixed effects and year fixed effects. The gamma
statistic is the shape parameter of the loglogistic estimation, with a gamma less than one indicating that the hazard of closure
increases then decreases. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


                                (1)      (2)          (3)      (4)                 (5)        (6)           (7)         (8)
                   Model:           Loglogistic Survival Model                       Loglogistic-Frailty Survival Model
                  Sample:      Seed    Series A Series B Series C                            All Series Pooled
                  Display:                  Log Odds                                             Log Odds
Levered Equity               0.452*** 0.500*** 0.384*** 0.421***                0.240***                 0.197*** 0.3083***
                             [0.0216] [0.029] [0.0383] [0.0625]                 [0.0161]                 [0.0153]   [0.0175]

Runway Loans                 0.118*** 0.185*** 0.147*** 0.217***                             0.0635*** 0.0556*** 0.1077***
                             [0.0168] [0.026] [0.0359] [0.0542]                               [0.0128]  [0.0127]  [0.0158]

Log Current Investment       0.208*** 0.490*** 0.748*** 0.977***                0.113***     0.105***     0.108***     0.1275***
                             [0.0137] [0.0503] [0.0938] [0.173]                 [0.0149]      [0.014]     [0.0136]      [0.0144]

Log Prior Investments        0.0427*** 0.0488*** 0.0708*** 0.0280**             -0.129***    -0.134***    -0.126*** -0.1160***
                             [0.00414] [0.00437] [0.00523] [0.0112]              [0.002]      [0.002]      [0.002]    [0.002]

Log Premoney Value           -0.125*** -0.395*** -0.681*** -0.887***           -0.0712*** -0.0640*** -0.0743*** -0.0786***
                              [0.0147] [0.0524] [0.0957] [0.175]                 [0.016]    [0.015]    [0.015]    [0.015]

High Volume Investor         -0.0368** 0.037         0.00504      0.0183       -0.0505*** -0.0492*** -0.0401*** -0.0359***
                              [0.0154] [0.0235]      [0.032]     [0.0542]       [0.0134]   [0.0136]   [0.0121]   [0.0127]


                               Calendar Year Effects, Employee Count            Series Fixed Effects, Calendar Year Effects,
Other Variables Included
                                   Buckets, Industry Fixed Effects             Employee Count Buckets, Industry Fixed Effects

                                                                                                                          Firm-
Frailty                                                                           Firm         Firm          Firm        Capital
                                                                                                                        Structure
Observations              156,264 106,941             63,503      29,740         227,363      202,319      272,174      272,174
Gamma                      0.472    0.609              0.616      0.599           0.279        0.272        0.280         0.285
Funding Rounds            46,480   24,481             14,481      6,794          50,276       45,631        59,806       59,806
Number of Frailty Groups                                                         20,712       19,708       21,570        29,222
Mean Round-Years per Frailty Group                                                10.98        10.27        12.62         9.31
LR chi2                                                                          11,323       11,732       12,888        16,361




                                                                62
Table 4: Exit Results, Conditional on Survival


This table reports the effect of capital structure on exits. Observations are rounds of financing. The sample period is 1999-2016. We restrict the sample by dropping all
firms that eventually close. Columns (1) to (4) reports the estimates from an ordered logistic specification. The dependent variable is exits in the following descending
order: IPO, priced M&A, M&A with undisclosed price, and ongoing. Columns (5) to (9) report the estimates from a logistic specification. The dependent variable is an
indicator variable equal to one if a startup eventually achieves a M&A or IPO. Columns (1) to (8) subsample the rounds by series. Column (9) is a mixed logit (random
effects) model, with pooled series and series fixed effects to absorb static firm heterogeneity. All specifications control for the natural logarithm of the amount of capital
raised, the natural logarithm of prior investment, the natural logarithm of the pre-money valuation, and an indicator variable for whether the investor is a high volume
investor. We also include employee quintiles at the time of fundraising, industry fixed effects and year fixed effects. Standard errors in brackets are clustered at the firm
level in columns (1) to (8). *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



                                (1)         (2)           (3)        (4)                    (5)         (6)          (7)            (8)                       (9)
                   Model:             Ordered Logit of Resolution                                         Logit (Exit)                         Logit (Exit) Random Effects
                  Sample:      Seed      Series A      Series B   Series C                 Seed      Series A     Series B       Series C                   Pooled
                  Display:                    Log Odds                                                  Marginal Effects                              Marginal Effects
Levered Equity               0.437***    0.278***       0.0632     0.0146              0.0504***    0.0536***      0.0193         0.0136                  0.0071***
                             [0.0562]    [0.0485]      [0.0547]   [0.0828]              [0.0091]     [0.0117]     [0.0156]       [0.0238]                  [0.0021]

Runway Loans                 0.194***      0.266***       0.135**      0.162**         0.0211**     0.0553***      0.0396**       0.0368                  0.0088***
                             [0.0650]      [0.0521]       [0.0618]     [0.0821]        [0.0088]      [0.0130]      [0.0177]      [0.0231]                  [0.0021]

Log Current Investment       0.336***       0.249*         0.168       0.597***        0.0331***     0.0655*       -0.0108       0.137**                   0.0102*
                             [0.0804]       [0.138]       [0.188]       [0.203]         [0.0101]     [0.0342]      [0.0472]      [0.0700]                  [0.0062]

Log Prior Investments        0.0640***     0.0302***     0.0251***    0.0818***        0.0131***    0.0128***     0.0179***     0.0496***                 0.0029***
                              [0.0131]      [0.0081]      [0.0086]     [0.0182]         [0.0015]     [0.0017]      [0.0028]      [0.0088]                  [0.0003]

Log Premoney Value           -0.213**       -0.115        -0.0143      -0.484**        -0.0270**     -0.0473        0.0269       -0.139**                   -0.0053
                             [0.0850]       [0.140]       [0.188]       [0.204]         [0.0107]     [0.0351]      [0.0475]      [0.0701]                  [0.0063]

High Volume Investor          0.0879        -0.0155       0.104**       0.0265          0.00964      0.00622      0.0401***       0.0208                    0.0028
                             [0.0549]       [0.0442]      [0.0489]     [0.0722]         [0.0069]     [0.0102]      [0.0141]      [0.0212]                  [0.0017]

Other Variables Included                         Calendar Year Effects, Employee Quintiles , Industry Fixed Effects                                 + Series Fixed Effects
Rounds Observations           25,454        16,458         10,542        5,342          15,974        12,805         9,240         5,145                   43,165
Number of Firm Effects                                                                                                                                     15,052
Pseudo R-Squared               0.179         0.189         0.159         0.144             0.185       0.255         0.265         0.255


                                                                                      63
Table 5: Dilution Mechanism Results
This table reports the mixed logit (random effect) estimates of the effect of dilution on the choice of capital structure. Observations are rounds of financing. The sample
period is 1999-2016. The dependent variable in columns (1) to (4) is an indicator equal to one if the round is financed with levered equity and zero if financed with
equity only, excluding runway loans from the sample. The dependent variable in columns (5) to (8) is an indicator equal to one if the round is financed with runway
loan and zero if financed with equity only, excluding levered equity rounds. All specifications control for the natural logarithm of the amount of capital raised, the
natural logarithm of prior investment, the natural logarithm of the pre-money valuation, and an indicator variable for whether the investor is a high volume investor.
We also include employee quintiles at the time of fundraising, industry fixed effects and year fixed effects. Standard errors are in brackets. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.


                                       (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)                            (5)              (6)            (7)        (8)
                      Model:                 Logit (Choice of Levered Equity)                                             Logit (Choice of Runway Loan)
                  Estimation:                Mixed Model with Random Effects                                             Mixed Model with Random Effects
                     Sample:          Seed       Series A        Series B     Series C                         Seed          Series A        Series B    Series C
                     Display:                        Marginal Effects                                                             Marginal Effects
Log Dilution                        0.177***     1.115***       1.200***      2.177***
                                    [0.0461]      [0.177]        [0.296]       [0.554]
Forward Log Dilution                                                                                         0.200***          0.251            -0.307         2.446**
                                                                                                             [0.0712]         [0.225]          [0.313]         [1.090]
Log Prior Investments               0.000407       0.0154***        0.0279***       0.0126***               0.0112***        0.0171***       0.0209***         0.0259
                                   [0.000718]      [0.00128]        [0.00200]       [0.00443]               [0.00147]        [0.00193]       [0.00292]        [0.0188]
Log PreMoney Value                 0.0441***        0.106***        0.119***        0.158***                -0.0246***        0.0029          -0.00427        -0.0443*
                                   [0.00125]        [0.00342]       [0.00626]       [0.00909]                [0.00271]       [0.00469]       [0.00616]        [0.0263]
High Volume Investor               0.169***         0.338***        0.418***         0.627***               0.0677***        0.134***         0.123***         0.126*
                                   [0.00337]        [0.00676]       [0.0151]         [0.0189]               [0.00817]        [0.0114]         [0.0160]        [0.0729]


                                   Calendar Year Effects, Employee Quintiles, Industry Fixed                Calendar Year Effects, Employee Quintiles, Industry Fixed
Other Variables Included
                                                            Effects                                                                  Effects
Observations                         41,517          20,383           11,786           5,383                  15,942           8,642           4,523             323
Number of Random Effects             32,980          18,741           10,749           4,942                  11,932           7,671           4,014             294




                                                                                      64
Table 6: Duration-to-Next-Financing Mechanism Results

This table reports the mixed linear (random effects) estimates of the effect of duration on the choice of capital structure. Observations are rounds of financing. The
sample period is 1999-2016. All specifications control for the natural logarithm of the amount of capital raised, the natural logarithm of prior investment, the natural
logarithm of the pre-money valuation, and an indicator variable for whether the investor is a high volume investor. We also include employee quintiles at the time of
fundraising, industry fixed effects and year fixed effects. The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of the number of days until the next round of financing.
Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                   (1)                (2)             (3)           (4)                (5)             (6)                   (7)                  (8)
      Dependent Variable                                           Log Runway Forward: Duration until Next Round (in log days)
                 Sample                     Seed                           Series A                         Series B                                 Series C
                               LS Random      AR1 Random          LS Random       AR1 Random          LS Random      AR1 Random          LS Random        AR1 Random
                    Model
                                 Effects        Effects             Effects         Effects             Effects        Effects             Effects          Effects
AR1: Lag Log Runway                                0.0720***                          0.020                            0.0677***                           0.0666***
                                                    [0.0145]                         [0.0153]                           [0.0159]                            [0.0190]
Levered Equity                  -0.0443**           -0.0115        -0.0607***         0.0064           0.0472*          0.0545*           -0.0797*          -0.0795*
                                 [0.0205]           [0.0393]        [0.0198]         [0.0327]          [0.0268]         [0.0292]          [0.0427]          [0.0440]
Runway Loan                     -0.184***          -0.148***       -0.186***        -0.140***         -0.0874***       -0.0732**          -0.174***         -0.149***
                                 [0.0224]           [0.0432]        [0.0219]         [0.0358]          [0.0307]         [0.0335]           [0.0428]          [0.0433]
Log Current Investment          0.160***           0.118***          0.0929           0.166*            0.0435            0.16              0.11                0.0301
                                [0.0233]           [0.0383]         [0.0703]         [0.0898]          [0.0839]          [0.110]           [0.111]              [0.116]
Log Prior Investments          -0.0472***          -0.0531***      -0.0324***      -0.0641***         -0.0293***       -0.123***         -0.0278***        -0.0679***
                                [0.00384]           [0.0117]        [0.00340]       [0.0120]           [0.00462]        [0.0125]          [0.00910]         [0.0193]
Log PreMoney Value              -0.0578**             0.01          -0.00962          -0.0484           0.0523           -0.024            0.0104                0.104
                                 [0.0249]           [0.0398]        [0.0717]         [0.0920]          [0.0852]          [0.112]           [0.111]              [0.116]
High Volume Investor              0.0105            0.0640*        0.0955***        0.116***           0.105***         0.105***          0.130***          0.118***
                                 [0.0190]           [0.0355]        [0.0181]        [0.0304]           [0.0248]         [0.0274]          [0.0381]          [0.0390]
Constant                        3.792***           3.166***         3.639***        3.696***           3.239***         3.952***          2.799***          2.675***
                                 [0.129]            [0.248]          [0.206]         [0.313]            [0.295]          [0.353]           [0.367]           [0.442]

Other Variables Included                                         Calendar Year Effects, Employee Quintiles, Industry Fixed Effects
Observations                     18,771              5,205           11,919           4,870              7,197           5,882              3,554               3,327
Number of Random Effects         13,725              3,625           10,294           4,282              6,127           5,023              3,077               2,926


                                                                                    65
