                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    DOES JOINING THE S&P 500 INDEX HURT FIRMS?

                                        Benjamin Bennett
                                         René M. Stulz
                                           Zexi Wang

                                       Working Paper 27593
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27593


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2020




Bennett is from the AB Freeman School of Business, Tulane University, Stulz is from the Fisher
College of Business, The Ohio State University, NBER and ECGI, and Wang is from Lancaster
University Management School. We are grateful for comments at a presentation at The Ohio
State University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27593.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Benjamin Bennett, René M. Stulz, and Zexi Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Joining the S&P 500 Index Hurt Firms?
Benjamin Bennett, René M. Stulz, and Zexi Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 27593
July 2020
JEL No. G11,G14,G23,G31,G32,G35

                                         ABSTRACT

We investigate the impact on firms of joining the S&P 500 index from 1997 to 2017. We find that
the positive announcement effect on the stock price of index inclusion has disappeared and the
long-run impact of index inclusion has become negative. Inclusion worsens stock price
informativeness and some aspects of governance. Compensation, investment, and financial
policies change with index inclusion. For instance, payout policies of firms joining the index
become more similar to the policies of their index peers. ROA falls following inclusion. There is
no evidence of an impact of inclusion on competition.

Benjamin Bennett                                Zexi Wang
A.B. Freeman School of Business,                Lancaster University
Tulane University                               Management School
McAlister Drive                                 Lancaster
New Orleans, LA 70118                           Lancaster LA1 4YX
bbennett1@tulane.edu                            United Kingdom
                                                z.wang41@lancaster.ac.uk
René M. Stulz
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
806A Fisher Hall
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu




An internet appendix is available at: http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27593
1. Introduction

    For investors wanting to hold common stocks, the best-known investment textbooks show that it is

hard to do better than investing in a low cost indexed fund. However, little is known about whether

firms benefit from being included in a major index. The S&P 500 index is the most visible and

prestigious broad-based index in the US. In this paper, we investigate the real effects on firms of being

added to the S&P 500 index, and whether these real effects have changed from 1997 to 2017 as passive

holdings of stocks in the index have increased.

    Joining the S&P 500 index can have both positive and negative effects on a firm. Being added to

the index is like joining a prestigious club. A firm gains prestige by joining the club, but at the cost of

becoming compared to other firms in the club. On the positive side, the increased demand for the stock

from passive investors may increase the value of the stock and the firm gains prestige. On the negative

side, the increase in holdings by passive investors implies that more investors ignore firm fundamentals

when they make decisions about their holdings of the firm's stock (Barberis and Shleifer, 2003;

Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler, 2005), so that the stock price may become less informative and

governance may become worse. Further, active investors, managers, and board members become more

likely to assess the firm relative to other firms in the index even though the index addition itself does

not directly change the firm's fundamentals.

    From 1997 to 2017, the likelihood that a listed firm belongs to the S&P 500 index roughly doubles

because the number of listed firms falls by half. At the same time, the holdings of shares of firms in the

index by passive investors increase, but passive investors become more sophisticated in how they

attempt to replicate the performance of the index and active investors become better able to take

advantage of temporary price movements associated with changes in weights of the index and index

inclusion. Because of these changes, it is likely that the impact on firms of joining the index changes,

but how it does so is an empirical issue.

    We show that joining the index has real effects on firms and that some of these effects change over

time. While joining the index has a transitory positive effect but no long-term effect on stock prices in

the first half of our sample period, stock prices of firms joining the index experience no transitory



                                                    1
positive effect and negative risk-adjusted long-term returns in the second half of our sample period.

Though there has been much concern about the impact of joining the index on price discovery, we find

that this impact does not worsen as passive investing increases. We show that inclusion affects the

investment, payout, and financing policies of added firms. Though payout and financing policies of

included firms commove more with the payout and financing policies of their S&P 500 peers after

inclusion, we find increased comovement with investment only if we measure investment by asset

growth and not when we measure it by capital expenditures. In no case do these effects increase over

our sample period. We also find that firms in the index repurchase more and that firms joining the index

increase repurchases. A plausible explanation for this evolution is that managers of added firms see the

number of S&P 500 firms in their compensation peer group increase, so that they are more compared

to firms in the index after inclusion than before. Belonging to the index conveys valuable prestige. This

prestige may explain why firms added to the index experience a credit rating increase. This increase is

stronger earlier in our sample period. There has been much debate in the literature about a potential

adverse impact on competition of the increase in passive investment because of the associated increase

in common ownership. Using multiple measures of competition, we find no evidence that index

inclusion has a competitive impact. In particular, an included firm's profit margins do not increase and

neither do the profit margins of other firms in the industry that are already in the index.

      Introduced in 1957, the S&P 500 index is the index of choice for investors who invest in passive

equity vehicles. At the end of 2017, the index covers 83.3% of the market capitalization of the U.S.

stock market and has a market capitalization of USD 23 trillion. S&P estimates that USD 3.4 trillion

are indexed to the S&P 500 and an additional USD 6.5 trillion are benchmarked to the index at that

time. 2 When a stock is added to the index, passive investors in general tend to increase their holdings

of that stock. This is obviously the case for managers of funds indexed to the S&P 500 who hold the

index. However, it can also be the case for investors who are benchmarked to the S&P 500 as these

investors do not want their performance to differ too much from the index. We confirm that firms added

to the index have higher passive ownership after being added to the index.



2
    S&P Dow Jones Indices, Annual Survey of Assets as of December 31, 2017.

                                                      2
    Since Harris and Gurel (1986) and Shleifer (1986), much empirical evidence shows that a firm's

stock price increases when it is announced that it will join the index. This stock price increase holds in

the first half of our sample period (the early period), namely from 1997 to 2007, but not in the second

half (the late period). There is a long-standing debate in the literature on whether this price increase is

a transitory effect or a permanent effect. Possible explanations for the stock-price reaction include

temporary price pressure effects or permanent price effects arising from a shift in the demand curve for

the stock. We investigate whether the price effect is permanent. We find that there is no cumulative

abnormal return over one year in the early period irrespective of the approach we use. In contrast, there

is a significant negative cumulative abnormal return over one year including the month of addition for

the late period. This cumulative abnormal return is weaker when we exclude 2008 from the late period,

but it is still significant. Consequently, index inclusion appears to have a negative impact on shareholder

wealth in the late period but not the early period.

    A negative permanent impact of index inclusion raises the question of whether index inclusion has

negative effects on firm fundamentals over time. To identify the effects of firm addition on firm

fundamentals, we carry out a difference-in-differences (DiD) analysis based on S&P 500 addition. 3 For

each treated firm that is added to the S&P 500 index, we select a control firm that is never in the index

with similar total assets, Tobin's q, stock return, and in the same industry one year before the index

addition. Matching on stock returns is important because the S&P 500 selection committee is unlikely

to include a firm in the index whose stock has performed poorly before the inclusion. We then study

the impact of index inclusion on firms' passive holdings, stock price informativeness, governance,

corporate policies, accounting performance, and competition.

    The adverse impact of index addition comes from the fact that a stock joining the index becomes

included in a new category such that investors make decisions about the stock based on the category it

is now included in. Passive investors hold the stock because it belongs to the category and change their

holdings of the stock when they change their holdings of the category. Active investors now compare

the firm and its policies to other firms in the category. This pushes firm policies to become more similar


3
  We use the index additions but not deletions in our empirical design because the majority of deletions are caused
by acquisitions, which means we do not have the data for the deleted firms after the deletions.

                                                        3
to policies of index peers even though the decision to add a firm to the index has no direct impact on its

fundamentals.

    Passive investors do not have to acquire information about a stock to hold it. If passive investors

held all stocks, there would be no information production about stocks. We show that information

production about a firm's stock falls after the firm joins the index. Another way to put this is that stock

prices are less informative after a stock joins the index. It is well documented that price discovery in

the stock market guides managers to make more efficient decisions (see Bond, Edmans, and Goldstein,

2012, for a review of the literature). If the stock price becomes less informative, we expect firms to

make worse decisions. We find evidence that being added to the S&P 500 index reduces a firm's

investment efficiency. 4

    Higher passive holdings likely impact a firm's governance. Because passive funds simply track the

index, they may care little about firm fundamentals and accordingly spend few resources on monitoring

the corporate governance of firms in their portfolio (Bebchuk and Hirst, 2019). However, it is also

possible that passive funds have incentives to improve the governance of the firms they invest in. These

funds cannot walk away from a firm in the index because its weak governance leads it to destroy

shareholder wealth (Appel, Gormley, and Keim, 2016). Furthermore, the low-fee design of passive

funds also means fewer resources and less expertise for monitoring. Existing evidence shows that index

fund providers vote more with management (Heath, Macciocchi, Michaely, and Ringgenberg, 2019)

and that increases in passive ownership increase CEO power (Schmidt and Fahlenbrach, 2017). Both

of these changes suggest that index inclusion reduces the incentives for investors to attempt to influence

management through block holdings. Corum, Malenko, and Malenko (2020) show that, theoretically,

the impact of an increase in passive investors on governance depends on whether the growth in passive

investors is at the expense of active institutional managers or of independent retail investors. They argue

that an increase in passive investors at the expense of active investors is likely to impact governance

adversely because active investors have greater incentives to intervene in the governance of the firms

in which they are investors. We find that the growth in passive holdings when a firm is added to the


4
  Billett, Diep-Nguyen, and Garfinkel (2020) find a related result for a similar sample period with a different
test.

                                                        4
index comes at the expense of active institutional investors. The literature has provided extensive

evidence on the governance benefits of block ownership. In particular, lower block ownership can

exacerbate the free-rider issue in governance (Shleifer and Vishny, 1986; Edmans, 2009; Edmans and

Manso, 2011). We find consistent evidence that blockholder ownership is significantly reduced after a

firm is added to the S&P 500 index.

    Categorical thinking can affect how institutions that produce information about firms think about a

firm that is added to the S&P 500. We find this to be the case for rating agencies. We find that ratings

of S&P 500 firms are higher controlling for firm characteristics. When a firm is added to the index, its

credit rating increases by half a notch. However, the treatment effect is stronger for the early period

than for the late period.

    Categorical thinking likely impacts actions by the added firm's board and by its management. As a

firm is added to the S&P 500, its board may now think that it is a different firm and that its management

should be evaluated differently. We find that after a firm is added to the S&P 500, management's

performance comparison group involves more firms from the S&P 500 even though inclusion does not

impact firm fundamentals directly. We then explore how investment, external financing, and payout

policies change when a firm is added to the index because of decisions by management. We find

evidence that following inclusion investment falls, equity issuance falls, and dividends and repurchases

increase. In addition, investment measured by asset growth, equity issuance, debt issuance, dividends

and repurchases commove more with those of index peers after inclusion. However, some of these

effects are stronger for the early period than the late period.

     Our evidence shows that the permanent stock price impact of index addition is negative in the late

period. We show that index addition has a real impact on firms. An obvious question is whether this

real impact translates into lower accounting performance. Though most of the literature has taken the

view that the fact that a firm is added to the index conveys no new information about the future

performance of the firm, Denis, McConnell, Ovtchinnikov, and Yu (2003) find that analyst EPS

forecasts increase after addition and that firms have higher realized EPS. We find consistent evidence.

However, when we use ROA instead of EPS, we find that index addition is associated with a decrease



                                                     5
in ROA. Since firms joining the index increase repurchases, it is plausible that EPS could increase

because of the decrease in the number of shares rather than because of an increase in net income.

    Finally, we investigate the effects of index addition on market competition. As index addition

mechanically increases the common ownership of firms in the index due to the greater holdings by

funds tracking the index, index addition may weaken the competition among industry peers within the

index, which are generally industry leaders and have a large impact on the competition dynamics.

However, it is also argued that index funds generally lack incentives to intervene in the real operations

of firms in their portfolio, and therefore, they should not affect competition dynamics in the market.

We find no evidence of an impact of inclusion on competition using measures at the firm level and at

the industry level. In particular, we do not observe an increase in profit margins for included firms or

for other firms in the industry already belonging to the index.

    Our paper contributes to several literatures. First, this paper contributes to the literature on the effect

of adding a stock to an index. Following Harris and Gurel (1986) and Shleifer (1986), a large number

of papers examine the stock price impact of S&P 500 index addition. Much of the focus of this literature

is on whether demand curves for stocks slope downward. Many of these papers (e.g., Beneish and

Whaley, 1996; Lynch and Mendenhall, 1997; Wurgler and Zhuravskaya, 2002) conclude that there is a

permanent impact from index addition, but they look at short periods following the addition. More

recently, Patel and Welch (2017) conclude that there is solid evidence of reversion for the 2000s.

Authors have argued that S&P 500 index additions are problematic to assess stock demand curves.

Kaul, Mehrotra, and Morck (2000) and Chang, Hong, and Liskovich (2015) find evidence of downward-

sloping demand curves using, respectively, a change in weights for the TSE 300 and Russell indexes

reconstitutions. Baltussen, Bekkum, and Da (2017) find that serial dependence in index returns has

recently turned significantly negative due to the rising popularity of equity index products. Vijh (1994),

Barberis, Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005), and Greenwood (2008) show that index addition increases

comovement between stocks added and the S&P 500 index, while Chen, Singal, Whitelaw (2016)

question the evidence of an increase in comovement. Qin and Singal (2015) show that indexing reduces

the efficiency of stock prices, as indicated by stronger postearningsannouncement drift and greater

deviations of stock prices from the random walk. Existing studies mainly focus on the effects in the

                                                      6
stock market. In contrast, this paper provides evidence that index addition impacts firms' real

operations.

    Second, this paper contributes to the literature on passive investing (see French, 2008, and Cremers

and Petajisto, 2009, for early contributions). In recent years, passive investment vehicles such as index

funds and index ETFs have grown dramatically. A large literature has developed on the implications of

the increase in holdings by passive investors. The literature has mixed results. For example, Boehmer

and Song (2018) and Glosten, Nallareddy, and Zou (2016) show that passive investing facilitates the

transmission of systematic information into prices. Boone and White (2015) find evidence that greater

holdings by quasi-indexing investors lead to greater transparency and hence a better information

environment for the stock. In contrast to these positive implications of passive investing, other papers

find negative implications. For instance, Ben-David, Franzoni, and Moussawi (2018) show that an

increase in ETF ownership in a stock causes an increase in stock return's volatility and negative

autocorrelation, Israeli, Lee, and Sridhavan (2017) report that an increase in ETF ownership of a stock

increases the stock's trading costs and decreases its earnings-response coefficient, and Coles, Heath,

and Ringgenberg (2018) find that index investing introduces noise into stock prices but does not impact

long-term price efficiency.

    Much of the literature on the implications of passive investing has used Russell indexes

reconstitutions as a quasi-exogenous event, but indexing to the S&P 500 dwarfs indexing to the Russell

indexes. The focus of this literature is stocks demoted from the Russell 1000 to the Russell 2000. The

categorical thinking that we investigate in relation to the S&P 500 is unlikely to be relevant for these

demoted stocks. For instance, it seems unlikely that the board of a company that has its stock demoted

would suddenly want its management to adopt policies similar to those of the smaller firms in the

Russell 2000. This literature examines the impact of changes in passive investors on governance and

reaches conflicting results. For instance, Appel, Gormley, and Keim (2016) find that passive mutual

funds influence governance positively through their voting choices at the annual general meeting, but

Schmidt and Fahlenbrach (2017) examine high-cost governance activities requiring continuous

monitoring throughout the year and conclude that an increase in passive institutional membership

increases the CEO's power at the expense of shareholders. Our paper shows that an increase in passive

                                                   7
investing has real effects on firms, in that it leads to poorer price discovery, less efficient investment,

and lower block ownership. However, though much attention is devoted to potential anti-competitive

implications of common ownership presumed to increase with passive ownership (see Schmalz, 2018,

for a review), we find no evidence of an impact of inclusion on competition.

      Third, our paper contributes to the literature on the real effects of financial markets (Bennett, Stulz,

and Wang, 2019; Bond, Edmans, and Goldstein, 2012; Bond, Goldstein, and Prescott, 2009; Chen,

Goldstein, and Jiang, 2007; Durnev, Morck, and Yeung, 2004; Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang, 2012;

Edmans, Jayaraman and Schneemeier, 2017; Luo, 2005). We show that S&P 500 index addition has

significant effects on firms' real decisions on investments, governance, and managerial performance

evaluation. Some of these effects follow form a change in the informativeness of stock prices, but most

of the effects we discuss appear to be related to categorical thinking on the part of management, the

firm's board, and investors in general when they assess the performance and policies of a firm that has

joined the index.

      The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the sample construction. Section 3 reports

the effects of index addition on stock returns. Section 4 presents our empirical design for our

investigation of how index addition impacts firms. Section 5 shows the effects of index additions on

passive ownership and governance. Section 6 examines the impact of index addition on stock price

informativeness and investment efficiency. Section 7 shows the effect of index addition on firms' credit

ratings. Section 8 reports the peer effects of index addition on corporate policies, including executive

compensation, investment, financing, and payouts. Section 9 reports how index addition affects firm

performance. Section 10 investigates the potential effect of index additions on market competition.

Section 11 concludes.



2. Sample construction

      Daily and monthly stock data are from CRSP. The data for the GPIN informativeness measure are

from Duarte, Hu, and Young (2020). 5 Corporate accounting data are from CRSP and Compustat



5
    We are grateful to Edwin Hu for sharing the data on his website.

                                                         8
Merged. Institutional ownership data are from Thomson Reuters 13F. Mutual fund holdings data are

from CRSP Mutual Fund Database and Thomson Reuters Mutual Fund Holdings (S12). The data on

comparison groups in executive compensation contracts, available from 2006, are from IncentiveLab.

The data on board characteristics are from BoardEx. S&P 500 index additions and announcement dates

are from Siblis Research. Firm-level market competition measures, available from 1997, are from the

Hoberg-Phillips data library. Data availability explains why our sample starts in 1997 and ends in 2017.

Our sample includes 659 S&P 500 additions. Variables are defined in the Appendix. Table 1 shows

summary statistics. Because 2008 is a highly unusual year, all the results of the paper are replicated in

the Internet Appendix omitting 2008. We discuss in the text when omitting 2008 changes our inferences.



3. Stock price reaction to S&P 500 index additions

    The existing evidence is that the stock market generally reacts positively to announcements of S&P

500 index additions. In this section, we investigate whether such a positive reaction holds throughout

our sample period, whether the reaction is permanent, and whether stocks have abnormal performance

after joining the index.

    Announcements of additions are made after the market close. 6 We use the first trading day

following the announcement (i.e., the first day an added stock is affected) as day zero when studying

the effect of index additions on stock returns. We estimate four widely-used models of short-run daily

cumulative abnormal returns: market model, Fama-French 3-factor model (FF3), Fama-French 4-factor

(FF3 plus momentum; Carhart, 1997) model, and Fama-French 5-factor model (Fama and French,

2015). 7 For each of the four models, we calculate the cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) for event

windows starting five days before day zero and ending five or twenty-one days after for each stock

added to the index. We then calculate the average CAR for each event window and use t-tests for the

statistical significance.



6
  Announcements of S&P 500 additions are made at 05:15 PM Eastern Time:
https://us.spindices.com/documents/methodologies/methodology-sp-us-indices.pdf
7
  Our estimation window for the relevant models is 252 days using daily stock returns, requiring at least 200
observations within the window. To reduce the likelihood that the model estimation would be affected by the
index additions (event-induced return variance), our estimation window ends 50 days before an index addition.

                                                     9
    We report the results in Table 2. In Panel A of Table 2, we show the results for the event window

[-5, +5]. CARs are positive and significant for all four models in the 1997-2017 time period as expected

from the existing findings in the literature. The abnormal returns range from 3.2% to 3.3% and are all

statistically significant at the 1% level for the whole period. When we estimate CARs for the early

sample period (1997 to 2007) and for the late period (2008 to 2017) separately, the results are quite

different for these two sub-periods. For the early period, CARs range from 4.7% to 4.9% and are highly

significant. In contrast, for the late period, CARs range from 0.6% to 0.7% and are insignificant. The

CARs for the late period are significantly different from the CARs for the early period. It follows that

there is no stock-price reaction to the announcement of S&P 500 inclusions in the late period. As

internet appendix Table IA2 shows, the results are robust if we omit 2008.

    We also estimate CARs for an event window starting five days before day zero and ending twenty-

one days after day zero and tabulate the results in Panel B of Table 2. This window extends our tests

for abnormal returns to include one calendar month after the stock is added to the index. We find very

distinct outcomes for the early sample period relative to the late sample period. While the CARs in this

window are insignificant for the whole sample period, they are significantly positive for the early

sample period and significantly negative for the late sample period. For the early sample period, there

is evidence of reversal since the CARs for the short event window are higher than for the long event

window. However, the CARs for the long event window are significantly positive and range from 2.0%

to 2.4%. In contrast, for the late sample period, we find evidence of an adverse impact on the stock price

of S&P 500 addition as the CARs range from -2.3% to -2.1%. The one-month CARs based on the Fama-

French 4-factor model are shown in Figure 1 for the whole period and the two sub-periods.

    We further extend the time horizon and investigate long-run abnormal returns 12 months following

the addition, starting from the addition month (i.e., a time window [0, +12]). The literature documents

the difficulty of estimating long-run abnormal returns because of issues such as the new listing bias,

rebalancing bias, and skewness bias (Kothari and Warner, 1997; and Barber and Lyon, 1997). There is

also controversy about the asset pricing model that should be used for expected returns. We follow the

literature and measure the long-run stock abnormal returns following three widely used methodologies.



                                                   10
    The first approach we use is the calendar-time portfolio return approach. At the end of each month,

we add to the portfolio the firms added to the index. We keep a firm in the portfolio for twelve months

from index addition. We then estimate a time-series regression of the portfolio monthly returns on risk

factors of four asset pricing models, including the market model, the Fama-French three-factor model,

the Fama-French three-factor model augmented with the momentum (UMD) factor, and the Fama-

French five-factor model. We show the results in Panel C of Table 2. We find that the intercept of the

regressions (monthly alpha) is negative but insignificant for the whole sample period. In other words,

stocks do not earn significant abnormal returns over the twelve months period following the month they

are added to the index. When we split the sample period into the early sample period and the late sample

period, we find that the risk-adjusted abnormal returns are insignificant for the early sample period and

significantly negative for the late sample period. For the late sample period, the monthly risk-adjusted

return ranges from -0.63% to -0.73%. Removing 2008 from the late period reduces the absolute value

of the monthly adjusted returns so that they range from -0.54% to -0.63% as shown in Table IA2.

    Our second approach matches the portfolio of added firms with a benchmark that is constructed

from a set of 125 portfolios formed on the basis of market capitalization, book-to-market, and prior-

year return, following Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman and Wermers (DGTW, 1997). We show the estimates

in Panel D of Table 2. The results using that approach are similar to the results from using popular asset

pricing models. However, the late period alpha estimate is insignificant when we remove 2008 from the

sample period.

    Lastly, we implement the BHAR approach of Barber and Lyon (1997), which reflects the

compounding in long-run returns. A firm's BHARs are measured as the buy-and-hold monthly returns

minus the buy-and-hold monthly returns for a benchmark portfolio matched on size, book-to-market

and momentum. The results shown in the last column of Panel D in Table 2 are similar to the other two

approaches. 8 Note, however, that in this case the BHAR represents a one-year holding period excess

return rather than a monthly alpha.



8
 The magnitude of the BHARs in the last column of Panel D in Table 2 looks larger than that of other long-run
abnormal returns because BHARs are yearly abnormal returns while others are alphas in regressions using
monthly returns.

                                                     11
    With the portfolio return approach the risk-adjusted abnormal returns for the early sample period

are significantly different from the risk-adjusted abnormal returns for the late sample period for all four

asset pricing models and for the BHAR approach. With the DGTW calendar-time approach, the late

sample period abnormal returns are not significantly different from the early sample period abnormal

returns.

    The evidence in this section shows that the impact on a firm's stock from being added to the S&P

500 index differs between the early sample period and the late sample period. With the early sample

period, the short-run stock-price reaction to inclusion is significantly positive and the long-run impact

of addition on the stock price is insignificant. In contrast, with the late sample, there is no significant

positive stock-price reaction when an index addition is announced and the firm's stock price is affected

negatively over time.



4. Empirical design of the difference-in-differences analysis

      To investigate the impact of S&P 500 addition on firm policies, governance, and performance,

we carry out difference-in-differences (DiD) analyses based on S&P 500 index addition. Specifically,

we first identify all S&P 500 additions in our sample period. Added firms are our treated firms. For

each treated firm, we search for a control firm that is never a member of the S&P 500 index in our

sample period and use a propensity-score match on total assets, Tobin's q, stock return, and 2-digit SIC

industry (exact match) in the year before a treated firm is added to the index, so that the matching

process is not affected by index additions. Table IA1 reports the medians for the matching variables for

the treated firms and control firms. Not surprisingly, our requirement of an exact industry match implies

that we cannot match each variable closely. In particular, treated firms and control firms still have

different Tobin's q and stock return after the matching process. To address this issue, in our DiD

analysis we control for Tobin's q and stock return together with other relevant firm characteristics. We

use an event window of four years before and four years after an index addition and the addition year

is excluded.

    We carry out a DiD analysis for a sample of treated and control firms using the following

specification:

                                                    12
        Y = 0 + 1  SP500Add + 2  SP500Add + X   +  +  +  ,                                         (1)

where i is for firm i and t is for year t. Y is the dependent variable of interest, such as stock price

informativeness or firm policies, SP500Add is a dummy variable for S&P 500 index addition, which

equals one for a treated firm after its addition year and zero otherwise, and PreSP500Add is a dummy

variable for the pre-treatment trend, which equals one for a treated firm in the year before its addition

and zero otherwise, X is a vector of control variables,  is a vector of relevant coefficients of controls,

 is the firm fixed effect,  is the year fixed effect, and  is the error term.

      The treatment effect of the DiD analysis is captured by the coefficient of SP500Add, 1 . In a DiD

analysis, it is important to check the parallel trend condition. In our design, the coefficient of

PreSP500Add, 2 , is for the test of the parallel trend condition. Specifically, an insignificant 2

indicates that the treated group and the control group are not statistically different from each other

before addition, which means the parallel trend condition is satisfied.

    We are interested in assessing whether the impact of being added to the index differs between the

early sample period and the late sample period. To assess whether the treatment effect differs between

the early sample period and the late sample period, we estimate the following regression:

           Y = 0 + 1  SP500Add + 2  SP500Add × Late + 3  SP500Add

          +X   +  +  +                                                                      (2)

where Late is an indicator variable that takes value 1 if the firm is added to the index from 2008 to 2017.

Note that we do not include Late as a separate variable because we use year fixed effects. A significant

coefficient 2 is evidence that the treatment effect differs between the early and the late sample periods.



5. Index addition, passive holdings, and governance

    The net asset value of funds indexed to the S&P 500 represents a substantial fraction of the market

capitalization of the index constituents. This fraction has increased over time. However, not all indexed

funds hold the basket of index constituents. Some funds attempt to approximate the performance of the

index by holding an appropriately chosen subset of constituents and/or derivatives. It follows that it is

not necessarily the case that the share of a stock held by passive investors increases substantially when



                                                    13
the stock is added to the S&P 500. Therefore, we first investigate how the ownership of added stocks

changes following inclusion. Finding that passive ownership increases, we then turn to the question of

whether passive ownership crowds out block ownership by non-passive investors.



5.1 Index addition and changes in ownership structure: the role of passive investing

     To assess the importance of the change in the ownership structure of a stock following its inclusion

in the index, we calculate the change in passive holdings of added stocks. We define a firm's passive

holdings as the percent of the firm's stock held by passive mutual funds. To assess whether a fund is a

passive fund, we use the active share measure proposed by Cremers and Petajisto (2009). Specifically,

the active share measures the percentage of fund holdings with weights that differ from the weights in

the S&P 500 index. If a fund has an active share of 60%, then 40% of the holdings of the fund have

weights identical to the S&P 500 index and 60% of the holdings have different weights. We define a

fund to be a S&P 500 passive mutual fund if it is a fund with a name that includes both "index" and

"500" or a fund with an active share using the S&P 500 as a benchmark that is below 60%. 9

     We estimate the change in passive holdings of added stocks relative to their controls using our DiD

model. In these tests, the dependent variable in Equation (1) is passive holdings defined above. Results

are reported in Model 1 of Table 3. The coefficient of SP500Add is positive and statistically significant

at the 1% level (t-value 25.72). 10 The coefficient estimate of 0.034 means that after index addition

passive holdings increase by 3.4 percentage points. As is widely discussed in the literature, passive

investing increases over time. Model 2 allows the coefficient of SP500Add to change in the late sample

period. We find that the coefficient estimate of the interaction SP500Add x Late is 0.017 with a t-

statistic of 8.48. With this Model, the impact of S&P 500 addition on passive holdings is higher in the

late sample period than in the early sample period by 1.7 percentage points (an increase of 70.8%).

Models 3 and 4 show estimates of the regressions for active mutual funds ­ the mutual funds that are

not passive. We find that holdings by active mutual funds decrease when a stock is added to the index



9
  Our results are robust to alternative cutoffs, such as 20%, 40%, or 80%.
10
  The effect on passive holdings is larger in more recent years, as shown in Figure 2. This is consistent with the
rapid growth of index funds in recent years.

                                                       14
and that the impact of index addition on holdings by active mutual funds is greater in the late sample

period than in the early sample period.

    Models 5 and 6 show the effect of index addition on total holdings by all 13F institutions. The

holding data is from Thomson Reuters 13F. The coefficient of SP500Add is not statistically different

from zero in the regression for the whole sample period in Model 5 and is not significantly higher in

the late period in Model 6. When looking at all institutional investors, there is no significant change in

holdings for newly added firms. This implies that when institutional investors tracking the S&P500

index closely (e.g., passive mutual funds) have to buy newly added stocks mechanically, other

institutional investors tend to sell their holdings. This is consistent with our findings in Models 3 and 4

and the findings by Patel and Welch (2017) who show that S&P 500 addition no longer increases total

investor demand. All tests in this section have statistically insignificant PreSP500Add coefficients,

signifying that the parallel trends condition is satisfied.



5.2 Corporate governance

  Index addition triggers greater passive holdings and these passive investors are unlikely to have as

strong incentives to actively monitor the firms in their portfolio as the investors they replace, namely

active institutional investors (Corum, Malenko, Malenko, 2020). As a result, it is likely that the power

of management increases as a result of index addition (Schmidt and Fahlenbrach, 2017). If this is the

case, we would expect a drop in holdings by blockholders that are not passive funds. These blockholders

would see their ability to influence management drop after the firm's inclusion, which would reduce

the expected return on their holdings. The resulting decrease in blockholders reduces the monitoring of

management, so that management becomes more powerful and entrenched. We investigate the effects

of index addition on blockholder ownership, in which blockholders are large shareholders holding at

least 5% of a firm's shares outstanding.

  In our analysis, we consider blockholder ownership from 13F institutions excluding quasi-index fund

holdings, which follows Bushee and Noe (2000). We exclude quasi-index funds to address the potential

concern that asset management companies may become new blockholders because of the size of their



                                                     15
indexed funds but are unlikely to monitor firms actively. We use the blockholder ownership as the

dependent variable in Equation (1) and the results are reported in Table 4.

  Model 1 shows that the coefficient of SP500Add is negative and statistically significant at the 5%

level. The effects are also economically significant. After an index addition, aggregate blockholder

ownership falls by 2.5 percentage points, which is 14.7% of its average of 17%. Model 2 shows that the

SP500Add x Late interaction is not statistically significant.



6. Stock price informativeness and investment-q sensitivity

    One expected consequence of having more passive investors is that less information is impounded

in stock prices as fewer investors trade actively on new information. In this section, we show that an

added firm's stock price becomes less informative. If a firm's stock price becomes less informative, we

expect that the firm's investment efficiency falls. We find support for this hypothesis in the early period,

but not so much in the late period.



6.1 Stock price informativeness

    As discussed in the introduction, there is evidence in the literature that when a stock is added to the

S&P 500 index, its return comoves more with other stocks in the index. Larger co-movement reduces

the proportion of firm-specific information in stock prices, and in turn decreases price informativeness.

Therefore, we expect that index addition have a negative effect on stock price informativeness.

    We use two measures of stock price informativeness. The first measure is Rsq, which is the R-

squared from a market model regression of a firm's daily stock returns on market returns in a year. The

proxy for market returns is the value-weighted return from CRSP (vwretd). Roll (1988) introduced R-

squared as a measure of firm-specific variation unrelated to public information. In subsequent work,

Durnev, Morck, Yeung, and Zarowin (2003) show that the stock price of firms with lower R-squared is

more informative in that current returns have more information about future earnings. A larger Rsq

means a firm's stock comoves more with the market and its price is less informative about firm-specific

events (i.e., lower price informativeness). The second measure is GPIN, following the Generalized PIN



                                                    16
model proposed by Duarte, Hu, and Young (2020). GPIN has a micro foundation based on structural

market microstructure models. A larger GPIN means the stock price is more informative.

    Table 5 shows our estimates. For each dependent variable, we estimate Equation (1) and Equation

(2). Model 1 shows index addition increases Rsq. The variable PreSP500Add is insignificant and the

coefficient estimate is zero. After index addition the stock price comoves more with the market and its

informativeness is reduced significantly. This result is consistent with the findings on changes in R-

squared by Barberis, Shleifer and Wurgler (2005). Model 2 allows for changes in the coefficient on

SP500Add in the late sample period. We find that the coefficient on SP500Add x Late is statistically

insignificant. It follows from this that index addition increases Rsq and does so similarly throughout the

sample period. With GPIN, the story is more complicated. The results in Model 3 and Model 4 indicate

that GPIN decreases with index addition, but it decreases significantly less in the late period. These

results are consistent with a weaker treatment effect of index addition on price informativeness.

    We further investigate the direct link between price informativeness and passive holdings of stocks.

Specifically, we regress the price informativeness measure on the stock holdings by passive mutual

funds and relevant firm characteristics. Results are reported in Panel B of Table 5. Neither Model 1 nor

Model 2 show evidence of a direct link between passive ownership and stock price informativeness

measures by Rsq. In contrast, Models 3 and 4 show strong evidence of such a link for GPIN. The

evidence for GPIN is consistent with the hypothesis that passive holdings decrease GPIN, which means

passive holdings have a negative effect on stock price informativeness.



6.2 Investment efficiency

     The negative effect of index addition on price informativeness can reduce the efficiency of

corporate investment. The existing literature documents that managers can learn from their firm's stock

price to improve investment efficiency. In particular, a firm's investment is more sensitive to Tobin's

q (i.e., higher investment-q sensitivity) when its stock price is more informative (e.g., Chen, Goldstein,

and Jiang, 2007). In this section, we follow the literature and measure investment efficiency by

investment-q sensitivity. We follow the regression model of Chen, Goldstein, and Jiang (2007). As



                                                   17
index addition has a negative effect on price informativeness, we expect index addition to reduce

investment-q sensitivity. Our specification is as follows.

Capexit = 0 + 1  SP500Add, × ,-1 + 2   ,-1 + 3  SP500Add, + 4  PreSP500Add,

                 + 5  PreSP500Add , ×  ,-1 +    +  +  +                                               (3)

where i is the firm index, t is the year index, Capex is capital expenditure scaled by lagged assets,

500 is a dummy variable for the treatment effect of S&P 500 index addition, which equals one

for a treated firm after the addition year, and zero otherwise, 500 is a dummy variable for

the pre-treatment trend, which equals one for a treated firm in the year prior to the index addition, and

zero otherwise, X is the vector of control variables,  is the coefficient vector for the control variables,

 is the firm fixed effect,  is the year fixed effect, and  is the error term. The focus is on the

coefficient of the interaction between SP500Add and Tobin's q, 1 . We expect 1 to be negative, which

means index addition reduces the investment-q sensitivity.

        Model 1 of Table 6 shows estimates of equation (3). The result shows that the treatment effect

is significantly negative, which means that index addition reduces the sensitivity of investment to

Tobin's q. One might be concerned that the stock price is distorted by the shift in demand by passive

investors, so that the sensitivity of investment to Tobin's q should fall. However, this explanation is

implausible because we are estimating the treatment effect on the four years following the index

addition. The pre-trend coefficient is not significant, so that we cannot reject the parallel trend

assumption. 11

     To estimate whether the treatment effect differs in the late sample period from the early sample

period, we use the following equation:

     Investment it = 0 + 1  SP500Add, ×  ,-1

                      + 2  SP500Add, ×  ,-1 × Lateit + 3  SP500Add, + 4  ,-1

                       +5  PreSP500Add, ×  ,-1 +    +  +  +                                           (4)




11
  In contemporaneous work, Billett, Diep-Nguyen, and Garfinkel (2020) estimate a regression to assess the
impact of S&P 500 inclusion on investment in a study where the main focus is on the investment efficiency of
peers using a different approach.

                                                    18
     Model 2 of Table 6 shows estimates of equation (4). The coefficient on SP500Add x Tobin's q is

negative and statistically significant at the 1% level. The coefficient on SP500Add x Tobin's q x Late

is not statistically significant. However, when we exclude 2008, we find that the interaction for the late

period is significantly positive with a coefficient of 0.004 when the coefficient on SP500Add x Tobin's

q is -0.006. This evidence suggests that the impact of index addition on investment efficiency is much

weaker in the later period.



7. Credit ratings and S&P 500 addition

     Credit rating agencies produce opinions that investors use to assess the credit risk of securities and

other obligations issued by firms. In their function, they use both quantitative and qualitative

information. In this section, we investigate whether being included in the S&P 500 affects a firm's

credit rating. For that purpose, we use our DiD approach.

     We first investigate whether ratings of S&P 500 firms differ from those of non-S&P 500 firms. For

this purpose, we create a sample including all S&P 500 firms and the largest 500 non-S&P 500 firms

(by market capitalization) each year. We collect S&P long-term issuer credit ratings from Compustat.

To use ratings information in a regression setting, we define a variable Rating, an integer between 1

and 22 in which AAA is 22 and each step down in rating is one integer less. We define a dummy variable

SP500, which equals one if a firm is a member of the S&P 500 index in a year and zero otherwise. Then

we regress numerical ratings on SP500, controlling for firm characteristics, industry fixed effects, and

year fixed effects. We control for industry fixed effects to capture the within-industry cross-sectional

heterogeneity of ratings between S&P 500 firms and non-S&P 500 firms. 12 Results in Panel A of Table

7 show that S&P 500 members have a higher credit rating. For example, Model 1 shows that the

coefficient of the SP500 dummy is positive and statistically significant at the 1% level. With this

coefficient, on average a S&P 500 firm's rating is four tenth of a notch than that of a non-S&P 500 firm

after controlling for firm characteristics.



12
   Our results in Panel A are robust when controlling for firm fixed effects. But controlling for firm fixed effects
captures the within-firm switching effect rather than cross-sectional heterogeneity of ratings between S&P 500
firms and non-S&P 500 firms.

                                                        19
    We then turn to the DiD analysis. Panel B of Table 7 shows the estimates. The results in Model 1

shows that for the sample period as a whole index inclusion increases a firm's credit rating by almost

half a notch. In Model 2, we allow for the treatment effect to change from the early period to the late

period. We find that the interaction for the late period is not significant.



8. Peer effects on corporate policies

      A firm that joins the S&P 500 joins a new prestigious club. Categorical thinking would suggest

that as the firm joins the new club, its board and managers pay more attention to what peers within the

new club do than before the firm joins the new club. In this section, we demonstrate this effect and

show that corporate policies change when a firm is added to the index. We show first that incentives of

managers change as their comparison group for compensation includes more S&P 500 peer firms after

their firm is added to the index. We then show that the firm's investment, external financing, and payout

policies change. Importantly, we show that the added firm's policies become more affected by the

actions of its S&P 500 peers.



8.1 Executive compensation

  In this section, we investigate whether index inclusion changes how a firm's board evaluates the

CEO's performance. Managerial performance evaluation is crucial to managerial incentives and can

affect important corporate decisions. Boards usually specify a list of peer firms in executive

compensation contracts and use these peers as the benchmark of executive performance in the relative

performance evaluation (Aggarwal and Samwick, 1999; Gong, Li, and Shin, 2011). This relative

performance determines the performance-based portion of the CEO's compensation. If a board includes

more S&P 500 firms in a CEO's peer group following addition of the firm to the index, we would expect

that this would lead the CEO to takes actions more similar to those of the firm's peers in the index.

  We collect the data on peer firms from IncentiveLab and define a variable %SP500Peer as the portion

of S&P 500 peer firms in the firm's peer group for the relative performance evaluation. This data

becomes available in 2006, so we have no results for the early period. We first show univariate results

that compare the average of %SP500Peer in newly added firms before and after the addition. These

                                                     20
results are reported in Panel A of Table 8. The results show that before index addition the average

portion of S&P 500 peers is 41.3% and the average increases by 10.3 percentage points after index

addition, or 24.9%, to 51.6%. The difference in the averages is statistically significant and the p-value

of the mean equality t-test is only 0.001.

  We further carry out a DiD analysis and use %SP500Peer as the dependent variable. Results are

reported in Panel B of Table 8. The coefficient of SP500Add in Model 1 is positive and statistically

significant at the 5% level. The coefficient of 0.051 means that a newly added firm increases the portion

of S&P 500 peers in the relative performance evaluation peer group by 5.1 percentage points, which is

12.3% of the average proportion before the index addition. Note that the coefficient on PreSP500Add

is small and insignificant, which indicates that there is no difference in the fraction of S&P 500 peers

in the performance evaluation peer group of the treated firms and of the control firms before index

addition. The evidence is consistent with the categorical idea that corporate boards think that after index

addition the newly added firm becomes different and that management should be evaluated differently

despite the fact that index addition has no direct impact on firm fundamentals. One might argue that the

board does not necessarily know about the index inclusion when it selects the peer group in the event

year. We also estimate the regression lagging the control variables. Model 2 shows that the results are

similar.



8.2 S&P 500 peer effects on investment

    After index inclusion, we expect the firm's board, its management, and its active investors to

compare the firm more with its S&P 500 peers. As a result, we expect corporate policies to change and

one way in which they are likely to change is in exhibiting greater comovement with industry peers in

the index. One driver of this greater comovement could be the compensation peer effect documented

in the previous section. In this section, we focus on the impact of S&P 500 inclusion on corporate

investment. Though categorical thinking could lead to greater comovement of investment, there are

other reasons for greater comovement of investment after inclusion. Specifically, with weaker

governance, management exerts less effort and, therefore, relies less on private information. When

managers rely more on public information, their decisions become more similar. Using a different

                                                    21
metric comovement, Knyazeva, Knyazeva, Morck, and Yeung (2008) find that worse governance is

associated with higher comovement of investment.

     We first examine whether the investment rate of S&P 500 firms differs from that of other firms. We

measure investment by the growth of total assets, which is the annual change in total assets scaled by

lagged total assets. 13 This measure takes into account acquisitions and has now become a standard

measure of investment in the asset pricing literature (see, for instance, Fama and French, 2015). The

test sample includes all S&P 500 firms and the largest 500 non-S&P 500 firms (by market

capitalization) each year. We include industry fixed effects to capture the within-industry cross-

sectional heterogeneity in investment between S&P 500 firms and non-S&P 500 firms. Year fixed

effects are also included. The results are reported in Panel A of Table 9. Model 1 shows that the

coefficient of the S&P 500 membership dummy SP500 is negative and statistically significant at the

1% level. When allowing the membership effect to change across sub-periods, Model 2 shows that the

coefficient of SP500 remains negative and highly significant, but the coefficient of SP500 x Late is

positive and significant, so that the membership effect weakens in the late period.

     We then investigate the treatment effect on investment of joining the index. The results are reported

in Panel B of Table 9. Model 1 shows that the coefficient of the treatment dummy SP500Add is negative

and statistically significant at the 1% level. The result shows that newly added firms significantly

decrease their investment rate following addition. However, when we allow the impact to differ in the

late period, Model 2 shows that the effect is much smaller in the late period as the coefficient on

SP500Add x Late is positive and significant.

     To study the treatment effect on the association between the added firm's investment and its industry

peers in the index, we define a variable InvestSP500Peer that is the average investment of S&P 500

peers in a firm's industry (4-digit SIC, excluding the firm itself). The specification of our tests is as

follows:




13
   Results using capital expenditure as a measure of investment are reported in the Internet Appendix Table IA14.
The results show that S&P500 firms have fewer capital expenditures than non-S&P500 firms; index additions
reduce capital expenditures; but the peer effect of index additions on capital expenditure is not statistically
significant at the 10% level.

                                                      22
  Investment it = 0 + 1  InvestSP500Peer × SP500Add + 2  InvestSP500Peer + 3

                    SP500Add + 4  InvestSP500Peer × PreSP500Add +    +  + 

                   +  ,                                                                               (5)

where i is the firm index, t is the year index, InvestSP500Peer is as defined above, 500 is a

dummy variable for the treatment effect of S&P 500 index addition, which equals one for a treated firm

after the addition year, and zero otherwise, 500 is a dummy variable for the pre-treatment

trend, which equals one for a treated firm in the year prior to the index addition, and zero otherwise, X

is the vector of control variables,  is the coefficient vector for the control variables,   is the firm fixed

effect,  is the year fixed effect, and  is the error term. The focus is on the coefficient of the

interaction between SP500Add and InvestSP500Peer, 1 .

    Panel C of Table 9 tabulate results on investment comovement. The results show a strong increase

in investment comovement after a firm is added to the index. This increase is stable between the early

and late period.



8.3. External financing

  In this section, we investigate how index addition affects net debt issuance and net equity issuance.

Net debt issuance is defined as debt issuance less debt retired scaled by total assets. Net equity issuance

is equity issued less equity buybacks scaled by total assets. We expect external financing of added firms

to comove more with that of their S&P 500 industry peers.

   We first examine whether external financing of S&P 500 firms differs from that of other firms. The

test sample includes all S&P 500 firms and the largest 500 non-S&P 500 firms (by market

capitalization) each year. We include industry fixed effects to capture the within-industry cross-

sectional heterogeneity in external financing between S&P 500 firms and non-S&P 500 firms. Year

fixed effects are also included. Panel A of Table 10 reports the results. Model 1 shows that the

coefficient of the S&P 500 membership dummy SP500 is negative but not statistically significant at the

10% level. When allowing the coefficient to differ between the early and late periods, Model 2 shows

that neither coefficient is statistically significant. Models 3 and 4 show how equity issuance differs for



                                                     23
S&P 500 firms and non-S&P 500 firms. Model 3 reports that the coefficient of SP500 is negative and

statistically significant at the 1% level. Model 4 shows that this effect is stable across sample periods.

These results show that S&P 500 firms have significantly less net equity financing compared with non-

S&P 500 firms.

  We then investigate the treatment effect on financing policy of joining the index. Panel B of Table

10 reports the results. Neither Model 1 nor Model 2 provide evidence supportive of an effect of index

inclusion on net debt issuance. In Model 3, the coefficient on SP500Add is negative and statistically

significant. Finally, in Model 4, the coefficient on SP500Add is negative and statistically significant at

the 1% level, and the coefficient on SP500Add x Late is insignificant, which means the treatment effect

is stable across sample periods.

  To study the treatment effect on the financing comovement between a newly added firm and its

industry peers in the index, we define NDI_SP500Peer and NEI_SP500Peer, which are the average net

debt issuance and net equity issuance of S&P 500 peers in a firm's industry (4-digit SIC, excluding the

firm itself), respectively. The specification of our tests is as follows:

    Fit = 0 + 1  FSP500Peer × SP500Add + 2  FSP500Peer + 3  SP500Add + 4

                      FSP500Peerit × PreSP500Add +    +  +  +  ,                                  (6)

where i is the firm index, t is the year index, F is net debt issuance or net equity issuance, FSP500Peer

is NDI_SP500Peer or NEI_SP500Peer, respectively, 500 is a dummy variable for the treatment

effect of S&P 500 index addition, which equals one for a treated firms after an addition year, and zero

otherwise, 500 is a dummy variable for the pre-treatment trend, which equals one for a

treated firms in the year prior to the index addition, and zero otherwise, X is the vector of control

variables,  is the coefficient vector for the control variables,  is the firm fixed effect,  is the year

fixed effect, and  is the error term. The focus is on the coefficient of the interaction between

SP500Add and FSP500Peer, 1 . We expect 1 to be positive, which means index addition increases the

comovement between the external financing of newly added firms and that of their S&P 500 industry

peers.




                                                     24
    Results on external financing comovement are reported in Panel C of Table 10. The estimated

coefficients for the impact of S&P 500 inclusion are surprisingly large. Model 1 shows that the

coefficient of NDI_SP500Peer x SP500Add is 0.618 and statistically significant at the 1% level. Such

a coefficient means that if S&P 500 peers of an added firm raise 1% of assets as net debt, the included

firm's net debt increases by 0.618%. Model 2 shows that this effect is stable across sample periods.

Models 1 and 2 confirm that after index addition net debt financing of the newly added firm comoves

more with that of its industry peers in the S&P 500 index. Models 3 and 4 show that index addition also

increases the association between net equity financing of the newly added firms and their industry peers

in the S&P 500 and this effect is stable across sample periods. The magnitude of the effects for net

equity issuance is similar to the magnitude of the effects for net debt issuance.



8.4. Payout policy peer effects

  We would expect payouts of added firms to comove more with those of their S&P 500 industry peers.

We measure payouts by the ratio of dollar amount of payouts to total assets and use three measures of

payouts: dividends, repurchases, and total payouts as the sum of dividends and repurchases.

  We first examine whether payouts of S&P 500 firms differ from payouts of other firms. Since payout

policies differ across industries, we use industry and year fixed effects as well as the control variables

we use in other regressions. The test sample includes all S&P 500 firms and the largest 500 non-S&P

500 firms (by market capitalization) in each year. The results are reported in Panel A of Table 11.

Models 1 and 2 show that there is no difference in dividend payouts between S&P 500 firms and other

firms. However, Models 3 and 4 show a strong difference in repurchases. Within an industry, S&P 500

firms repurchase more than other firms after controlling for total assets, Tobin's q, cash flow, cash,

leverage and stock return, by 2.1 percentage points of assets. This difference is stable across sample

periods. Models 5 and 6 show that the results for total payouts are similar to those for repurchases.

  We then investigate the treatment effect on payout policy of joining the index. Panel B of Table 11

reports the results. Models 1 and 2 show that dividends increase following addition, but the increase is

small compared with the increase in repurchases shown in Models 3 and 4. Model 3 shows that index

addition increases repurchases by 1.6%, which is 53.3% of the sample mean for repurchases of 3%.

                                                   25
Model 4 demonstrates that the treatment effect is stable across sample periods. Note that net equity

issuance in Table 10 falls with repurchases. Consequently, the increase in repurchases likely explains

the decrease in net equity issuance documented in Table 10. Models 5 and 6 show similar results for

total payouts.

  To study the treatment effect on the comovement between the added firm's payout policies and its

industry peers in the index, we define three variables DivSP500Peer, RepSP500Peer, and

PayoutSP500Peer, which are the average dividend, repurchase, and total payout of S&P 500 peers in a

firm's industry (4-digit SIC, excluding the firm itself), respectively. The specification of our tests is as

follows:

   Yit = 0 + 1  YSP500Peer × SP500Add + 2  YSP500Peer + 3  SP500Add + 4

                      YSP500Peerit × PreSP500Add +    +  +  +  ,                                   (7)

where i is the firm index, t is the year index, Y is Dividend, Repurchase, or Payout, and YSP500Peer is

DivSP500Peer, RepSP500Peer, or PayoutSP500Peer, respectively, 500 is a dummy variable for

the treatment effect of S&P 500 index addition which equals one for treated firms after an addition year,

and zero otherwise, 500 is a dummy variable for the pre-treatment trend, which equals one

for a treated firms in the year prior to the index addition, and zero otherwise, X is the vector of control

variables,  is the coefficient vector for the control variables,  is the firm fixed effect,  is the year

fixed effect, and  is the error term. The focus is on the coefficient of the interaction between

SP500Add and YSP500Peer, 1 . We expect 1 to be positive, which means index addition increases

the association between the relevant payout policy of newly added firms and that of their S&P 500

industry peers.

    Results on payout comovement are reported in Panel C of Table 11. Model 1 shows that the

coefficient of DivSP500Peer x SP500Add is positive and statistically significant at the 1% level. Model

2 shows that this effect is stable across sample periods. Models 1 and 2 confirm that after index addition

dividend payouts of newly added firms comove more with those of their industry peers in the S&P 500

index. Models 3 and 4 show that index addition also increases repurchase comovement between newly

added firms and their industry peers in the S&P 500. Not surprisingly, the effect on comovement is



                                                    26
stronger for repurchases than for dividends. Furthermore, the magnitude of the coefficient of

RepSP500Peer x SP500Add is twice that of DivSP500Peer x SP500Add. Models 5 and 6 show that the

treatment effect on the comovement of total payouts are consistent with that of its two components as

shown in Models 1 to 4.



9. Firm earnings and profitability

    Given our evidence that joining the index changes firm governance and policies, it is possible that

these changes cause a change in firm earnings and return on assets (ROA). We investigate this

possibility in this section.

    Though index addition is generally viewed as having no direct implications for firm performance,

Denis, McConnell, Ovtchinnikov, and Yu (2003) show that firms joining the index experience an

increase in analyst earnings forecasts and higher realized earnings. Better earnings performance seems

difficult to reconcile with our finding of negative abnormal returns over the year following index

inclusion. The findings of Denis et al. (2003) are for the period from 1987 through 1999. Their sample

period overlaps for two years with our sample period. We therefore first examine whether the results of

Denis et al. (2003) hold for our sample period. Our approach uses Equations (1) and (2) of our DiD

analysis.

    Model 1 of Table 12 shows the addition effect on EPS forecasts by financial analysts. The

dependent variable EPS forecast is the average analyst estimate for the one-year EPS from IBES. The

coefficient is positive and significant at the 10% level. In Model 2, we allow for the treatment effect to

differ between the early and late sample periods. We find that neither the coefficient on SP500Add nor

the coefficient on SP500Add x Late are significant, but both coefficients are positive. When we turn to

realized EPS, the treatment effect is insignificant in Model 3. In Model 4, the coefficient on SP500Add

is insignificantly negative but the coefficient on SP500 x Late is positive and statistically significant at

the 5% level. These results suggest that our results are not inconsistent with those of Denis et al. (2003).

    EPS is defined as a firm's earnings divided by shares outstanding. Our findings on share repurchases

show that firms repurchase more after index addition, which means that shares outstanding, the

denominator of EPS, is reduced after index addition. Therefore, it could be that the treatment effect on

                                                    27
the numerator is negative but is offset by the reduction in the number of shares when we look at EPS.

Return on assets (ROA) does not suffer from the impact of repurchases on the denominator of EPS. We

would therefore expect ROA to fall following a firm's inclusion in the S&P 500 index. We define ROA

as the ratio of net income over assets. The DiD analysis is also reported in Table 12. The results show

that the coefficient on SP500Add is negative and statistically significant at the 5% or 1% level. For

example, Model 6 shows that ROA falls by 1.6 percentage points when a firm joins the index and that

the effect is stable over the whole sample period. A fall of 1.6 percentage point is 18% of its standard

deviation (0.09). The results demonstrate that index addition has negative real effects on firm

performance, and in particular, index addition significantly reduces ROA of added firms.



10. Collusion and competition

    When a firm is added to the S&P 500 index, relevant index funds rebalance their portfolios to

include the firm in their holdings. The fraction of stocks held by index funds increases substantially

over our sample period. The literature has emphasized that increases in index fund ownership leads to

increases in common ownership of stocks in an index. Various authors have expressed concerns that

increases in common ownership can lead to a decrease in competition (see Schmalz, 2018, for a review).

The argument is that two firms with common ownership have less incentive to compete against each

other. In this section, we investigate whether index addition affects the competition among S&P 500

peer firms.

    We first study the effect on the product market competition of newly added firms at the firm level.

If the increase in the common ownership by passive investors leads to a collusion among firms in the

S&P 500 index, the firm-level competition is expected to decrease. We use three firm-level measures

of product competition. The first is Fluidity, which is the fluidity of product market reflecting product

market threats or instability (Hoberg, Phillips, and Prabhala, 2014). The second is Similarity, which is

the product similarity between a firm and its rivals (Hoberg and Phillips, 2016). They are both text-

based competition measures from the Hoberg-Phillips data library. The third is Gross margin, which is

the difference between revenues and COGS scaled by revenues.



                                                   28
    The results of the DiD analysis are reported in Panel A of Table 13. Models 1 and 2 show that the

treatment effect on Fluidity is not significant. Models 3 and 4 show similarly that there is no evidence

that S&P inclusion increases Similarity, which means that inclusion does not lead firms to differentiate

their products more. Lastly, in Models 5 and 6, we show that there is no evidence that index inclusion

causes an increase in a firm's gross margin.

    We further provide evidence at the industry level. If index addition leads to a decrease in

competition among peer firms in the S&P 500 index, we would expect a larger reduction in competition

when more firms in an industry are added to the S&P 500 index. To measure the competition among

industry peers in S&P 500 firms, we first divide S&P 500 firms by their industries (3-digit SIC) into

groups, which are called SP500 industry groups. We then define Lerner index SP500 as the median

gross margin within an SP500 industry group in a year. A greater value of this variable indicates less

competition among peer firms in an S&P 500 industry group.

    We define Ch(SP500Firms) as the change in the number of firms in an S&P 500 industry group in

a year. We then regress the change in Lerner index SP500 on Ch(SP500Firms) including industry fixed

effects and year fixed effects and the sample for this test is at the industry-year level. The result is

reported in Model 1 of Panel B. The result shows that when more firms in an industry are added to the

S&P 500 index we do not observe a significant change in competition among the S&P 500 firms in that

industry. Model 2 allows for the treatment effect to differ between the early and late sample periods, in

which the coefficient of Ch(SP500 Firms) x Late is insignificant.

    We also investigate potential heterogenous effects when the number of firms in an S&P 500

industry group increases or decreases. Accordingly, we define a variable Increase (Decrease) in SP500

firms as a dummy variable equal to one if one or more firms are added to (deleted from) an S&P 500

industry group in a year. The relevant result is reported in Model 3 of Panel B. The result shows that

neither an increase nor a decrease in the number of firms in an S&P industry group leads to a significant

change in competition in the industry group. Model 4 allows for the treatment effect to differ between

the early and late sample periods, in which the coefficients of the two interaction terms are both

insignificant. In sum, we do not find the evidence that index addition reduces product market

competition.

                                                   29
11. Conclusion

    In this paper, we first show that the impact on stock returns from S&P 500 index inclusion has

changed substantially over time. In the first half of our sample period, announcement of addition to the

S&P 500 has a positive abnormal return that does not disappear over time. In the second half of our

sample period, there is no longer a significant positive abnormal return and the long-run impact of index

addition on a stock is negative.

    When a firm joins the index, it acquires investors who are indifferent to the price of the firm's stock.

As a result, less information is incorporated in the stock price through the trading of investors, so that

the price of the stock becomes less informative. We show that the informativeness of the stock price

decreases with index inclusion. The decrease in the informativeness of the stock price causes the firm

to invest less efficiently. The increase in the fraction of passive investors decreases the quality of the

governance of the firm both because passive investors have little incentives to invest in governance

activities and because the increase in passive holdings decreases the potential gains to investors from

actively trying to influence a firm's activities. We find evidence that there may be a reputation effect

from joining the index with credit rating agencies in that inclusion causes an increase in a firm's rating.

    Though it is widely recognized that joining the index changes the composition of the shareholder

body, the literature has not explored the implication that joining the index appears to lead to a change

in the firm's peers as viewed by its board and its management. This peer effect of joining the index has

important implications for firm policies that have not been identified before. This peer effect is

surprising because by merely classifying a firm as belonging to the index does not change any of the

fundamental characteristics of a firm. Yet, as the firm joins the index, its board changes the CEO's peer

group for its compensation policy, so that the fraction of peers from the S&P500 increases by 24.9%.

We show that a firm's investment, funding, and payout policies become more correlated with the

policies of its index peers. We also find that repurchases increase sharply as a result of firms joining the

index. Lastly, we find no effect of inclusion on competition even though it causes an increase in passive

ownership. Though passive ownership decreases throughout our sample period, the effects we

document do not become stronger over time and in some cases become weaker. Further research should



                                                    30
attempt to explain why and how markets and investors appear to have adjusted to the increase in passive

investing so that the real effects of passive investing have become somewhat weaker.




                                                  31
References

Aggarwal, R., and A. Samwick, 1999. Executive compensation, strategic competition, and relative
performance evaluation: theory and evidence. Journal of Finance 54,1999-2043.

Amihud, Yakov, 2002. Illiquidity and stock returns: cross-section and time-series effects. Journal of
Financial Markets 5, 31-56.

Appel, Ian R., Todd A. Gormley, and Donald B. Keim, 2016. Passive investors, not passive owners.
Journal of Financial Economics 121, 111-141.

Baltussen, Guido and van Bekkum, Sjoerd and Da, Zhi, 2019. Indexing and stock market serial
dependence around the world. Journal of Financial Economics 132, 26-48.

Barber, Brad M., and John D. Lyon, 1997. Detecting long-run abnormal stock returns: The empirical
power and specification of test statistics. Journal of Financial Economics 43, 341-372.

Barberis, Nicholas and Andrei Shleifer, 2003. Style investing. Journal of Financial Economics 68, 161­
199.

Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2005. Comovement. Journal of Financial
Economics 75, 283-317.

Bebchuk, Lucian, and Scott Hirst, 2019. Index funds and the future of corporate governance: Theory,
evidence, and policy. Columbia Law Review 119, 2029-2145.

BenDavid, I., Franzoni, F. and Moussawi, R., 2018. Do ETFs increase volatility? The Journal of
Finance 73, pp.2471-2535.

Beneish, Messod D., and Robert E. Whaley, 1996. An anatomy of the "S&P Game": The effects of
changing the rules. Journal of Finance 51, 1909-1930.

Bennett, Benjamin, René Stulz, and Zexi Wang, 2019. Does the stock market make firms more
productive? Journal of Financial Economics 136, 281-306.

Billett, Matthew T., Ha Diep-Nguyen, and Jon A. Garfinkel, 2020. Index investing and corporate
investment-price sensitivity. University of Indiana, working paper.

Boehmer, Ekkehart, and Wanshan Song, 2018. Passive investing, stock price efficiency and liquidity.
Singapore Management University, working paper.

Boone, Audra L., and Joshua T. White, 2015. The effect of institutional ownership on firm transparency
and information production. Journal of Financial Economics 117, 508-533.

Bond, Philip, Alex Edmans, and Itay Goldstein, 2012. The real effects of financial markets. Annual
Review of Financial Economics 4, 339-360.

Bond, Philip, Itay Goldstein, and Edward Simpson Prescott, 2009. Market-based corrective actions.
Review of Financial Studies 23, 781-820.

Bushee, Brian J., and Christopher F. Noe, 2000. Corporate disclosure practices, institutional investors,
and stock return volatility. Journal of Accounting Research, 171-202.

Butler, Alexander W., Larry Fauver, and Sandra Mortal, 2009. Corruption, political connections, and
municipal finance. Review of Financial Studies 22, 2873-2905.

                                                  32
Carhart, Mark M., 1997. On persistence in mutual fund performance. Journal of Finance 52, 57-82.

Chang, Yen-Cheng, Harrison Hong, and Inessa Liskovich, 2015. Regression discontinuity and the price
effects of stock market indexing. Review of Financial Studies 28, 212-246.

Chen, Qi, Itay Goldstein, and Wei Jiang, 2007. Price informativeness and investment sensitivity to stock
price. Review of Financial Studies 20, 619-650.

Chen, Honghui, Vijay Singal, and Robert F. Whitelaw, 2016. Comovement revisited. Journal of
Financial Economics 121, 624-644.

Coles, Jeffrey L., Davidson Heath, and Matthew Ringgenberg, 2018. On index investing. University of
Utah, working paper.

Corum, Adrian A., Andrey Malenko, and Nadya Malenko, 2020. Corporate governance in the presence
of active and passive delegated investment. Unpublished working paper.

Cremers, KJ Martijn, and Antti Petajisto, 2009. How active is your fund manager? A new measure that
predicts performance. Review of Financial Studies 22, 3329-3365.

Daniel, Kent, Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1997. Measuring mutual fund
performance with characteristicbased benchmarks. Journal of Finance 52 1035-1058.

Denis, Diane K., John J. McConnell, Alexei V. Ovtchinnikov, and Yun Yu, 2003. S&P 500 index
additions and earnings expectations. Journal of Finance 58, 1821-1840.

Dow, James, and Gary Gorton, 1997. Stock market efficiency and economic efficiency: Is there a
connection? Journal of Finance 52, 1087-1129.

Duarte, Jefferson, Edwin Hu, and Lance Young, 2020. A comparison of some structural models of
private information arrival. Journal of Financial Economics 135, 795-815.

Durnev, Artyom, Randall Morck, Bernard Yeung, and Paul Zarowin, 2003. Does greater firmspecific
return variation mean more or less informed stock pricing? Journal of Accounting Research 41, 797-
836.

Durnev, Art, Randall Morck, and Bernard Yeung, 2004. Value-enhancing capital budgeting and firm-
specific stock return variation. Journal of Finance 59, 65-105.

Edmans, Alex, 2009. Blockholder trading, market efficiency, and managerial myopia. Journal of
Finance 64, 2481-2513.

Edmans, Alex, Itay Goldstein, and Wei Jiang, 2012. The real effects of financial markets: The impact
of prices on takeovers. Journal of Finance 67, 933-971.

Edmans, Alex, and Gustavo Manso, 2011. Governance through trading and intervention: A theory of
multiple blockholders. Review of Financial Studies 24, 2395-2428.

Edmans, Alex, Sudarshan Jayaraman, and Jan Schneemeier, 2017. The source of information in prices
and investment-price sensitivity. Journal of Financial Economics 126, 74-96.

Fama, E.F. and French, K.R., 2015. A five-factor asset pricing model. Journal of financial
economics 116, 1-22.


                                                  33
French, Kenneth R, 2008. Presidential address: The cost of active investing. Journal of Finance 63,
1537-1573.

Gong, G., L. Y. Li, and J. Shin, 2011. Relative performance evaluation and related peer groups in
executive compensation contracts. Accounting Review 86, 1007-1043.

Greenwood, Robin, 2008. Excess comovement of stock returns: evidence from cross-sectional variation
in Nikkei 225 weights. Review of Financial Studies 21, 1153­1186.

Harris, Lawrence, and Eitan Gurel, 1986. Price and volume effects associated with changes in the S&P
500 list: New evidence for the existence of price pressures. Journal of Finance 41, 815-829.

Heath, Davidson, Daniele Macciocchi, Roni Michaely, and Matthew Ringgenberg, 2019. Do index
funds monitor? Swiss Finance Institute Research Paper 19-08.

Hoberg, Gerard, and Gordon Phillips, 2016. Text-based network industries and endogenous product
differentiation. Journal of Political Economy 124, 1423-1465.

Hoberg, Gerard, Gordon Phillips, and Nagpurnanand Prabhala, 2014. Product market threats, payouts,
and financial flexibility. Journal of Finance 69, 293-324.

Kaul, Aditya, Vikas Mehrotra, and Randall Morck, 2000. Demand curves for stocks do slope down:
New evidence from an index weights adjustment. Journal of Finance 55, 893-912.

Kothari, S. P., and Jerold B. Warner, 1997. Measuring long-horizon security price performance. Journal
of Financial Economics 43, 301-339.

Knyazeva, Anzhela, Diana Knyazeva, Randall Morck, and Bernard Yeung, 2008. Comovement in
investment. Unpublished working paper.

Luo, Yuanzhi, 2005. Do insiders learn from outsiders? Evidence from mergers and acquisitions. Journal
of Finance 60, 1951-1982.

Lynch, Anthony W., and Richard R. Mendenhall, 1997. New evidence on stock price effects associated
with changes in the S&P 500 index. Journal of Business 70, 351-383.

Patel, Nimesh, and Ivo Welch 2017. Extended stock returns in response to S&P 500 index changes.
Review of Asset Pricing Studies 7, 172-208.

Qin, Nan, and Vijay Singal, 2015. Indexing and stock price efficiency. Financial Management 44, 875-
904.

Schmalz, Martin C, 2018. Common-ownership concentration and corporate conduct. Annual Review of
Financial Economics 10, 413-448.

Schmidt, Cornelius, and Rüdiger Fahlenbrach, 2017. Do exogenous changes in passive institutional
ownership affect corporate governance and firm value? Journal of Financial Economics 124, 285-306.

Shleifer, Andrei, 1986. Do demand curves for stocks slope down? Journal of Finance 41, 579­590.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1986. Large shareholders and corporate control. Journal of
Political Economy 94, no. 3, 461-488.

Vijh, Anand M, 1994. S&P 500 trading strategies and stock betas. Review of Financial Studies 7, 215­
251.

                                                 34
Wurgler, Jeffrey, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya, 2002. Does arbitrage flatten demand curves for stocks?
Journal of Business 75, 583-608.




                                                35
Appendix: Variable Definitions

Active                           the number of a firm's shares held by all mutual funds less
                                 those shares held by passive funds scaled by the firm's total
                                 shares outstanding

All 13F                          the number of a firm's shares held held by institutions filing
                                 13F's at the SEC.gov website scaled by the firm's total shares
                                 outstanding

Amihud                           stock illiquidity measure by Amihud (2002)

Analysts                         the number of financial analysts covering a firm

Block ownership                  aggregate percentage ownership of a firm's outstanding shares
                                 held by all blockholders (owners of more than 5%) excluding
                                 quasi-index institutions

Board independence               the number of board members who are classified as
                                 independent directors divided by the number of all board
                                 members

Capex                            capital expenditures scaled by lagged total assets

CapexSP500Peer                   the average capex of S&P 500 firms in a firm's industry (4-
                                 digit SIC)

Cash                             cash and cash equivalents scaled by total assets

Cashflow                         income before extraordinary items plus depreciation and
                                 amortization all scaled by total assets

Ch(SP500 Firms)                  the change in the number of firms in an S&P 500 industry in
                                 a year

Decrease in SP500 Firms          a dummy variable equal to one if one or more firms are
                                 removed from an S&P 500 industry in a year

Dividend                         the dollar amount of dividends paid to common stock scaled
                                 by total assets

DivSP500Peer                     the average dividend of S&P 500 firms in a firm's industry (4-
                                 digit SIC)

ESP forecast                     the average analyst annual earnings per share (EPS) estimate
                                 from IBES

EPS realized                     realized annual EPS

Fluidity                         the firm-level competition measure as calculated in Hoberg,
                                 Phillips, and Prabhala (2014)

GPIN                             (GPIN) is Generalized-PIN as calculated in Duarte, Hu, and
                                 Young (2020)


                                          36
Gross margin              Gross margin is revenues less COGS scaled by revenues

Increase in SP500 Firms   a dummy variable equal to one if one or more firms are added
                          to an S&P 500 industry in a year

Investment                the annual change in total assets scaled by lagged total assets


InvestSP500Peer           the average investment of S&P 500 firms in a firm's industry
                          (4-digit SIC)

Late                      a dummy variable equal to one if the year is greater than 2007
                          and zero otherwise

Lerner Index SP500        the median gross margin within an industry-year

Leverage                  the sum of short term and long-term debt scaled by total assets

Log(Compensation)         the natural logarithm of the CEO's annual compensation
                          (TDC1)

Log(Employees)            the natural logarithm of the number of the firm's employees (in
                          thousands)

Log(Revenue)              the natural logarithm of a firm's total revenue

Net debt                  debt issued less debt retired scaled by total assets

Net equity                equity issued less equity repurchased scaled by total assets

NDI_SP500Peer             the average net debt issuance of S&P 500 firms in a firm's
                          industry (4-digit SIC)

NEI_SP500Peer             the average net equity issuance of S&P 500 firms in a firm's
                          industry (4-digit SIC)

Passive                   the number of a firm's shares held in S&P 500 passive mutual
                          funds scaled by the firm's shares outstanding, where passive
                          funds are those with an active share of less than 0.60 where
                          the active share follows that in Cremers and Petajisto (2009)
                          or a fund whose name contains both "500" and "index"

PayoutSP500Peer           the average payout (dividend plus repurchase) of S&P 500
                          firms in a firm's industry (4-digit SIC)

PreSP500Add               dummy variable equal to one for treated firms one year prior
                          to an addition year and zero otherwise (always equal to zero
                          for control firms)

Rating                    an integer between 1 and 22, in which AAA is 22 and each
                          step down is one integer less (following Butler, Fauver, and
                          Mortal, 2009

Repurchase                the dollar amount of repurchases scaled by total assets


                                    37
RepSP500Peer   the average repurchase of S&P 500 firms in a firm's industry
               (4-digit SIC)

ROA            Net income scaled by total assets

Rsq            the R-squared from a model regressing daily stock returns on
               market returns within a firm-year

%S&P500Peer    percent of a firm's compensation peer group comprised of
               firms in the S&P 500

Similarity     the firm-level competition measure as calculated in Hoberg
               and Phillips (2016)

SP500          dummy variable equal to one if a firm is a member of the S&P
               500 and zero otherwise

SP500Add       dummy variable equal to one for treated firms after the
               addition year and zero otherwise (always equal to zero for
               control firms)

Tobin's q      the sum of total assets plus market value of equity minus book
               value of equity divided by total assets

Volatility     the standard deviation of stock returns in a year, calculated
               using daily stock returns from CRSP




                        38
Figure 1: Daily abnormal returns around S&P 500 index additions

The figures present daily abnormal returns around S&P 500 index additions. The event window is [-5, +21].
Abnormal returns are the difference between the actual daily return and the predicted return on the same day. The
predicted return is calculated based on the four-factor model (Fama-French 3-factor plus momentum), in which
betas are estimated using a 252-day window ending 50 days before an index addition. The 95% confidence
intervals are shown in dotted lines. Day 0 is the day following an announcement date as the addition is announced
after the market close. Panels A, B, and C is for CARs around S&P 500 index additions during 1997-2017, 1997-
2007 and 2008-2017, respectively.

Panel A: 1997-2017




Panel B: 1997-2007




Panel C: 2008-2017




                                                      39
Figure 2: Passive holdings in S&P 500 firms over time

This figure presents the annual average passive holdings in S&P 500 firms that are added to the index within
previous four years. The passive holding is the proportion of a firm's outstanding shares held by S&P 500 passive
mutual funds. A mutual fund is defined as an S&P 500 passive mutual fund if its fund name contains both "index"
and "500" or its active share is less than 0.60 (following that in Cremers and Petajisto, 2009).



                                                                  % Passive
 0.07


 0.06


 0.05


 0.04


 0.03


 0.02


 0.01


    0
        1997

               1998

                      1999

                             2000

                                    2001

                                           2002

                                                  2003

                                                         2004

                                                                2005

                                                                       2006

                                                                              2007

                                                                                     2008

                                                                                            2009

                                                                                                   2010

                                                                                                          2011

                                                                                                                 2012

                                                                                                                        2013

                                                                                                                               2014

                                                                                                                                      2015

                                                                                                                                             2016

                                                                                                                                                    2017




                                                                              40
Table 1: Summary statistics

This table presents summary statistics. The sample includes treated firms added to the S&P 500 index and control
firms that are propensity-score matched on total assets, Tobin's q, stock return, and industry (2-digit SIC) in the
year before index addition (more details in Section 4). The sample period is 1997 to 2017. All variables are
winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. Variable definitions are in Appendix.

 Variable                     Mean            SD             p25            p50           p75             N
 Log(Assets)                   8.46           1.28           7.65          8.41           9.25          6,707
 Tobin's q                     2.38           2.01           1.20          1.65           2.65          6,707
 Cash                          0.15           0.17           0.03          0.08           0.21          6,704
 Leverage                      0.26           0.21           0.09          0.24           0.39          6,707
 Block ownership               0.17           0.14           0.07          0.14           0.24          2,851
 Rsq                           0.26           0.17           0.12          0.23           0.37          6,113
 GPIN                          0.07           0.06           0.04          0.06           0.08          2,762
 Capex                         0.06           0.08           0.01          0.04           0.08          6,690
 Cashflow                      0.11           0.11           0.05          0.10           0.16          6,265
 %SP500Peers                   0.44           0.22           0.29          0.44           0.60          2,102
 Investment                    0.22           0.50           0.01          0.09           0.24          6,707
 Net debt issuance             0.02           0.08          -0.01           0             0.04          6,064
 Net equity issuance           -0.01          0.07          -0.02           0             0.01          5,758
 Dividend                      0.01           0.02            0            0.00           0.02          6,707
 Repurchase                    0.03           0.05            0            0.00           0.03          5,936
 ROA                           0.05           0.09           0.01          0.04           0.09          6,707




                                                       41
Table 2: Abnormal returns of S&P 500 index additions

This table presents abnormal stock returns for S&P 500 index additions. The abnormal returns are calculated for
the full sample (1997 to 2017), the early sub-period (1997 to 2007), and the late sub-period (2008 to 2017). The
p-values of the equality tests for abnormal returns between the early and the late sub-periods are reported. Panel
A (B) shows the short-run CARs for the event window [-5, +5] ([-5, +21]) around the announcement date. The
short-run CARs are calculated using four models: market model, Fama-French three-factor model, Carhart (1997)
four-factor model (FF3 plus momentum), and Fama-French five-factor model (Fama and French, 2015). Panels
C and D present long-run CARs starting from the addition month to 12 months later. Panel C presents CARs
(monthly alphas) using the calendar-time portfolio approach. Panel D presents abnormal returns based on
benchmark portfolio matching following Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman and Wermers (1997). In particular, the column
"Calendar-time monthly alpha" shows the average difference between the stock return and its matched benchmark
portfolio return, in which the average is across all firms added to S&P 500 index from the addition month to 12
months later (the window is [0,12]). The column "Event time BHAR" shows the event-time buy-and-hold
abnormal returns (BHAR), which are measured as the buy-and-hold raw return minus the buy-and-hold return for
a benchmark portfolio matched on size, book-to-market, and momentum over the same [0,12] window as in Panel
C following Barber and Lyon (1997) and Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman and Wermers (1997). ***, **, and * are for
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Panel A. Short-run CARs [-5, +5]: event-time method

 Period                              Market                 FF3             FF3 + UMD                FF5
 1997-2017                          0.033***             0.033***             0.032***            0.033***
 1997-2007                          0.049***             0.048***             0.047***            0.049***
 2008-2017                            0.006                0.007                0.007               0.006
 p-value (early - late)               <0.01                <0.01                <0.01               <0.01

Panel B. Short-run CAR [-5, +21]: Event-time method

 Period                                  Market               FF3            FF3 + UMD               FF5
 1997-2017                                0.006               0.005              0.006              0.004
 1997-2007                              0.024***             0.020**           0.023***            0.021**
 2008-2017                             -0.023***            -0.021***          -0.021***          -0.022***
 p-value (early - late)                  <0.01               <0.01               <0.01               <0.01

Panel C. One year long-run CAR: Calendar-time portfolio approach (monthly alpha)

 Period                              Market                 FF3             FF3 + UMD                FF5
 1997-2017                           -0.0025              -0.0023             -0.0021              -0.0022
 1997-2007                            0.0013               0.0015              0.0023               0.0026
 2008-2017                          -0.0063**            -0.0073**           -0.0073**            -0.0066**
 p-value (early - late)                0.05                 0.02                0.02                 0.02

Panel D. One year long-run CAR: DGTW benchmark portfolio match

 Period                                   Calendar-time alpha monthly                Event-time BHAR
 1997-2017                                          -0.0021                                0.004
 1997-2007                                           0.0003                                0.035
 2008-2017                                         -0.0045**                             -0.053**
 p-value (early - late)                               0.12                                  0.04


                                                       42
Table 3: Passive mutual fund holdings and S&P 500 index additions

This table shows the effects of S&P 500 index addition on passive fund holdings, active fund holdings, and total
13F-institutional holdings. A mutual fund is defined as an S&P 500 passive mutual fund if its active share is less
than 0.60 (following Cremers and Petajisto, 2009) or its fund name contains both "index" and "500". Passive is
the proportion of a firm's outstanding shares held by S&P 500 passive mutual funds. Active is the proportion of a
firm's outstanding shares held by active mutual funds that are not passive mutual funds (as defined above). All
13F is the proportion of a firm's outstanding shares held by all 13F institutions. SP500Add is the S&P 500 addition
dummy that is equal to one for treated firms after the addition year and zero otherwise. PreSP500Add is a dummy
variable that is equal to one for treated firms one year prior to an addition year and zero otherwise. Both SP500Add
and PreSP500Add equal zero for control firms. Late is a dummy variable equal to one for years in or after 2008
and zero otherwise. The event window is four years before and four years after a year of addition. The addition
year is excluded. The sample period is from 1997 to 2017. All specifications include firm and year fixed effects.
Robust standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Variable definitions are in Appendix. ***, **, * denote
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively

                                      (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)            (5)           (6)
 VARIABLES                          Passive      Passive        Active       Active        All 13F       All 13F

 SP500Add                          0.034***     0.024***      -0.115***       -0.031       -0.007        -0.015
                                    [25.72]      [13.66]        [-2.72]       [-1.12]      [-0.28]      [-0.62]
 SP500Add x Late                                0.017***                     -0.142*                      0.015
                                                  [8.48]                      [-1.71]                    [0.46]
 PreSP500Add                         0.001        0.001          0.021         0.025        -0.005       -0.006
                                     [1.43]       [0.83]        [0.44]         [0.50]      [-0.35]      [-0.39]
 Log(Assets)                        0.002**      0.002**         0.033         0.033         0.028        0.028
                                     [2.43]       [2.52]        [1.32]         [1.34]       [1.55]       [1.55]
 Tobin's q                         0.001***     0.001***         0.010         0.010         0.002        0.002
                                     [2.86]       [2.82]        [1.37]         [1.42]       [0.35]       [0.32]
 Cash                                0.001        0.002         -0.025        -0.029         0.037        0.037
                                     [0.50]       [0.69]       [-0.56]        [-0.65]       [0.60]       [0.59]
 Leverage                            0.001        0.002        0.090**       0.085**       0.091*       0.090*
                                     [0.30]       [0.47]        [2.23]         [2.09]       [1.96]       [1.95]
 Return                              0.000        0.000         -0.004        -0.004       0.025**      0.025**
                                     [0.38]       [0.23]       [-0.20]        [-0.18]       [2.43]       [2.43]

 Observations                        4,501        4,501         4,501         4,501         3,027         3,027
 R-squared                           0.816        0.825         0.594         0.595         0.803         0.803
 Firm FE                               Y            Y             Y             Y             Y             Y
 Year FE                               Y            Y             Y             Y             Y             Y




                                                        43
Table 4: Corporate governance and S&P 500 index additions

This table shows the effect of S&P 500 index addition on block ownership. Block ownership is the percent of
shares held by blockholders (at least 5%). Quasi index institutions are excluded, in which quasi-index institutions
follow the classification by Bushee and Noe (2000). SP500Add is the S&P 500 addition dummy that is equal to
one for treated firms after an addition year and zero otherwise. PreSP500Add is a dummy variable equal to one
for treated firms one year prior to an addition year and zero otherwise. Both SP500Add and PreSP500Add equal
zero for control firms. Late is a dummy variable equal to one for years in or after 2008 and zero otherwise. The
event window is four years before and four years after a year of addition. The addition year is excluded. The
sample period is from 1997 to 2017. All specifications include firm and year fixed effects. Robust standard errors
are clustered at the firm level. Variable definitions are in Appendix. ***, **, * denote significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                      (1)                                    (2)
 VARIABLES                                      Block ownership                        Block ownership

 SP500Add                                           -0.025**                                -0.028**
                                                     [-1.98]                                 [-1.98]
 SP500Add x Late                                                                              0.005
                                                                                              [0.36]
 PreSP500Add                                          -0.012                                 -0.012
                                                      [-1.54]                                [-1.56]
 Log(Assets)                                        -0.033***                              -0.033***
                                                      [-2.95]                                [-2.96]
 Tobin's q                                            -0.003                                 -0.003
                                                      [-1.06]                                [-1.08]
 Cash                                                 -0.019                                 -0.020
                                                      [-0.57]                                [-0.58]
 Leverage                                            0.088***                               0.087***
                                                       [3.23]                                 [3.22]
 Return                                               -0.006                                 -0.006
                                                      [-1.31]                                [-1.31]
 Analysts                                             -0.001                                 -0.001
                                                      [-0.93]                                [-0.92]
 Amihud                                                0.000                                  0.000
                                                       [0.98]                                 [0.99]

 Observations                                         2,346                                  2,346
 R-squared                                            0.673                                  0.673
 Firm FE                                                Y                                      Y
 Year FE                                                Y                                      Y




                                                        44
Table 5: Stock price informativeness, S&P 500 additions, and passive holdings

This table presents the effect of S&P 500 index addition and passive mutual fund holdings on stock price
informativeness (SPI). Rsq is the R-squared from the market model where the value-weighted market return is
used (vwretd in CRSP). GPIN follows the Generalized PIN model by Duarte, Hu, and Young (2020). SP500Add
is a dummy variable that is equal to one for treated firms after an addition year and zero otherwise. PreSP500Add
is a dummy variable that is equal to one for treated firms one year prior to an addition year and zero otherwise.
Both SP500Add and PreSP500Add equal zero for control firms. Late is a dummy variable equal to one for years
in or after 2008 and zero otherwise. Panel A (B) shows the addition (passive holding) effect on SPI. In Panel B,
Passive is the proportion of a firm's outstanding shares held in S&P 500 passive mutual funds. A mutual fund is
defined as an S&P 500 passive mutual fund if its active share is less than 0.60 (following that in Cremers and
Petajisto, 2009) or its fund name contains both "index" and "500". The event window is four years before and
four years after a year of addition. The addition year is excluded. The sample period is from 1997 to 2017. All
specifications include firm and year fixed effects. Robust standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Variable
definitions are in Appendix. ***, **, * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Panel A: SPI and S&P 500 additions

                                                  (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)
 VARIABLES                                        Rsq               Rsq              GPIN              GPIN

 SP500Add                                      0.022***           0.030***         -0.021***         -0.030***
                                                 [2.81]             [3.42]           [-3.95]           [-3.96]
 SP500Add x Late                                                   -0.015                              0.017**
                                                                   [-1.31]                              [2.36]
 PreSP500Add                                      0.000             0.001             0.009              0.008
                                                  [0.07]            [0.12]           [1.06]             [1.01]
 Log(Assets)                                    0.032***          0.031***           -0.002             -0.001
                                                  [6.12]            [6.07]          [-0.33]            [-0.26]
 Tobin's q                                      0.011***          0.011***          0.008*             0.008**
                                                  [6.89]            [6.88]           [1.94]             [1.97]
 Cash                                             0.011             0.010            -0.017             -0.017
                                                  [0.42]            [0.41]          [-0.65]            [-0.65]
 Leverage                                      -0.054***         -0.054***          0.038**           0.039***
                                                 [-2.72]           [-2.76]           [2.50]             [2.63]
 Return                                           0.002             0.003             0.004              0.004
                                                  [0.76]            [0.78]           [1.08]             [1.10]

 Observations                                    5,332             5,332             2,379             2,379
 R-squared                                       0.751             0.752             0.264             0.266
 Firm FE                                           Y                 Y                 Y                 Y
 Year FE                                           Y                 Y                 Y                 Y




                                                         45
Panel B: SPI and passive holdings

                              (1)           (2)       (3)         (4)
 VARIABLES                    Rsq           Rsq      GPIN        GPIN

 Passive                     0.036       -0.113     -0.306***   -0.356**
                             [0.31]      [-0.69]      [-3.64]    [-2.35]
 Passive x Late                           0.236                   0.091
                                          [1.14]                  [0.60]
 Log(Assets)                0.033***    0.033***     -0.004      -0.004
                              [5.34]      [5.40]    [-0.63]      [-0.64]
 Tobin's q                  0.013***    0.013***    0.007**     0.007**
                              [7.52]      [7.56]     [2.29]       [2.29]
 Cash                        0.047*      0.047*      -0.013      -0.012
                              [1.67]      [1.68]    [-0.48]      [-0.47]
 Leverage                   -0.055**    -0.055**    0.034**     0.034**
                             [-2.56]     [-2.57]     [2.11]       [2.09]
 Return                      -0.002      -0.002     0.008*       0.008*
                             [-0.59]     [-0.63]     [1.88]       [1.87]

 Observations                 4,769         4,769    2,209       2,209
 R-squared                    0.760         0.760    0.237       0.237
 Firm FE                        Y             Y        Y           Y
 Year FE                        Y             Y        Y           Y




                                       46
Table 6: Investment-q sensitivity and S&P 500 additions

This table shows the effect of S&P 500 index addition on firms' investment efficiency. Capex is defined as capital
expenditures scaled by lagged total assets. SP500Add is the S&P 500 addition dummy that is equal to one for
treated firms after an addition year and zero otherwise. PreSP500Add is a dummy variable equal to one for treated
firms one year prior to an addition year and zero otherwise. Both SP500Add and PreSP500Add equal zero for
control firms. Late is a dummy variable equal to one for years in or after 2008 and zero otherwise. Tobin's q is
one-year lagged following the literature. The event window is four years before and four years after an addition
year. The addition year is excluded. The sample period is from 1997 to 2017. All specifications include firm and
year fixed effects. Robust standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Variable definitions are in Appendix.
***, **, * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                                               (1)                  (2)
 VARIABLES                                                                    Capex                Capex

 SP500Add x Tobin's q                                                       -0.005***            -0.006***
                                                                              [-4.23]              [-4.01]
 SP500Add x Tobin's q x Late                                                                        0.003
                                                                                                    [1.55]
 Tobin's q                                                                  0.008***              0.008***
                                                                              [7.57]                [7.19]
 Tobin's q x Late                                                                                  -0.002
                                                                                                   [-0.88]
 SP500Add                                                                     0.007               0.013**
                                                                              [1.52]                [2.17]
 SP500Add x Late                                                                                  -0.014**
                                                                                                   [-1.97]
 PreSP500Add x Tobin's q                                                     -0.001                -0.001
                                                                             [-0.93]               [-0.88]
 PreSP500Add                                                                 -0.000                -0.000
                                                                             [-0.03]               [-0.03]
 Cashflow                                                                   0.106***              0.106***
                                                                              [5.49]                [5.49]

 Observations                                                                 5,384                 5,384
 R-squared                                                                    0.763                 0.764
 Firm FE                                                                        Y                     Y
 Year FE                                                                        Y                     Y




                                                       47
Table 7: Credit ratings and S&P 500 index additions

This table shows the effect of S&P 500 index addition on corporate credit ratings. Rating is an integer between 1
and 22, in which AAA is 22 and each step down is one integer less (following Butler, Fauver, and Mortal, 2009).
Panel A shows differences in ratings of S&P 500 firms and non-S&P 500 firms. SP500 is a dummy variable equal
to one if a firm is a member of the S&P 500 index and zero otherwise. Late is a dummy variable equal to one for
years in or after 2008 and zero otherwise. The test sample for Panel A includes all S&P 500 firms and the largest
500 non-S&P 500 firms (by market capitalization) per year from 1997-2017. Panel B shows the effect of S&P
500 additions on ratings. SP500Add is the S&P 500 addition dummy that is equal to one for treated firms after an
addition year and zero otherwise. PreSP500Add is a dummy variable equal to one for treated firms one year prior
to the addition year and zero otherwise. Both SP500Add and PreSP500Add equal zero for control firms. The event
window in Panel B is four years before and four years after an addition year. The addition year is excluded. All
specifications in Panel A (B) include industry (firm) and year fixed effects. Robust standard errors are clustered
at the firm level. Variable definitions are in Appendix. ***, **, * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
levels, respectively.

Panel A. Ratings of S&P 500 and non-S&P 500 firms
                                                          (1)                                 (2)
 VARIABLES                                               Rating                              Rating

 SP500                                                  0.415***                            0.292***
                                                          [3.56]                              [2.79]
 Log(Assets)                                            1.089***                            1.040***
                                                         [19.32]                             [18.94]
 Tobin's q                                              0.264***                            0.393***
                                                          [2.87]                              [4.99]
 Cash                                                                                      -2.287***
                                                                                             [-4.14]
 Leverage                                                                                  -4.522***
                                                                                            [-11.14]
 Return                                                                                    -0.937***
                                                                                            [-13.33]

 Observations                                            15,530                             15,341
 R-squared                                                0.350                              0.415
 Industry FE                                                Y                                  Y
 Year FE                                                    Y                                  Y




                                                       48
Panel B. S&P 500 addition effects on credit ratings
                                                        (1)         (2)
 VARIABLES                                             Rating      Rating

 SP500Add                                             0.408***     0.522***
                                                        [3.17]       [3.35]
 SP500Add x Late                                                     -0.219
                                                                    [-1.20]
 PreSP500Add                                              0.104       0.110
                                                         [1.43]      [1.52]
 Log(Assets)                                           0.844***    0.839***
                                                         [7.62]      [7.59]
 Tobin's q                                              0.118**     0.116**
                                                         [2.43]      [2.36]
 Cash                                                    -0.419      -0.429
                                                        [-0.86]     [-0.88]
 Leverage                                             -1.522***   -1.544***
                                                        [-3.64]     [-3.73]
 Return                                               -0.383***   -0.381***
                                                        [-5.64]     [-5.60]

 Observations                                          3,617       3,617
 R-squared                                             0.900       0.900
 Firm FE                                                 Y           Y
 Year FE                                                 Y           Y




                                             49
Table 8: S&P 500 peer firms as performance benchmark in executive compensation

This table shows the effect of S&P 500 index addition on CEO performance evaluation in executive compensation.
%SP500Peer is the portion of S&P 500 peers in a CEO's peer group for the relative performance evaluation in
her compensation contract. The data is available from 2006. Panel A shows the univariate evidence and compares
%SP500Peers before and after a firm is added to the S&P 500 index. The p-value is for the t-test of mean equality.
Panel B shows results of multivariate regressions. SP500Add is the S&P 500 addition dummy that is equal to one
for treated firms after an addition year and zero otherwise. PreSP500Add is a dummy variable equal to one for
treated firms one year prior to an addition year and zero otherwise. Both SP500Add and PreSP500Add equal zero
for control firms. Model 1 uses contemporaneous control variables. Model 2 uses lagged controls and drops the
event year. Peer group data is from IncentiveLab. The event window is four years before and four years after an
addition year. The addition year is excluded. All specifications include firm and year fixed effects. Robust standard
errors are clustered at the firm level. Variable definitions are in Appendix. ***, **, * denote significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Panel A. Univariate evidence

                                                        %SP500Peer                   p-value (mean equality)
 Before addition                                             0.413
                                                                                              0.001
 After addition                                              0.516

Panel B. DiD regressions

                                                               (1)                              (2)
 VARIABLES                                                 %SP500Peers                      %SP500Peers
 Controls                                                   Contemp                           Lagged

 SP500Add                                                     0.051**                           0.037*
                                                                [2.12]                           [1.83]
 PreSP500Add                                                    0.013                             0.018
                                                                [0.86]                           [1.23]
 Log(Assets)                                                  0.072***                         0.093***
                                                                [3.56]                           [3.78]
 Tobin's q                                                      0.007                           0.011*
                                                                [0.95]                           [1.77]
 Cash                                                          -0.074                             0.076
                                                               [-1.10]                           [1.17]
 Leverage                                                      -0.041                            -0.095
                                                               [-0.76]                          [-1.55]
 Return                                                        -0.013                            -0.010
                                                               [-1.61]                          [-1.25]
 Analysts                                                     0.004**                           0.004**
                                                                [2.57]                           [2.22]
 Board independence                                            -0.065                          -0.298**
                                                               [-0.64]                          [-2.46]

 Observations                                                  1,441                             1,269
 R-squared                                                     0.847                             0.849
 Firm FE                                                         Y                                 Y
 Year FE                                                         Y                                 Y




                                                        50
Table 9: Corporate investment and S&P 500 additions

This table shows the effect of S&P 500 index addition on corporate investment. Investment is the annual change
in total assets scaled by lagged total assets. Panel A shows differences in investment of S&P 500 firms and non-
S&P 500 firms. SP500 is a dummy variable equal to one if a firm is a member of the S&P 500 index and zero
otherwise. Late is a dummy variable equal to one for years in or after 2008 and zero otherwise. The test sample
in Panel A includes all S&P 500 firms and the largest 500 non-S&P 500 firms (by market capitalization). Panel B
shows the effect of S&P 500 additions on investment. SP500Add is the S&P 500 addition dummy that is equal to
one for treated firms after an addition year and zero otherwise. PreSP500Add is a dummy variable equal to one
for treated firms one year prior to an addition year and zero otherwise. Both SP500Add and PreSP500Add equal
zero for control firms. Panel C shows the S&P 500 peer effect on investment of newly added firms.
InvestSP500Peer is the average investment of S&P 500 peers in a firm's industry. The event window in Panels B
and C is four years before and four years after an addition year. The addition year is excluded. The sample period
is from 1997 to 2017. Specifications in Panel A include industry and year fixed effects. Specifications in Panels
B and C include firm and year fixed effects. Robust standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Variable
definitions are in Appendix. ***, **, * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Panel A. Investment of S&P 500 and non-S&P 500 firms
                                                                 (1)                            (2)
 VARIABLES                                                   Investment                     Investment

 SP500                                                       -0.056***                       -0.079***
                                                               [-6.53]                         [-9.22]
 SP500 x Late                                                                                0.049***
                                                                                                [4.58]
 Log(Assets)                                                     0.029                          0.024
                                                                [1.08]                          [1.07]
 Log(Assets) squared                                            -0.002                         -0.001
                                                               [-1.23]                         [-1.15]
 Tobin's q                                                    0.017***                       0.017***
                                                                [4.23]                          [3.59]
 Cashflow                                                     -0.441**                       -0.444***
                                                               [-2.11]                         [-6.50]
 Cash                                                          0.116**                       0.113***
                                                                [2.22]                          [3.24]
 Leverage                                                        0.047                         0.045*
                                                                [1.12]                          [1.90]
 Return                                                       0.154***                       0.153***
                                                                [6.16]                        [12.62]

 Observations                                                  18,966                         18,966
 R-squared                                                      0.133                          0.134
 Industry FE                                                      Y                              Y
 Year FE                                                          Y                              Y




                                                       51
Panel B. S&P 500 addition effects on investment
                                                      (1)          (2)
 VARIABLES                                        Investment   Investment

 SP500Add                                         -0.149***    -0.201***
                                                    [-5.20]      [-4.83]
 SP500Add x Late                                                0.098**
                                                                  [2.22]
 PreSP500Add                                        -0.038       -0.041
                                                   [-1.44]       [-1.53]
 Log(Assets)                                        -0.002        0.007
                                                   [-0.01]        [0.06]
 Log(Assets) squared                               0.014**      0.014**
                                                    [2.05]        [2.00]
 Tobin's q                                          -0.003       -0.003
                                                   [-0.28]       [-0.30]
 Cash                                              0.274**      0.278**
                                                    [2.17]        [2.21]
 Leverage                                         0.361***     0.365***
                                                    [4.37]        [4.43]
 Cashflow                                         1.571***     1.566***
                                                    [9.65]        [9.61]
 Return                                           0.110***     0.109***
                                                    [5.63]        [5.63]

 Observations                                       5,357        5,357
 R-squared                                          0.396        0.397
 Firm FE                                              Y            Y
 Year FE                                              Y            Y




                                           52
Panel C. S&P 500 peer effects on investment
                                                       (1)          (2)
 VARIABLES                                         Investment   Investment

 InvestSP500Peer x SP500Add                        0.485***     0.450***
                                                     [3.72]        [2.85]
 InvestSP500Peer x SP500Add x Late                                 0.165
                                                                   [0.59]
 InvestSP500Peer x Late                                           -0.062
                                                                  [-0.43]
 InvestSP500Peer                                    0.223***    0.235***
                                                      [3.57]       [3.79]
 SP500Add                                          -0.215***    -0.278***
                                                     [-6.41]      [-5.93]
 SP500Add x Late                                                 0.119**
                                                                   [2.48]
 InvestSP500Peer x PreSP500Add                       0.122         0.119
                                                     [0.77]        [0.73]
 PreSP500Add                                        -0.045        -0.046
                                                    [-1.30]       [-1.33]
 Log(Assets)                                         0.014         0.024
                                                     [0.12]        [0.20]
 Log(Assets) squared                                 0.011         0.011
                                                     [1.60]        [1.54]
 Tobin's q                                          -0.001        -0.001
                                                    [-0.10]       [-0.14]
 Cash                                              0.341***     0.343***
                                                     [2.80]        [2.85]
 Leverage                                          0.334***     0.342***
                                                     [3.82]        [3.91]
 Cashflow                                          1.338***     1.333***
                                                     [8.28]        [8.27]
 Return                                            0.101***     0.100***
                                                     [5.02]        [5.03]

 Observations                                        4,680        4,680
 R-squared                                           0.445        0.447
 Firm FE                                               Y            Y
 Year FE                                               Y            Y




                                              53
Table 10: External financing and S&P 500 index additions

This table shows the effect of S&P 500 index addition on firms' external financing. Net Debt is defined as debt
issuance less debt retired scaled by total assets. Net Equity is equity issued less equity repurchased scaled by
assets. Panel A shows differences in external financing of S&P 500 firms and non-S&P 500 firms. SP500 is a
dummy variable equal to one if a firm is a member of the S&P 500 index and zero otherwise. Late is a dummy
variable equal to one for years in or after 2008 and zero otherwise. The test sample in Panel A includes all S&P
500 firms and the largest 500 non-S&P 500 firms (by market capitalization). Panel B shows the effect of S&P 500
additions on net debt issuance and net equity issuance. SP500Add is the S&P 500 addition dummy that is equal
to one for treated firms after an addition year and zero otherwise. PreSP500Add is a dummy variable equal to one
for treated firms one year prior to an addition year and zero otherwise. Both SP500Add and PreSP500Add equal
zero for control firms. Panel C shows the S&P 500 peer effect on security issuance of newly added firms.
NDI_SP500Peer (NEI_SP500Peer) is the average net debt (equity) issuance of S&P 500 firms in a firm's industry
(4-digit SIC). The event window in Panels B and C is four years before and four years after an addition year. The
addition year is excluded. The sample period is from 1997 to 2017. Specifications in Panel A include industry and
year fixed effects. Specifications in Panels B and C include firm and year fixed effects. Robust standard errors are
clustered at the firm level. Variable definitions are in Appendix. ***, **, * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% levels, respectively.

Panel A. External financing of S&P 500 and non-S&P 500 firms
                                          (1)                  (2)                  (3)                 (4)
 VARIABLES                              Net Debt             Net Debt           Net Equity          Net Equity

 SP500                                    -0.002                -0.003          -0.021***           -0.021***
                                          [-1.05]              [-1.59]            [-9.08]             [-9.77]
 SP500                                                          0.002                                  0.000
                                                                [1.00]                                 [0.13]
 Log(Assets)                             -0.002**            -0.002***           0.002**             0.002***
                                          [-2.38]              [-3.14]            [2.75]               [2.94]
 Tobin's q                                 0.001               0.001**            -0.002            -0.002***
                                           [1.57]               [2.13]           [-1.59]              [-2.73]
 Cash                                   0.043***              0.043***             0.007               0.007
                                           [4.68]               [6.95]            [0.76]               [0.78]
 Leverage                               0.135***              0.135***            -0.006              -0.006
                                          [11.07]              [23.29]           [-0.81]              [-0.92]
 Return                                    0.001                0.001           0.016***             0.016***
                                           [0.47]               [0.72]            [5.27]              [10.28]
 Firm age                               -0.000***            -0.000***             0.000               0.000
                                          [-4.14]              [-4.67]            [0.01]               [0.01]

 Observations                             14,950              14,950              14,470              14,470
 R-squared                                0.134               0.135               0.186               0.186
 Industry FE                                Y                   Y                   Y                   Y
 Year FE                                    Y                   Y                   Y                   Y




                                                        54
Panel B. S&P 500 addition effects on external financing
                                       (1)             (2)          (3)          (4)
 VARIABLES                           Net Debt        Net Debt   Net Equity   Net Equity

 SP500Add                             -0.003           0.002    -0.017***    -0.021***
                                      [-0.60]          [0.31]     [-3.82]      [-3.50]
 SP500Add x Late                                      -0.010                    0.008
                                                      [-1.14]                   [1.16]
 PreSP500Add                          -0.001          -0.001     -0.003        -0.003
                                      [-0.20]         [-0.16]    [-0.87]       [-0.92]
 Log(Assets)                         0.022***        0.022***   0.010***      0.010***
                                       [5.12]          [5.07]     [2.73]        [2.76]
 Tobin's q                             0.002           0.002      0.000         0.000
                                       [1.04]          [1.05]     [0.16]        [0.17]
 Cash                                0.084***        0.084***   0.075***      0.075***
                                       [3.97]          [3.95]     [3.99]        [3.98]
 Leverage                            0.280***        0.280***    -0.005        -0.005
                                      [11.55]         [11.52]    [-0.35]       [-0.33]
 Return                               -0.003          -0.003    0.013***      0.013***
                                      [-0.81]         [-0.80]     [5.49]        [5.48]
 Firm age                             -0.000          -0.000    0.002***      0.002***
                                      [-0.07]         [-0.05]     [2.88]        [2.73]

 Observations                          4,511          4,511       4,275        4,275
 R-squared                             0.330          0.331       0.506        0.506
 Firm FE                                 Y              Y           Y            Y
 Year FE                                 Y              Y           Y            Y




                                                55
Panel C. S&P 500 peer effects on external financing
                                                         (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)
 VARIABLES                                            Net Debt   Net Debt   Net Equity   Net Equity


 NDI_SP500Peer x SP500Add                             0.618***   0.636***
                                                       [9.01]     [7.11]
 NDI_SP500Peer x SP500Add x Late                                  -0.017
                                                                  [-0.13]
 NDI_SP500Peer x Late                                             -0.059
                                                                  [-0.61]
 NDI_SP500Peer                                        0.146***   0.167***
                                                       [2.96]     [2.65]
 NDI_SP500Peer x PreSP500Add                           0.016      0.017
                                                       [0.13]     [0.14]
 NEI_SP500Peer x SP500Add                                                   0.646***     0.749***
                                                                              [7.83]       [6.48]
 NEI_SP500Peer x SP500Add x Late                                                           -0.177
                                                                                          [-1.17]
 NEI_SP500Peer x Late                                                                      0.036
                                                                                           [0.45]
 NEI_SP500Peer                                                              0.218***     0.204***
                                                                              [3.98]       [3.16]
 NEI_SP500Peer x PreSP500Add                                                  0.036        0.028
                                                                              [0.35]       [0.27]
 SP500Add                                              -0.007     -0.007      -0.001       -0.002
                                                       [-1.17]    [-0.85]    [-0.11]      [-0.30]
 SP500Add x Late                                                  -0.001                   0.002
                                                                  [-0.12]                  [0.27]
 PreSP500Add                                           0.005      0.005       -0.003       -0.003
                                                       [0.91]     [0.95]     [-0.66]      [-0.71]
 Log(Assets)                                          0.016***   0.017***    0.009**      0.009**
                                                       [3.62]     [3.64]      [2.30]       [2.29]
 Tobin's q                                             0.001      0.001       0.001        0.001
                                                       [0.81]     [0.80]      [0.42]       [0.39]
 Cash                                                 0.084***   0.084***   0.080***     0.079***
                                                       [3.51]     [3.51]      [4.16]       [4.11]
 Leverage                                             0.255***   0.255***     0.003        0.004
                                                      [10.44]    [10.44]      [0.21]       [0.27]
 Return                                                -0.001     -0.001    0.011***     0.011***
                                                       [-0.36]    [-0.33]     [4.46]       [4.41]
 Firm age                                              0.002      0.002       0.002        0.002
                                                       [0.39]     [0.41]      [0.66]       [0.64]


 Observations                                          3,955      3,955       3,734        3,734
 R-squared                                             0.407      0.407       0.577        0.577
 Firm FE                                                 Y          Y           Y            Y
 Year FE                                                 Y          Y           Y            Y




                                            56
Table 11: Payouts and S&P 500 index additions

This table shows the effect of S&P 500 index addition on corporate payouts. Dividend is the dollar amount of
dividends paid to common stock scaled by total assets. Repurchase is the dollar amount of repurchases scaled by
total assets. Payout is the sum of Dividend and Repurchase. Panel A shows differences in payouts of S&P 500
firms and non-S&P 500 firms. SP500 is a dummy variable equal to one if a firm is a member of the S&P 500
index and zero otherwise. Late is a dummy variable equal to one for years in or after 2008 and zero otherwise.
The test sample in Panel A includes all S&P 500 firms and the largest 500 non-S&P 500 firms (by market
capitalization). Panel B shows the effect of S&P 500 additions on payouts. SP500Add is the S&P 500 addition
dummy that is equal to one for treated firms after an addition year and zero otherwise. PreSP500Add is a dummy
variable equal to one for treated firms one year prior to an addition year and zero otherwise. Both SP500Add and
PreSP500Add equal zero for control firms. Panel C shows the S&P 500 peer effect on payouts of newly added
firms. DivSP500Peer, RepSP500Peer, and PayoutSP500Peer are the average dividend, repurchase, and total
payouts of S&P 500 peers in a firm's industry (4-digit SIC), respectively. The event window in Panels B and C is
four years before and four years after an addition year. The addition year is excluded. The sample period is from
1997 to 2017. Specifications in Panel A include industry and year fixed effects. Specifications in Panels B and C
include firm and year fixed effects. Robust standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Variable definitions are
in Appendix. ***, **, * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Panel A. Payouts of S&P 500 and non-S&P 500 firms
                         (1)             (2)            (3)              (4)               (5)             (6)
 VARIABLES            Dividend        Dividend       Repurchase       Repurchase         Payout          Payout

 SP500                 -0.001            -0.001       0.021***          0.021***       0.020***         0.020***
                       [-0.92]           [-0.96]       [11.34]           [13.65]        [10.51]          [11.73]
 SP500 x Late                            -0.000                          -0.000                           -0.001
                                         [-0.09]                         [-0.12]                         [-0.26]
 Log(Assets)             0.000            0.000       -0.003***        -0.003***       -0.003***       -0.003***
                         [0.76]           [0.78]        [-5.12]          [-5.48]         [-4.18]         [-4.47]
 Tobin's q             0.001**        0.001***          0.001*          0.001***         0.003**        0.003***
                         [2.49]           [4.15]         [1.85]           [2.89]          [2.21]          [3.48]
 Cashflow             0.123***        0.123***         0.219***         0.219***        0.359***        0.359***
                        [13.64]          [18.82]        [13.22]          [18.80]         [16.04]         [25.29]
 Cash                  -0.007*         -0.007**        0.030***         0.030***        0.024***        0.024***
                        [-1.93]          [-2.08]         [4.36]           [4.48]          [3.02]          [3.08]
 Leverage               0.006*           0.006*        0.018***         0.018***        0.026***        0.026***
                         [1.80]           [1.94]         [3.20]           [3.52]          [3.78]          [4.38]
 Return               -0.006***       -0.006***       -0.007***        -0.007***       -0.014***       -0.014***
                        [-6.91]         [-11.94]        [-4.50]          [-8.16]         [-5.87]        [-11.51]

 Observations          18,972          18,972           17,701          17,701           17,701          17,701
 R-squared             0.325           0.325            0.314           0.314            0.386            0.386
 Industry FE             Y               Y                Y               Y                Y                Y
 Year FE                 Y               Y                Y               Y                Y                Y




                                                        57
Panel B. S&P 500 addition effects on payouts
                      (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
 VARIABLES         Dividend    Dividend    Repurchase   Repurchase    Payout      Payout

 SP500Add          0.003***     0.003**    0.016***      0.017***    0.020***     0.022***
                     [2.67]       [2.43]     [4.86]        [3.50]      [5.27]       [4.05]
 SP500Add x Late                 -0.001                   -0.001                   -0.004
                                 [-0.48]                  [-0.21]                  [-0.56]
 PreSP500Add          0.001       0.001       0.002        0.002         0.004      0.004
                      [1.09]      [1.11]      [0.94]       [0.95]       [1.26]      [1.28]
 Log(Assets)        -0.002**    -0.002**   -0.011***    -0.011***    -0.014***   -0.014***
                     [-2.21]     [-2.22]     [-4.82]      [-4.80]      [-5.20]     [-5.18]
 Tobin's q          0.001**     0.001**       0.000        0.000         0.001      0.001
                      [2.58]      [2.58]      [0.30]       [0.30]       [1.03]      [1.03]
 Cashflow           0.014**     0.014**    0.123***      0.123***     0.156***    0.156***
                      [2.20]      [2.20]      [8.06]       [8.06]       [7.75]      [7.75]
 Cash                 0.001       0.001      -0.021       -0.021        -0.020     -0.020
                      [0.36]      [0.35]     [-1.58]      [-1.59]      [-1.38]     [-1.39]
 Leverage             0.003       0.003       0.013        0.013       0.029**    0.029**
                      [0.59]      [0.59]      [1.14]       [1.13]       [2.08]      [2.07]
 Return            -0.002***   -0.002***   -0.008***    -0.008***    -0.011***   -0.011***
                     [-3.71]     [-3.73]     [-5.63]      [-5.64]      [-6.51]     [-6.52]

 Observations       5,359       5,359          4,780      4,780       4,780       4,780
 R-squared          0.738       0.738          0.574      0.574       0.594       0.594
 Firm FE              Y           Y              Y          Y           Y           Y
 Year FE              Y           Y              Y          Y           Y           Y




                                            58
Panel C. S&P 500 peer effects on payouts
                                        (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
 VARIABLES                           Dividend    Dividend    Repurchase   Repurchase    Payout      Payout

 DivSP500Peer x SP500Add             0.263***     0.280*
                                       [3.17]      [1.71]
 DivSP500Peer x SP500Add x Late                    0.032
                                                   [0.16]
 DivSP500Peer x Late                              -0.051
                                                  [-0.55]
 DivSP500Peer                        0.222***    0.239***
                                       [4.27]      [3.65]
 DivSP500Peer x PreSP500Add           -0.013      -0.011
                                      [-0.23]     [-0.19]
 RepSP500Peer x SP500Add                                     0.551***     0.580***
                                                               [7.44]       [5.33]
 RepSP500Peer x SP500Add x Late                                            -0.059
                                                                           [-0.41]
 RepSP500Peer x Late                                                        0.009
                                                                            [0.15]
 RepSP500Peer                                                0.143***     0.141***
                                                               [3.75]       [3.63]
 RepSP500Peer x PreSP500Add                                    0.054        0.054
                                                               [1.00]       [0.98]
 PayoutSP500Peer x SP500Add                                                            0.612***     0.649***
                                                                                         [8.13]       [5.90]
 PayoutSP500Peer x SP500Add x Late                                                                   -0.050
                                                                                                     [-0.36]
 PayoutSP500Peer x Late                                                                              -0.025
                                                                                                     [-0.38]
 PayoutSP500Peer                                                                        0.221***    0.228***
                                                                                          [4.84]      [4.70]
 PayoutSP500Peer x PreSP500Add                                                            0.072       0.069
                                                                                          [1.17]      [1.13]
 SP500Add                             -0.002       -0.000      -0.004       -0.006     -0.013***    -0.013**
                                      [-1.27]      [-0.09]     [-1.04]      [-1.16]      [-2.90]     [-2.26]
 SP500Add x Late                                   -0.004                    0.004                   -0.000
                                                   [-1.57]                   [0.66]                  [-0.03]
 PreSP500Add                            0.000       0.001       0.002        0.002        0.001       0.001
                                       [0.40]      [0.42]       [0.69]       [0.69]       [0.22]      [0.28]
 Log(Assets)                           -0.001      -0.001    -0.011***    -0.011***    -0.013***   -0.013***
                                       [-1.41]     [-1.44]     [-4.79]      [-4.77]      [-4.60]     [-4.62]
 Tobin's q                            0.001**     0.001**       0.000        0.000        0.001       0.001
                                       [1.99]      [2.02]       [0.32]       [0.33]       [1.04]      [1.05]
 Cashflow                             0.016**     0.016**     0.086***     0.086***     0.119***    0.119***
                                       [2.18]      [2.20]       [5.89]       [5.89]       [5.75]      [5.79]
 Cash                                   0.003       0.003      -0.017       -0.016       -0.015      -0.015
                                       [0.68]      [0.68]      [-1.33]      [-1.30]      [-1.05]     [-1.01]
 Leverage                               0.003       0.003       0.004        0.004        0.019       0.019
                                       [0.62]      [0.59]       [0.33]       [0.32]       [1.22]      [1.22]
 Return                              -0.002***   -0.002***   -0.006***    -0.006***    -0.009***   -0.009***
                                       [-3.24]     [-3.22]     [-3.89]      [-3.90]      [-4.78]     [-4.76]

 Observations                         4,682       4,682        4,137        4,137       4,137       4,137
 R-squared                            0.765       0.766        0.641        0.641       0.665       0.665
 Firm FE                                Y           Y            Y            Y           Y           Y
 Year FE                                Y           Y            Y            Y           Y           Y




                                                       59
Table 12: EPS forecasts, realized EPS, and ROA

This table shows the effect of S&P 500 index addition on analyst forecasted EPS, realized EPS, and ROA. EPS
forecast is the average analyst estimate on annual earnings per share (EPS) from IBES. EPS Realized is the
realized annual EPS. ROA is net income scaled by total assets. SP500Add is the S&P 500 addition dummy that is
equal to one for treated firms after an addition year and zero otherwise. PreSP500Add is a dummy variable equal
to one for treated firms one year prior to the addition year and zero otherwise. Both SP500Add and PreSP500Add
equal zero for control firms. Late is a dummy variable equal to one for years in or after 2008 and zero otherwise.
The event window is four years before and four years after an addition year. The addition year is excluded. The
sample period is from 1997 to 2017. All specifications include firm and year fixed effects. Robust standard errors
are clustered at the firm level. Variable definitions are in Appendix. ***, **, * denote significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels, respectively.

                           (1)               (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)          (6)
 VARIABLES             EPS forecast      EPS forecast     EPS realized    EPS realized       ROA          ROA

 SP500Add                 0.225*              0.106           0.189           -0.069       -0.011**    -0.016***
                          [1.84]              [0.93]          [1.22]          [-0.46]       [-2.13]      [-2.63]
 SP500Add x Late                              0.211                          0.476**                      0.010
                                              [1.17]                           [2.06]                     [1.26]
 PreSP500Add                0.089             0.083            0.150           0.139         0.003        0.002
                            [1.45]            [1.37]           [1.63]          [1.51]       [0.77]        [0.71]
 Log(Assets)              0.683***          0.682***        0.371***         0.378***       0.009*       0.009*
                            [5.95]            [5.97]           [3.13]          [3.20]       [1.67]        [1.70]
 Tobin's q                0.137***          0.137***          0.060*          0.059*      0.013***      0.013***
                            [4.20]            [4.22]           [1.93]          [1.91]       [7.08]        [7.05]
 Cash                       0.175             0.181          1.136**         1.143**      0.069***      0.069***
                            [0.51]            [0.53]           [2.05]          [2.08]       [3.11]        [3.11]
 Leverage                -1.108***         -1.106***        -2.746***       -2.734***     -0.127***    -0.127***
                           [-2.99]           [-2.96]          [-5.77]         [-5.74]       [-6.08]      [-6.06]
 Return                    -0.092*           -0.092*        0.464***         0.463***     0.012***      0.012***
                           [-1.79]           [-1.79]           [6.20]          [6.18]       [3.82]        [3.81]
 Volatility             -17.556***        -17.599***       -35.019***      -35.065***     -1.573***    -1.574***
                           [-4.77]           [-4.76]          [-7.06]         [-7.07]       [-6.65]      [-6.66]

 Observations              3,837             3,837            4,999           4,999         5,002         5,002
 R-squared                 0.802             0.802            0.593           0.594         0.611         0.611
 Firm FE                     Y                 Y                Y               Y             Y             Y
 Year FE                     Y                 Y                Y               Y             Y             Y




                                                        60
Table 13: Competition and index additions

This table shows the effect of S&P 500 index addition on firms' product market competition. Panel A shows
evidence at the firm level. Fluidity and Similarity are firm-level competition measures from the Hoberg and
Phillips data library, where a larger value reflects more competition. Gross margin is revenues less COGS scaled
by revenues. SP500Add is the S&P 500 addition dummy that is equal to one for treated firms after an addition
year and zero otherwise. PreSP500Add is a dummy variable equal to one for treated firms one year prior to the
addition year and zero otherwise. Both SP500Add and PreSP500Add equal zero for control firms. Late is a dummy
variable equal to one for years in or after 2008 and zero otherwise. Panel B shows evidence at the industry level.
We first divide all S&P 500 firms in a year into different groups by 3-digit SIC industries (i.e. S&P 500 industry
group) and define variables at the industry group level. In particular, Ch(Lerner index SP500) is the annual change
in the median gross margin within an industry group in a year. Ch(SP500 Firms) is the change in the number of
firms in an S&P 500 industry group in a year. Increase (Decrease) in SP500 firms is a dummy variable equal to
one if one or more firms are added to (deleted from) an S&P 500 industry group in a year. The event window is
four years before and four years after a year of addition. The addition year is excluded. The sample period is from
1997 to 2017. Panel A (Panel B) specifications include firm (industry) and year fixed effects. Robust standard
errors are clustered at the firm level in Panel A and at the industry level in Panel B. Variable definitions are in
Appendix. ***, **, * denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Panel A: Firm level
                          (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)
 VARIABLES              Fluidity       Fluidity      Similarity      Similarity    Gross margin    Gross margin

 SP500Add               -0.085          -0.012         -0.390          -0.543         -0.007           -0.013
                        [-0.46]        [-0.06]         [-1.01]        [-1.01]         [-0.88]         [-1.22]
 SP500Add x Late                        -0.128                          0.286                           0.011
                                       [-0.59]                         [0.50]                          [0.88]
 PreSP500Add              0.012          0.017          -0.277         -0.288         0.006             0.006
                         [0.10]         [0.16]         [-0.93]        [-0.96]         [1.19]           [1.14]
 Log(Assets)            0.302**        0.302**          0.278           0.280        0.014*           0.014*
                         [2.43]         [2.43]          [1.02]         [1.02]         [1.81]           [1.85]
 Tobin's q                0.015          0.015          0.084           0.083        0.007**          0.007**
                         [0.39]         [0.41]          [0.87]         [0.86]         [2.41]           [2.39]
 Cash                     0.589          0.589          0.786           0.787         -0.030           -0.029
                         [1.28]         [1.28]          [0.93]         [0.93]        [-0.75]          [-0.74]
 Leverage                 0.213          0.208          -0.748         -0.738        -0.063*          -0.063*
                         [0.41]         [0.41]         [-0.76]        [-0.75]        [-1.69]          [-1.67]
 Return                  -0.056         -0.055         -0.215*        -0.215*         0.000             0.000
                        [-0.91]        [-0.91]         [-1.76]        [-1.76]         [0.03]           [0.01]

 Observations            4,313          4,313           4,548          4,548           5,718           5,718
 R-squared               0.830          0.830           0.910          0.910           0.871           0.871
 Firm FE                   Y              Y               Y              Y               Y               Y
 Year FE                   Y              Y               Y              Y               Y               Y




                                                       61
Panel B: Industry level

                                (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)
                          Ch(Lerner Index   Ch(Lerner Index   Ch(Lerner Index   Ch(Lerner Index
 VARIABLES                    SP500)            SP500)            SP500)            SP500)


 Ch(SP500 Firms)               0.004             0.007
                              [0.42]            [0.55]
 Ch(SP500 Firms) x
 Late                                           -0.006
                                                [-0.49]
 Increase in SP500
 Firms                                                             0.013             0.029
                                                                  [0.72]            [0.70]
 Increase in SP500
 Firms x Late                                                                       -0.033
                                                                                    [-0.57]
 Decrease in SP500
 Firms                                                            -0.002             0.004
                                                                  [-0.15]           [0.19]
 Decrease in SP500
 Firms x Late                                                                       -0.012
                                                                                    [-0.34]


 Observations                  5,689             5,689             5,689             5,689
 R-squared                     0.007             0.007             0.007             0.007
 Industry FE                    Y                   Y               Y                 Y
 Year FE                        Y                   Y               Y                 Y




                                               62
