                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

   VALUING THE GLOBAL MORTALITY CONSEQUENCES OF CLIMATE CHANGE
           ACCOUNTING FOR ADAPTATION COSTS AND BENEFITS

                                     Tamma A. Carleton
                                          Amir Jina
                                     Michael T. Delgado
                                     Michael Greenstone
                                       Trevor Houser
                                     Solomon M. Hsiang
                                      Andrew Hultgren
                                       Robert E. Kopp
                                      Kelly E. McCusker
                                        Ishan B. Nath
                                        James Rising
                                        Ashwin Rode
                                       Hee Kwon Seo
                                        Arvid Viaene
                                         Jiacan Yuan
                                     Alice Tianbo Zhang

                                     Working Paper 27599
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27599

                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2020


This project is an output of the Climate Impact Lab that gratefully acknowledges funding from
the Energy Policy Institute of Chicago (EPIC), International Growth Centre, National Science
Foundation, Sloan Foundation, Carnegie Corporation, and Tata Center for Development. Tamma
Carleton acknowledges funding from the US Environmental Protection Agency Science To
Achieve Results Fellowship (#FP91780401). We thank Trinetta Chong, Greg Dobbels, Diana
Gergel, Radhika Goyal, Simon Greenhill, Dylan Hogan, Azhar Hussain, Theodor Kulczycki,
Brewster Malevich, Sébastien Annan Phan, Justin Simcock, Emile Tenezakis, Jingyuan Wang,
and Jong-kai Yang for invaluable research assistance during all stages of this project, and we
thank Megan Landín, Terin Mayer, and Jack Chang for excellent project management. We thank
David Anthoff, Max Auffhammer, Olivier Deschênes, Avi Ebenstein, Nolan Miller, Wolfram
Schlenker, and numerous workshop participants at University of Chicago, Stanford, Princeton,
UC Berkeley, UC San Diego, UC Santa Barbara, University of Pennsylvania, University of San
Francisco, University of Virginia, University of Wisconsin-Madison, University of Minnesota
Twin Cities, NBER Summer Institute, LSE, PIK, Oslo University, University of British
Columbia, Gothenburg University, the European Center for Advanced Research in Economics
and Statistics, the National Academies of Sciences, and the Econometric Society for comments,
suggestions, and help with data.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Tamma A. Carleton, Amir Jina, Michael T. Delgado, Michael Greenstone, Trevor
Houser, Solomon M. Hsiang, Andrew Hultgren, Robert E. Kopp, Kelly E. McCusker, Ishan B.
Nath, James Rising, Ashwin Rode, Hee Kwon Seo, Arvid Viaene, Jiacan Yuan, and Alice
Tianbo Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Valuing the Global Mortality Consequences of Climate Change Accounting for Adaptation Costs
and Benefits
Tamma A. Carleton, Amir Jina, Michael T. Delgado, Michael Greenstone, Trevor Houser,
Solomon M. Hsiang, Andrew Hultgren, Robert E. Kopp, Kelly E. McCusker, Ishan B. Nath,
James Rising, Ashwin Rode, Hee Kwon Seo, Arvid Viaene, Jiacan Yuan, and Alice Tianbo
Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 27599
July 2020
JEL No. Q54

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper develops the first globally comprehensive and empirically grounded estimates
of mortality risk due to future temperature increases caused by climate change. Using 40
countries' subnational data, we estimate age-specific mortality-temperature relationships that
enable both extrapolation to countries without data and projection into future years while
accounting for adaptation. We uncover a U-shaped relationship where extreme cold and
hot temperatures increase mortality rates, especially for the elderly, that is flattened by both
higher incomes and adaptation to local climate (e.g., robust heating systems in cold climates
and cooling systems in hot climates). Further, we develop a revealed preference approach
to recover unobserved adaptation costs. We combine these components with 33 high-resolution
climate simulations that together capture scientific uncertainty about the degree of future
temperature change. Under a high emissions scenario, we estimate the mean increase in
mortality risk is valued at roughly 3.2% of global GDP in 2100, with today's cold locations
benefiting and damages being especially large in today's poor and/or hot locations. Finally, we
estimate that the release of an additional ton of CO2 today will cause mean [interquartile range]
damages of $36.6 [-$7.8, $73.0] under a high emissions scenario and $17.1 [-$24.7, $53.6] under
a moderate scenario, using a 2% discount rate that is justified by US Treasury rates over the
last two decades. Globally, these empirically grounded estimates substantially exceed the
previous literature's estimates that lacked similar empirical grounding, suggesting that
revision of the estimated economic damage from climate change is warranted.

Tamma A. Carleton                                       Michael Greenstone
Bren School of Environmental                            University of Chicago
Science & Management                                    Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Barbara                 1126 E. 59th Street
Santa Barbara, CA 93106                                 Chicago, IL 60637
tcarleton@uchicago.edu                                  and NBER
                                                        mgreenst@uchicago.edu
Amir Jina
Harris School of Public Policy                          Trevor Houser
University of Chicago                                   Rhodium Group
1155 East 60th Street                                   647 4th St.
Chicago, IL 60637                                       Oakland, CA 94607
and NBER                                                tghouser@rhg.com
amirjina@uchicago.edu
                                                        Solomon M. Hsiang
Michael T. Delgado                                      Goldman School of Public Policy
Rhodium Group                                           University of California, Berkeley
647 4th St.                                             2607 Hearst Avenue
Oakland, CA 94607                                       Berkeley, CA 94720-7320
mdelgado@rhg.com                                        and NBER
                                                        shsiang@berkeley.edu
Andrew Hultgren                                      Hee Kwon Seo
University of California at Berkeley                 University of Chicago
hultgren@berkeley.edu                                Booth School of Business
                                                     5807 S. Woodlawn Ave.
Robert E. Kopp                                       Chicago, IL 60637
Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences           hkseo@chicagobooth.edu
Wright Labs, 610 Taylor Road
Rutgers University                                   Arvid Viaene
Piscataway, NJ 08854-8066                            E.CA Economics
Robert.Kopp@rutgers.edu                              Brussels, Belgium
                                                     arvid.viaene.db@gmail.com
Kelly E. McCusker
Rhodium Group                                        Jiacan Yuan
647 4th Street                                       Department of Atmospheric
Oakland, CA 94607                                    and Oceanic Sciences
kmccusker@rhg.com                                    Fudan University
                                                     Shanghai, China
Ishan B. Nath                                        jiacan.yuan@gmail.com
Department of Economics
University of Chicago                                Alice Tianbo Zhang
1126 E. 59th St.                                     Department of Economics
Chicago, IL 60637                                    Williams School of Commerce,
inath@uchicago.edu                                   Economics, and Politics
                                                     Washington and Lee University
James Rising                                         Huntley 304
Grantham Research Institute                          Lexington, VA 24450
London School of Economics                           atzhang@wlu.edu
London, UK
jarising@gmail.com

Ashwin Rode
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th St.
Chicago, IL 60637
aarode@uchicago.edu




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27599
1      Introduction
Understanding the likely global economic impacts of climate change is of tremendous practical value
to both policymakers and researchers. On the policy side, decisions are currently made with incom-
plete and inconsistent information on the societal benefits of greenhouse gas emissions reductions.
These inconsistencies are reflected in global climate policy, which is at once both lenient and wildly
inconsistent. To date, the economics literature has struggled to mitigate this uncertainty, lacking em-
pirically founded estimates of the economic damages from climate change. This problem is made all
the more difficult because emissions today influence the global climate for hundreds of years, as Figure
1 illustrates. Thus, any reliable estimate of the damage from climate change must include long-run
projections of economic impacts at global scale.

                                                                                            median
                                                       0.0020                               interquartile range from
                                                                                            climate sensitivity uncertainty
                            Temperature anomaly (ºC)




                                                       0.0015


                                                       0.0010


                                                       0.0005


                                                       0.0000
                                                            2000   2050   2100       2150   2200          2250         2300
                                                                                     Year

Figure 1: Temperature change due to a marginal emissions pulse in 2020 persists for
centuries. The impact of a 1GtC emissions pulse (equivalent to 3.66Gt CO2 ) pulse of CO2 in 2020 on temperature
is shown. Median change is the difference in temperature of the "pulse" scenario relative to a high-emissions baseline
scenario. The levels are anomalies in global mean surface temperature (GMST) in Celsius using our modification of the
FAIR climate model. The shaded area indicates the inter-quartile range due to uncertainty in the climate's sensitivity
to CO2 (see Section 6 for details).


    Decades of study have accumulated numerous insights and important findings regarding the eco-
nomics of climate change, both theoretically and empirically, but a fundamental gulf persists between
the two main types of analyses pursued. On the one hand, there are stylized models able to capture
the global and multi-century nature of problem, such as "integrated assessment models" (IAMs) (e.g.,
Nordhaus, 1992; Tol, 1997; Stern, 2006), whose great appeal is that they provide an answer to the
question of what the global costs of climate change will be. However, the many necessary assumptions
of IAMs weaken the authority of these answers. On the other hand, there has been an explosion
of highly resolved empirical analyses whose credibility lie in their use of real world data and careful
econometric measurement (e.g., Schlenker and Roberts, 2009; Desch^    enes and Greenstone, 2007).1 Yet
these analyses tend to be limited in scope and rely on short-run changes in weather that might not fully
account for adaptation to gradual climate change (Hsiang, 2016). At its core, this dichotomy persists
because researchers have traded off between being complete in scale and scope or investing heavily
in data collection and analysis. The result is that no study has delivered estimated effects of climate
    1 For   a comprehensive review, see Dell, Jones, and Olken (2014); Carleton and Hsiang (2016); Auffhammer (2018b).



                                                                                 1
change that are at the scale of IAMs, while simultaneously being grounded in detailed econometric
analyses using high-resolution globally representative micro-data.
    The paper sets out to accomplish two major goals that require resolving the tension between these
approaches in the context of mortality risk due to climate change. Specifically, it strives to provide
the temporal and global scale of IAMs, but transparently built upon highly resolved econometric
foundations. In so doing, it aims to account for both the benefits and costs of adaptation. The first
goal is to produce local and global estimates of the mortality risk of climate change and its monetized
value. The spatial resolution, based on dividing the world into 24,378 regions,2 marks a substantial
improvement upon existing IAMs, which represent (at most) 16 heterogeneous global regions (Tol,
1997). Using these calculations, we are able to accomplish the second goal, which is to estimate
marginal willingness-to-pay (MWTP) to avoid the alteration of mortality risk associated with the
release of an additional metric ton of CO2 . We call this the excess mortality "partial" social cost of
carbon (SCC); a "full" SCC would encompass impacts across all affected outcomes.
    In order to make these contributions, the analysis overcomes four fundamental challenges that
have prevented the construction of empirically-derived and complete estimates of the costs of climate
change to date. The first two of these challenges are due to the global extent and long timescale of
both the causes and the impacts of climate change. For the first challenge, we note that CO2 is a
global pollutant, meaning that the costs of climate change must necessarily be considered at a global
scale; anything less will lead to an incomplete estimate of the costs. The second challenge is that
populations exhibit various levels of adaptation to current climate across space and adaptation levels
are likely to be different in the future as populations become exposed to changes in their local climate.
The extent to which investments in adaptation can limit the impacts of climate change is a critical
component of cost estimates; ignoring this would lead to overstating costs.
    We address both of these challenges simultaneously with a combination of extensive data and
an econometric approach that models heterogeneity in the mortality-temperature relationship. We
estimate this relationship using the most comprehensive dataset ever collected on annual, sub-national
mortality statistics from 41 countries that cover 55% of the global population. These data allow
us to estimate age-specific mortality-temperature relationships with substantially greater resolution
and coverage of the human population than previous studies; the most comprehensive econometric
analyses to date have been for a few countries within a single region or individual cities from several
countries. The analysis relies on inter-annual variation in temperature and uncovers a plausibly causal
U-shaped relationship where extreme cold and hot temperatures increase mortality rates, especially
for the elderly (those aged 65 and older).
    We quantify the benefits of adaptation to gradual climate change and the benefits of projected
future income growth by jointly modeling heterogeneity in the mortality-temperature response func-
tion with respect to the long-run climate (e.g., Auffhammer, 2018a) and income per capita (e.g.,
Fetzer, 2014). This cross-sectional modeling of heterogeneity allows us to predict the structure of the
mortality-temperature relationship across locations where we lack data, as well as into the future, both
of which are necessary to assess the global impacts of climate change. Such out-of-sample extrapola-
tion of temperature-mortality relationships delivers the first empirically-based approach to including
  2 In   the U.S., these impact regions map onto a county.




                                                             2
these populations in global climate impacts analysis, although a causal interpretation requires stronger
econometric assumptions. Using readily available data and projections for current and future climate,
income, and population projections, we estimate that the effect of an additional very hot day (35 C
/ 95 F) on elderly mortality is 50% larger in regions of the world where mortality data are unavail-
able. This finding underlines that current estimates may understate climate change impacts because
they disproportionately rely on data from wealthy economies and temperate climates. Furthermore, ac-
counting for changing mortality-temperature relationships is crucial to projecting the effect of warming
in the future, as we expect the mortality consequences of heat to decline over time due to adaptations
that individuals are predicted to undertake in response to warmer climates and higher incomes. Con-
sistent with this intuition we find that climate adaptation and income growth have substantial benefits,
marking a departure from previous literature that has often assumed that the mortality-temperature
relationship was constant over space and time (e.g., Desch^  enes and Greenstone, 2011).
    The third challenge is that the adaptation responses discussed in the previous paragraph are costly,
and these costs, along with the direct mortality impacts, must be accounted for in a full assessment
of climate change impacts. We develop a general revealed preference method to estimate the costs
incurred to achieve the benefits from adapting to climate change, even though these costs cannot be
directly observed. This is a critical step because a full accounting of the mortality-related costs of
climate change necessarily accounts for the direct mortality impacts, the benefits of adaptation, and
the opportunity costs of all resources deployed in order to achieve those adaptations. This is an ad-
vance on the previous literature that has either quantified adaptation benefits without estimating costs
(e.g., Heutel, Miller, and Molitor, 2017) or tried to measure the costs of individual adaptations (e.g.,
Barreca et al., 2016). The latter approach is informative of individual costs, but poorly equipped to
measure total adaptation costs, because the range of potential responses to warming ­ whether defen-
sive investments (e.g., building cooling centers) or compensatory behaviors (e.g. exercising earlier in
the morning) ­ is enormous, making a complete enumeration of their costs extraordinarily challenging.
    The revealed preference approach is based on the assumption that individuals undertake adapta-
tion investments when the expected benefits exceed the costs and that for the marginal investment,
benefits and costs are equal. Because we can empirically observe adaptation benefits by measuring
reduced mortality sensitivities to temperature, we can therefore infer their marginal cost. Then by
integrating marginal costs, we can compute total costs for non-marginal climate changes. A simplified
but illustrative example comes from comparing Seattle, WA and Houston, TX, which have similar
income levels, but very different climates: on average, Seattle has less than 1 day per year where
the daily average temperature exceeds 30 C (85 F), while Houston experiences over 8 of these days
annually.3 Our empirical analysis below finds that Houston is relatively adapted to this hotter climate,
with an individual hot day leading to much lower mortality than in temperate Seattle. By revealed
preference, it must be the case that the costs required to achieve Houston-like adaptation exceeds the
value of the lives Seattle would save by adopting similar practices. Similarly, the costs of adapting in
Houston must be less than or equal to the value of the additional deaths that they would otherwise
have to endure. These bounds shrink for smaller differences in climate (e.g. Seattle vs. Tacoma),
such that we can show that for infinitesimally small differences in climate, these bounds collapse to
  3 These   values of average daily temperature are calculated from the GMFD dataset, described in Section 3.




                                                           3
a single value where the estimable marginal benefits and unobserved marginal costs are equal. Using
this result, we are able to reconstruct non-marginal adaptation costs for each location, relying only on
empirically recovered reduced-form estimates.
    Together, addressing these three challenges allows us to achieve the first goal of this analysis:
to develop measures of the full mortality-related costs of future climate change for the entire world,
reflecting both the direct mortality costs accounting for adaptation and all adaptation costs. This
exercise is done using 33 global climate models that together reflect current scientific uncertainty about
the degree of temperature change4 and results are expressed in "death equivalents", i.e., the number
of deaths plus the adaptation costs incurred expressed in avoided deaths. We find that under a high
emissions scenario (i.e., Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) 8.5, in which CO2 emissions
growth is sustained) and a socioeconomic scenario with future global income and population growth
rates approximately matching recent observations (i.e., Shared Socioeconomic Pathway (SSP) 3), the
mean estimate of the total mortality burden of climate change is projected to be worth 85 death
equivalents per 100,000, at the end of the century. Accounting for econometric and climate uncertainty
leads to an interquartile range of [16, 121].5 This is equal to roughly 3.2% of global GDP at the end
of the century when death equivalents are valued using an age-varying value of a statistical life (VSL).
Further, failing to account for income and climate adaptation would overstate the mortality costs of
climate change by a factor of about 2.6, on average.
    The analysis uncovers substantial heterogeneity in the full mortality costs of climate change around
the globe. For example, mortality risk in Accra, Ghana is projected to increase by 19% of its current
annual mortality rate at the end of the century under a high emissions scenario, while Oslo, Norway
is projected to experience a decrease in mortality risk due to milder winters that is equal to 28% of its
current annual mortality rate today (United Nations, 2017). Further, the share of the full mortality-
related costs of climate change that are due to deaths, rather than adaptation costs, is 86% globally
but varies greatly, with poor countries disproportionately experiencing impacts through deaths and
wealthy countries disproportionately experiencing impacts through adaptation costs.
    The last of the four challenges facing the literature is the calculation of an SCC that is based
upon empirical evidence, the calculation of which is the second goal of our analysis. We develop
and implement a framework to estimate the excess mortality partial SCC using empirically-based
projections. The mortality partial SCC is defined as the marginal willingness-to-pay to avoid an
additional ton of CO2 . A central element of this procedure is the construction of empirically grounded
"damage functions," (Hsiang et al., 2017), each of which describes the costs of excess mortality risk in
a given year as a function of the overall level of global climate change. Such damage functions have
played a central role in the analysis of climate change as an economic problem since seminal work by
Nordhaus (1992), but existing estimates have been criticized for having little or no empirical foundation
(Pindyck, 2013). To our knowledge, ours is the first globally representative and empirically grounded
partial damage function, enabling us to calculate a partial SCC when combined with a climate model.
    Our estimates imply that the excess mortality partial SCC is roughly $36.6 (in 2019 USD) with
   4 SeeBurke et al. (2015) for a discussion of combining physical climate uncertainty with econometric estimates.
   5 Forreference, all cancers are responsible for approximately 125 deaths per 100,000 globally today (WHO, 2018).
Of course, the full costs of cancer, including all adaptations incurred to avoid risk, would be even larger if expressed in
death equivalents.




                                                            4
a high emissions scenario (RCP8.5) under a 2% discount rate and using an age-varying VSL. This
value falls to $17.1 with a moderate emissions scenario (i.e., Representative Concentration Pathway
(RCP) 4.5, in which CO2 emissions are stable through 2050 and then decline), due to the nonlinearity
of estimated damage functions. The respective interquartile ranges are [-$7.8, $73.0] for RCP8.5 and
[-$24.7, $53.6] for RCP4.5. These assumptions regarding discount rate and VSL are justified by US
Treasury rates over the last two decades6 and by standard economic reasoning regarding mortality
risk valuation (Jones and Klenow, 2016; Murphy and Topel, 2006), respectively. However, under a
higher discount rate of 3% and an age-invariant VSL, valuation assumptions used by the United States
Government to set the SCC in 2009, the mortality partial SCC is approximately $22.1 [-$5.6, $53.4]
under RCP8.5 and $6.7 [-$15.7, $32.1] under RCP4.5.
    These empirically grounded estimates of the costs of climate-induced mortality risks substantially
exceed available estimates from leading IAMs. For example, the total mortality-related damages from
climate change under RCP8.5 in 2100 amount to about 49-135% of the comparable damages reported
for all sectors of the economy in the IAMs currently determining the U.S. SCC (Interagency Working
Group on Social Cost of Carbon, 2010). When considering the full discounted stream of damages from
the release of an additional metric ton of CO2 , this paper's excess mortality partial SCC with a high
emissions scenario amounts to 73% of the Obama Administration's full SCC (under a 2% discount
rate and age-varying VSL); this value falls to 44% when using a 3% discount rate and age-invariant
VSL.
    The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 outlines a conceptual framework for the two
key problems of the paper: projecting climate damages into the future, accounting for adaptation and
its cost, and estimating a mortality partial SCC; Section 3 describes the data used in the estimation
of impacts and in the climate change projected impacts; Section 4 details the econometric approach
and explains how we extrapolate mortality impacts across space and project them over time while
computing adaptation costs and benefits; Section 5 describes the results of the econometric analysis
and presents global results from projections that use high-resolution global climate models; Section
6 details the calculation of a damage function based on these projections and computes a mortality
partial SCC; Section 7 discusses limitations of the analysis; and Section 8 concludes.


2     Conceptual framework
Climate change is projected to have a wide variety of impacts on well-being, including altering the risk
of mortality due to extreme temperatures. The ultimate effect on particular outcomes like mortality
rates will be determined by the adaptations that are undertaken. Specifically, as the climate changes,
individuals and societies will weigh the costs and benefits of undertaking actions that allow them to
exploit new opportunities (e.g., converting land to new uses) and protect themselves against new risks
(e.g., investments in air conditioning to mitigate mortality risks). The full cost of climate change,
and hence the social cost of carbon, will thus reflect both the realized direct impacts (e.g., changes in
mortality rates), which depend on the benefits of these adaptations, and the costs of these adaptations
in terms of foregone consumption. However, to date it has proven challenging to develop a theoretically
    6 The average 10-year Treasury Inflation-Indexed Security value over the available record of this index (2003-present)

is 1.01% (Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, 2020).


                                                            5
founded and empirically credible approach to explicitly recover the full costs of climate change and to
incorporate such costs into an SCC.7
   This section develops a simple framework to define (i) the full value of mortality risk due to climate
change, and (ii) the mortality partial SCC, such that each reflects both the costs and benefits of
adaptation. In both cases, we are able to derive expressions for these objects that are composed of
terms that can be estimated with data.


2.1     Setup
We define the climate as the joint probability distribution over a vector of possible conditions that can
be expected to occur over a specific interval of time. Following the notation of Hsiang (2016), let Ct
be a vector of parameters describing the entire joint probability distribution over all relevant climatic
variables in time period t (e.g., C might contain the mean and variance of daily average temperature
and rainfall, among other parameters). The climate is determined both by natural variations in the
climate system, and by the history of anthropogenic emissions. Thus, we write Ct = (E0 , E1 , E2 , ...Et )
where Et represents total global greenhouse gas emissions in period t and (·) is a general function
determined by the climate system that links past emissions to present climate.8
    Define weather realizations as a random vector ct drawn from a distribution characterized by Ct .
Emissions therefore influence realized weather by shifting the probability distribution, Ct . Mortality
risk is a function of both weather c and a composite good b =  (b1 , ..., bK ) comprising all bk , where each
bk is an endogenous economic variable that influences adaptation. The composite b thus captures all
adaptive behaviors and investments that interact with individuals' exposure to a warming climate, such
as installation of air conditioning and time allocated to indoor activities. Mortality risk is captured
by the probability of death during a unit interval of time ft = f (bt , ct ).
    Consider a single representative global agent who derives utility in all time periods t from consump-
tion of the numeraire good xt and who faces mortality risk ft = f (bt , ct ).9 Because weather realizations
ct are a random vector, this agent simultaneously chooses consumption of the numeraire xt and of the
composite good bt in each period to maximize utility given her expectations of the weather, subject to
an exogenous budget constraint, conditional on the climate.10 We let f    ~(bt , Ct ) = Ec [f (bt , c(Ct )) | Ct ]
                                                                                          t

represent the expected probability of death, where c(C ) is a random vector c drawn from a distribution
characterized by C . This agent chooses their adaptations by solving:

                                              ~(bt , Ct )
                               max u(xt ) 1 - f                  s.t. Yt  xt + A(bt ),                                (1)
                               bt ,xt


where climate is determined by the history of emissions, where A(bt ) represents expenditures for all
    7 See Desch^
               enes and Greenstone (2011); Hsiang and Narita (2012); Schlenker, Roberts, and Lobell (2013); Lobell et al.
(2014); Guo and Costello (2013); Desch^  enes, Greenstone, and Shapiro (2017); Deryugina and Hsiang (2017) for different
theoretical discussions of this issue and some of the empirical challenges.
    8 For more discussion, see Hsiang and Kopp (2018).
    9 Note that our empirical analysis relies on heterogeneous agents exposed to different climates, realizing different

incomes, and exhibiting different demographics. However, for expositional simplicity here we derive the full mortality
risk of climate change and the mortality partial SCC using a globally representative agent.
   10 The assumption of exogenous emissions implies that we rule out the possibility that the agent will choose an optimal

E  . This is unrealistic with a single agent. But in practice, the world is comprises a continuum of agents or countries
and the absence of coordinated global climate policy today is consistent with agents failing to choose optimal b .




                                                            6
adaptive investments, and Y is an income we take to be exogenous.11
    The following framework relies on a key set of assumptions. First, we assume that adaptation costs
are a function of technology and do not depend on the climate. Additionally, we assume that f          ~(·) is
continuous and differentiable, that markets clear for all technologies and investments represented by
the composite good b, as well as for the numeraire good x, and that all choices b and x can be treated
as continuous. Importantly, Equation 1 is static, because we assume that there is a competitive and
frictionless rental market for all capital goods (e.g., air conditioners), so that fixed costs of capital can
be ignored, and that all rental decisions are contained in b. As long as agents have accurate expectations
over their current climate, markets will clear efficiently in each period. Under these assumptions, the
first order conditions of Equation 1 define optimal adaptation as a function of income and the climate:
b (Yt , Ct ), which we sometimes denote below as b    t for simplicity.



2.2     The full value of mortality risk due to climate change
We first use the representative agent's problem in Equation 1 to derive an empirically tractable ex-
pression for the full value of mortality risk due to climate change. Before doing so, we highlight how
this expression builds upon prior work quantifying the impacts of climate change.
    Climate change will influence mortality risk f = f (b, c) through two pathways. First, a change in
C will directly alter realized weather draws, changing c. Second, as implied by Equation 1, a change in
C will alter individuals' beliefs about their distribution of potential weather realizations, shifting how
they act, and ultimately changing the optimal endogenous choice of b . Therefore, since the climate
C influences both c and b , the probability of death at the initial time period t = 1 is:

                                      Pr(death | C1 ) = f (b (Y1 , C1 ), c(C1 ))                                        (2)

    Many previous empirical estimates of the effects of climate assume no adaptation takes place (e.g.,
Desch^ enes and Greenstone, 2007; Hsiang et al., 2017), such that projections of future impacts are
computed assuming economic decisions embodied by b do not change. In reality, optimizing agents
will update their behaviors and technologies b to attenuate climate-induced increases in mortality risk.
Several analyses have empirically confirmed that accounting for endogenous changes to technology,
behavior, and investment mitigates the direct effects of climate in a variety of contexts (e.g., Barreca
et al., 2016; Park et al., 2020).12 However, existing climate change projections accounting for these
adaptation benefits do not account for the costs of adaptation, i.e., A(b).
    A full measure of the economic burden of climate change must account not only for the benefits
  11 The specification in Equation 1 imposes the assumption that there are no direct utility benefits or costs of adaptation

behaviors or investments b. In an alternative specification detailed in Appendix A.4, we allow agents to derive utility
both from x and from the choice variables in b; for example, air conditioning may increase utility directly, in addition to
lowering mortality risk. We show that under this alternative framework, the costs of adapting to climate change that we
can empirically recover include pecuniary expenditures on adaptation, A(b), net of any changes in direct utility benefits
or costs. All other aspects of the framework presented here are unaffected. Additionally, in a variant of this model
in which agents derive utility directly from the climate, the interpretation of empirically recovered adaptation costs is
modified to include an additional component representing changes in utility derived directly from the changing climate.
However, this change of interpretation to include another term that is "netted out" in estimated adaptation costs is the
only implication of adding climate directly to the utility function.
  12 For additional examples, see Schlenker and Roberts (2009); Hsiang and Narita (2012); Hsiang and Jina (2014);

Barreca et al. (2015); Heutel, Miller, and Molitor (2017); Burgess et al. (2017); Auffhammer (2018a).



                                                             7
generated by adaptive reactions to these changes but also their cost. Thus, the total cost of changing
mortality risks that result from climate change between time periods t = 1 and t = 2 is:

  full value of mortality risk due to climate change =
               V SL2 [f (b (Y2 , C2 ), c(C2 )) - f (b (Y2 , C1 ), c(C1 ))] + A(b (Y2 , C2 )) - A(b (Y2 , C1 )),
                               observable change in mortality rate                   adaptation costs
                                                                                                              (3)

where V SL2 is the value of a statistical life in time period 2, or the willingness to pay for a marginal
increase in the probability of survival, and is used to convert mortality risk to dollar value (Becker,
2007). Importantly, this definition includes changes in mortality risk and adaptation costs due only
to changes in the climate, as income Y is held fixed at its t = 2 level. This ensures, for example, that
increases in air conditioning prevalence due to rising incomes are not included in adaptation benefits or
costs of climate change. Note that the omission of the costs of adaptation, A(b), would underestimate
the overall economic burden of warming.
    The first key objective of this paper is to empirically quantify the total costs of climate change
impacts on mortality risk, following Equation 3. However, the changes in adaptation costs between
time periods (second term in Equation 3) are unobservable, practically speaking. In principle, data on
each adaptive action could be gathered and modeled (Desch^    enes and Greenstone, 2011, e.g.,), but since
there exists an enormous number of possible adaptive margins that together make up the composite
good b, computing the full cost of climate change using such an enumerative approach quickly becomes
intractable.
    To circumvent this challenge, we use a revealed preference approach derived from the first order
conditions of the agents' problem (Equation 1) to construct empirical estimates of changes in adapta-
tion costs due to climate change. We begin by rearranging the agent's first order conditions and using
                                                      u(x)
the conventional definition of the VSL (i.e., [1-f ~(b,C )]u/x (Becker, 2007)) to show that in any time
period t,

                   A(b        -u(x             ~(b , Ct )           ~(b , Ct )
                      t)            t)         f  t                 f  t
                         =                                = - V SLt                                           (4)
                    b              ~(b , Ct )]
                           u/x[1 - f               b                    b
                                       t


That is, marginal adaptation costs (lefthand side) equal the value of marginal adaptation benefits
(righthand side), when evaluated at the optimal level of adaptation b and consumption x . This
expression enables us to use estimates of marginal adaptation benefits infer estimates of marginal
adaptation costs.
    To make the expression in Equation 4 of greater practical value, we note that the total derivative
of expected mortality risk with respect to a change in the climate is the sum of two terms:

                                 ~(b , Ct )
                                df            ~(b , Ct )  b
                                              f                ~(b , Ct )
                                                               f
                                    t            t         t      t
                                            =                +                                                (5)
                                   dC           b        C       C

The first term on the righthand side of Equation 5 represents the expected impacts on mortality of
all changes in adaptive investments induced by the change in climate; as discussed, this is of limited



                                                         8
practical value because of data and estimation limitations.13 The second term is the direct effect that
the climate would have if individuals did not adapt (i.e., the partial derivative).14 For example, if
climate change produces an increase in the frequency of heat events that threaten human health, it
would be natural to expect the first term to be negative, as people make adjustments that save lives,
and the second term to be positive, reflecting the impacts of heat on fatalities absent those adjustment.
Equation 5 makes clear that we can express the unobservable mortality benefits of adaptation (i.e.,
f ~(b ,Ct )  b
             C ) as the difference between the total and partial derivatives of the expected probability of
     t        t
    b
death with respect to climate.
    We use this fact in combination with Equation 4 to develop an expression for the total adaptation
costs incurred as the climate changes gradually from t = 1 to t = 2, which is composed of elements
which can be estimated:15
                                         2
                                             A(b                         2   ~(b , Ct )  f ~(b , Ct ) dCt
                                                t )  bt dCt                df
A(b (Y2 , C2 ))-A(b (Y2 , C1 )) =                           dt = -              t
                                                                             V SLt     -      t
                                                                                                          dt
                                    1          b  C dt           1             d C            C        dt
                                                                                                       (6)
The practical value of Equation 6 is that it outlines how we can use estimates of the total and partial
derivatives of mortality risk--with respect to the climate--to infer net adaptation costs, even though
adaptation itself is not directly observable. In the following sections, we develop an empirical panel
model exploiting both short-run and long-run variation in temperature through which the total deriva-
       ~
      df                                                f ~
tive d C can be separated from the partial derivative  C . The details of implementing Equation 6 are
discussed in Section 4.5 and we empirically quantify these values globally in Section 5.3.
    Before proceeding, a few details are worth underscoring. First, while we integrate over changes
in climate in Equation 6, we hold income fixed at its endpoint value. This is because the goal is to
develop an estimate of the additional adaptation expenditures incurred due to the changing climate
only. In contrast, changes in expenditures due to rising income will alter mortality risk under climate
change, but are not a consequence of the changing climate; therefore not included in our calculation
of the total mortality-related costs of climate change.
    Second, the revealed preference approach for recovering adaptation costs relies on the first order
condition that guarantees that marginal costs of adaptation are equal to marginal benefits at the
optimal choice {x , b }. Since we can estimate marginal benefits, we can back out marginal costs.
    Third, the total adaptation costs associated with the climate shifting from C1 to C2 are calculated
by integrating marginal benefits of adaptation for a series of infinitesimal changes in climate (Equation
6), where marginal benefits continually evolve with the changing climate C . Thus, total adaptation
costs in a given period, relative to a base period, are the sum of the adaptation costs induced by a
series of small changes in climate in the preceding periods (see Appendix A.1 for a visual description).
    Finally, the total adaptation benefits associated with the climate shifting from C1 to C2 are defined
as the dollar value of the difference between the effects of climate change with optimal adaptation and
  13 This term is often known in the environmental health literature as the effect of "defensive behaviors" (Desch^ enes,
Greenstone, and Shapiro, 2017) and in the climate change literature as "belief effects" (Deryugina and Hsiang, 2017); in
our context these effects result from changes in individuals' defensive behaviors undertaken because their beliefs about
the climate have changed.
  14 This term is known in the climate change literature as the "direct effect" of the climate (Deryugina and Hsiang,

2017).
  15 Note that x is fully determined by b and income Y through the budget constraint.




                                                           9
   without any adaptation: -V SL2 [f   ~(b (Y2 , C2 ), C2 )­f
                                                            ~(b (Y2 , C1 ), C2 )]. In contrast to total adaptation
   costs, this expression relies on the relationship between mortality and temperature that holds only at
   the final climate, C2 . Therefore, when the marginal benefits of adaptation are greater at the final
   climate than at previous climates, the total benefits of adaptation will exceed total adaptation costs,
   generating an adaptation "surplus". For example, at a climate between C1 and C2 , the marginal
   unit of air conditioning (a key form of adaptation) purchased will have benefits that are exactly
   equal to its costs. However, at the warmer climate C2 , this same unit of air conditioning becomes
   inframarginal, and may have benefits that exceed its costs. Appendix A.2 derives a formal expression
   for this adaptation surplus.


   2.3        The mortality partial social cost of carbon
   The second objective of this paper is to quantify the mortality partial SCC. Here, we use the represen-
   tative agent's problem in Equation 1 to derive an expression for the partial SCC, which we empirically
   estimate using a procedure outlined in Section 6.
       Given the agent's expectations of the weather, the indirect utility function for the problem in
   Equation 1 in each period t is:

                         vt (Yt , A(b                       ~                              
                                     t ), Ct ) = u(xt ) 1 - f (bt , Ct ) + t [Yt - xt - A(bt )],                             (7)

   where, as above, climate is determined by the prior evolution of global emissions through Ct =
   (E0 , E1 , E2 , ...Et ) and t is the marginal utility of income. The mortality partial SCC is defined
   as the marginal willingness-to-pay (MWTP) in period t to avoid the mortality consequences from a
   marginal increase in emissions. Because emissions released in period t influence the trajectory of global
   emissions for hundreds of years (see Figure 1), this MWTP includes impacts of carbon emissions on
   utility in future time periods s > t. Thus, we derive the MWTP to avoid a marginal change in emis-
   sions in period t by differentiating the indirect utility function in each future period s with respect to
   emissions Et , and integrating over time:16
                                           
                                                        -dvs
Mortality partial SCCt (utils) =              e-(s-t)        ds
                                       t                dEt
                                                                  ~
                                                                  f     
                                                                    s  bs
                                                                            ~
                                                                            f           Cs            
                                                                                                                     As  b
                                                                             s                                            s  Cs
                                   =          e-(s-t) u(xs)               +                ds +          e-(s-t) s              ds,
                                       t                          b C       C          Et         t                   b  C Et
                                                discounted damages of emissions from                  discounted damages of emissions
                                                      change in mortality rates                            from adaptation costs

                                                                                                                             (8)

   where  indicates the discount rate.17
      The two terms in Equation 8 show that increases in emissions cause damages through two channels.
   First, emissions change mortality rates, net of optimal adaptation, for all future time periods. Second,
     16 Fordisplay purposes only we have omitted the arguments of f ~(·) in Equations 8 and 9.
     17 Equation 8 assumes a constant discount rate  . This approach is taken because it is standard in policy applications
   of the SCC (Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Carbon, 2010), although future work should explore the
   implications of more complex discounting procedures, such as declining discount rates (e.g., Newell and Pizer, 2004;
   Millner and Heal, 2018).


                                                               10
emissions change the expenditures that the agent must incur in order to update her optimal adaptation.
   Some manipulation allows us to convert Equation 8 into dollars. Using the standard definition of
the VSL and the first order conditions from Equation 1, we divide Equation 8 by [1 - f     ~]u/x to
rewrite the mortality partial SCC in units of dollars:

                                                                          ~
                                                                          f     
                                                                            s  bs
                                                                                    ~
                                                                                    f s            As  b       Cs
  Mortality partial SCCt (dollars) =               e-(s-t) V SLs                  +            +        s
                                                                                                                  ds
                                            t                             b C       C              b C        Et
                                                                  total monetized mortality-related damages
                                                                      from a marginal change in climate
                                                
                                                             dD(Cs , s)  Cs
                                        =          e-(s-t)                  ds,                                        (9)
                                            t                  dC       Et

where D(Cs , s) represents a damage function describing total global economic losses due to changes
in mortality risk in year s, as a function of the global climate C . Critically, this damage function is
inclusive of adaptation benefits and costs.
    In practice, we approximate Equation 9 by combining empirically-grounded estimated damage
functions D(·) with climate model simulations of the impact of a small change in emissions on the
global climate, i.e.,  Cs
                      Et . Expressing the mortality partial SCC using a damage function has three key
practical advantages. First, the damage function represents a parsimonious, reduced-form description
of the otherwise complex dependence of global economic damage on the global climate. Second, as
we demonstrate below in Section 6, it is possible to empirically estimate damage functions from the
climate change projections described in Section 2.2. Finally, because they are fully differentiable,
empirical damage functions can be used to compute marginal costs of an emissions impulse released in
year t by differentiation. The construction of these damage functions, as well as the implementation
of the entire mortality partial SCC, are detailed in Section 6.


3     Data
We believe that we have collected the most comprehensive data file ever compiled on mortality, his-
torical climate data, and climate, population, and income projections. Section 3.1 describes the data
necessary to estimate the relationship between mortality and temperature. Section 3.2 outlines the data
we use to predict the mortality-temperature relationship across the entire planet today and project
its evolution into the future as populations adapt to climate change. Appendix B provides a more
extensive description of all of these datasets.


3.1     Data to estimate the mortality-temperature relationship
Mortality data. Our mortality data are collected independently from 41 countries.18 Combined,
this dataset covers mortality outcomes for 55% of the global population, representing a substantial
increase in coverage relative to existing literature; prior studies investigate an individual country (e.g.,
Burgess et al., 2017) or region (e.g., Deschenes, 2018), or combine small nonrandom samples from
  18 Our main analysis uses age-specific mortality rates from 40 of these countries. We use data from India as cross-

validation of our main results, as the India data do not have records of age-specific mortality rates. The omission of
India from our main regressions lowers our data coverage to 38% of the global population.


                                                             11
across multiple countries (e.g., Gasparrini et al., 2015). Spatial coverage, resolution, and temporal
coverage are shown in Figure 2A, and each dataset is summarized in Table 1 and detailed in Appendix
B.1. We harmonize all records into a single multi-country panel dataset of age-specific annual mortality
rates, using three age categories: <5, 5-64, and >64, where the unit of observation is ADM2 (e.g., a
county in the U.S.) by year. Note that the India mortality data lacks age-specific rates, and therefore
is used for out-of-sample tests rather than in the main analysis.




Figure 2: Mortality statistics and future climate projections used in generating
empirically-based climate change mortality impact projections. Panel A shows the spatial distri-
bution and resolution of mortality statistics from all countries used to generate regression estimates of the temperature-
mortality relationship. Temporal coverage for each country is shown under the map (the dotted line for the European
Union (EU) time series indicates that start dates vary for a small subset of countries). Panel B shows the 21 climate
models (outlined maps) and 12 model surrogates (maps without outlines) that are weighted in climate change projections
so that the weighted distribution of the 2080 to 2099 global mean surface temperature anomaly (GMST) exhibited by
the 33 total models matches the probability distribution of estimated GMST responses (blue-gray line) under RCP8.5.
For this construction, the anomaly is relative to values in 1986-2005.


    Historical climate data. We perform analyses with two separate groups of historical data on
precipitation and temperature. First, we use the Global Meteorological Forcing Dataset (GMFD)
(Sheffield, Goteti, and Wood, 2006), which relies on a weather model in combination with observational
data. Second, we repeat our analysis with climate datasets that strictly interpolate observational
data across space onto grids, combining temperature data from the daily Berkeley Earth Surface
Temperature dataset (BEST) (Rohde et al., 2013) with precipitation data from the monthly University
of Delaware dataset (UDEL) (Matsuura and Willmott, 2007). Table 1 summarizes these data; full data
descriptions are provided in Appendix B.2. We link climate and mortality data by aggregating gridded
daily temperature data to the annual measures at the same administrative level as the mortality records
using a procedure detailed in Appendix B.2.4 that preserves potential nonlinearities in the mortality-
temperature relationship.
    Covariate data. Our analysis allows for heterogeneity in the age-specific mortality-temperature
relationship as a function of two long-run covariates: a measure of climate (in our main specification,
long-run average temperature) and income per capita. We assemble time-invariant measures of both
these variables at the ADM1 unit (e.g., state) level using GMFD climate data and a combination of
the Penn World Tables (PWT), Gennaioli et al. (2014), and Eurostat (2013). The construction of the
income variable requires some estimation to downscale to ADM1 level; details on this procedure are

                                                           12
   Mortality records
                                                                                     Average annual                              Average
                                                                                     mortality rate                         covariate values
                                                                                                           Global      GDP        Avg.      Annual
                                                                                                            pop.        per       daily    avg. days
                                               ×                                                                            
   Country              N      Spatial scale         Years      Age categories      All-age     >64 yr.    share     capita     temp.       > 28 C
   Brazil            228,762      ADM2             1997-2010    <5, 5-64, >64        525         4,096      0.028     11,192      23.8       35.2
   Chile             14,238       ADM2             1997-2010     <5, 5-64, >64        554        4,178     0.002     14,578      14.3         0
   China               7,488      ADM2             1991-2010     <5, 5-64, >64        635        7,507     0.193      4,875      15.1        25.2
   EU                13,013       NUTS2            1990 -2010    <5, 5-64, >64       1,014       5,243     0.063     22,941      11.2         1.6
           
   France              3,744      ADM2             1998-2010    0-19, 20-64, >64      961        3,576     0.009     31,432      11.9         0.3
   India             12,505       ADM2             1957-2001        All-age           724          ­       0.178      1,355      25.8        131.4
   Japan               5,076      ADM1             1975-2010     <5, 5-64, >64        788        4,135     0.018     23,241      14.3         8.3
   Mexico            146,835      ADM2             1990-2010     <5, 5-64,>64         561        4,241     0.017     16,518      19.1        24.6
   USA               401,542      ADM2             1968-2010     <5, 5-64, >64       1,011       5,251     0.045     30,718       13          9.5
   All Countries    833,203          ­                 ­               ­              780        4,736     0.554     20,590      15.5        32.6

   Historical climate datasets
   Dataset                         Citation                         Method         Resolution   Variable                   Source
   GMFD, V1          Sheffield, Goteti, and Wood (2006)          Reanalysis &        0.25       temp. &             Princeton University
                                                                 Interpolation                   precip.
   BEST                       Rohde et al. (2013)                Interpolation         1         temp.                 Berkeley Earth
   UDEL                  Matsuura and Willmott (2007)            Interpolation        0.5        precip.            University of Delaware


                                   Table 1: Historical mortality & climate data

 In units of deaths per 100,000 population.

 To remove outliers, particularly in low-population regions, we winsorize the mortality rate at the 1% level at high end of the
distribution across administrative regions, separately for each country.
   All covariate values shown are averages over the years in each country sample.
×
   ADM2 refers to the second administrative level (e.g., county), while ADM1 refers to the first administrative level (e.g.,
state). NUTS2 refers to the Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics 2nd (NUTS2) level, which is specific to the
European Union (EU) and falls between first and second administrative levels.
  Global population share for each country in our sample is shown for the year 2010.

   GDP per capita values shown are in constant 2005 dollars purchasing power parity (PPP).
   Average daily temperature and annual average of the number of days above 28 C are both population weighted, using
population values from 2010.

  EU data for 33 countries were obtained from a single source. Detailed description of the countries within this region is
presented in Appendix B.1.
  Most countries in the EU data have records beginning in the year 1990, but start dates vary for a small subset of countries.
See Appendix B.1 and Table B.1 for details.

   We separate France from the rest of the EU, as higher resolution mortality data are publicly available for France.

   It is widely believed that data from India understate mortality rates due to incomplete registration of deaths.



provided in Appendix B.3.


3.2         Data for projecting the mortality-temperature relationship around the
            world & into the future
Unit of analysis for projections. We partition the global land surface into a set of 24,378 regions
onto which we generate location-specific projected damages of climate change. These regions (hereafter,
impact regions ) are constructed such that they are either identical to, or are a union of, existing
administrative regions. They (i) respect national borders, (ii) are roughly equal in population across
regions, and (iii) display approximately homogenous within-region climatic conditions. Appendix C
details the algorithm used to create impact regions.
    Climate projections. We use a set of 21 high-resolution bias-corrected, downscaled global climate
projections produced by NASA Earth Exchange (NEX) (Thrasher et al., 2012)19 that provide daily
   19 The     dataset we use, called the NEX-GDDP, downscales global climate model (GCM) output from the Coupled



                                                                           13
temperature and precipitation through the year 2100.20 We obtain climate projections based on two
standardized emissions scenarios: Representative Concentration Pathways 4.5 (RCP4.5, an emissions
stabilization scenario) and 8.5 (RCP8.5, a scenario with intensive growth in fossil fuel emissions)
(Van Vuuren et al., 2011; Thomson et al., 2011)).
    These 21 climate models systematically underestimate tail risks of future climate change (Tebaldi
and Knutti, 2007; Rasmussen, Meinshausen, and Kopp, 2016).21 To correct for this, we follow Hsiang
et al. (2017) by assigning probabilistic weights to climate projections and use 12 surrogate models
that describe local climate outcomes in the tails of the climate sensitivity distribution (Rasmussen,
Meinshausen, and Kopp, 2016). Figure 2B shows the resulting weighted climate model distribution.
The 21 models and 12 surrogate models are treated identically in our calculations and we describe them
collectively as the surrogate/model mixed ensemble (SMME). Gridded output from these projections
are aggregated to impact regions; full details on the climate projection data are in Appendix B.2.
    Socioeconomic projections. Projections of population and income are a critical ingredient in
our analysis, and for these we rely on the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs), which describe a
set of plausible scenarios of socioeconomic development over the 21st century (see Hsiang and Kopp
(2018) for a description of these scenarios). We use SSP2, SSP3, and SSP4, which yield emissions in the
absence of mitigation policy that fall between RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 in integrated assessment modeling
exercises (Riahi et al., 2017). For population, we use the International Institute for Applied Systems
Analysis (IIASA) SSP population projections, which provide estimates of population by age cohort at
country-level in five-year increments (IIASA Energy Program, 2016). National population projections
are allocated to impact regions based on current satellite-based within-country population distributions
from Bright et al. (2012) (see Appendix B.3.3). Projections of national income per capita are similarly
derived from the SSP scenarios, using both the IIASA projections and the Organization for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD) Env-Growth model (Dellink et al., 2015) projections. We
allocate national income per capita to impact regions using current nighttime light satellite imagery
from the NOAA Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DSMP). Appendix B.3.2 provides details
on this calculation.


4     Methods
Here we describe a set of methods designed to generate future projections of the impacts of climate
change on mortality across the globe, relying on empirically estimated historical relationships. In
the first subsection, we detail the estimating equation used to recover the average treatment effect of
temperature on mortality rates across all administrative regions in our sample. This gives us the casual
estimate of temperature's impact upon mortality using historical data. In the second subsection, we
describe a model of heterogeneous treatment effects that allows us to capture differences in temperature
Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5) archive (Taylor, Stouffer, and Meehl, 2012), an ensemble of models
typically used in national and international climate assessments.
  20 See Hsiang and Kopp (2018) for a description of climate model structure and output, as well as the RCP emissions

scenarios.
  21 The underestimation of tail risks in the 21-model ensemble is for several reasons, including that these models form

an ensemble of opportunity and are not designed to sample from a full distribution, they exhibit idiosyncratic biases,
and have narrow tails. We are correcting for their bias and narrowness with respect to global mean surface temperature
(GMST) projections, but our method does not correct for all biases.



                                                          14
sensitivity across distinct populations in our sample, and thus to quantify the benefits of adaptation as
observed in historical data. The remaining sections detail how we combine this empirical information
with the theoretical framework from Section 2 to generate global projections of mortality risk under
climate change, accounting for both benefits and costs of adaptation, in addition to how we account
for uncertainty in these projections.


4.1       Estimating a pooled multi-country mortality-temperature response func-
          tion
We begin by estimating a pooled, multi-country mortality-temperature response function. The model
exploits year-to-year variation in the distribution of daily weather to identify the response of all-cause
mortality to temperature, following, for example, Desch^   enes and Greenstone (2011). Specifically, we
estimate the following equation on the pooled mortality sample from 40 countries,22

                                  Mait = ga (Tit ) + qac (Rit ) + ai + act + ait                                    (10)

where a indicates age category with a  {< 5, 5-64, > 64}, i denotes the second administrative level
(ADM2, e.g., county),23 c denotes country, and t indicates years. Thus, Mait is the age-specific all-
cause mortality rate in ADM2 unit i in year t. ai is a fixed effect for age × ADM 2, and act a vector
of fixed effects that allow for shocks to mortality that vary at the age × country × year level.
     Our focus in Equation 10 is the effect of temperature on mortality, represented by the response
function ga (·), which varies by age. Before describing the functional form of this response, we note that
our climate data are provided at the grid-cell-by-day level. To align gridded daily temperatures with
annual administrative mortality records, we first take nonlinear functions of grid-level daily average
temperature and sum these values across the year. This is done before the data are spatially averaged in
order to accurately represent the distributions at grid cell level. We then collapse annual observations
across grid cells within each ADM2 using population weights in order to represent temperature exposure
for the average person within an administrative unit (see Appendix B.2.4 for details). This process
results in the annual, ADM2-level vector Tit . We then choose ga (·) to be a linear function of the
nonlinear elements of Tit . This construction allows us to estimate a linear regression model while
preserving the nonlinear relationship between mortality and temperature that takes place at the grid-
cell-by-day level (Hsiang, 2016). The nonlinear transformations of daily temperature captured by Tit
determine, through their linear combination in ga (·), the functional form of the mortality-temperature
response function.
     In our main specification, Tit contains polynomials of daily average temperatures (up to fourth
order), summed across the year. We emphasize results from the polynomial model because it strikes
a balance between providing sufficient flexibility to capture important nonlinearities, parsimony, and
limiting demands on the data when covariate interactions are introduced (see Section 4.2). Results
for alternative functional form specifications are very similar to the fourth-order polynomial and are
provided in Appendices D.1 and F. Analogous to temperature, we summarize daily grid-level precipi-
  22 We  omit India in our main analysis because mortality records do not record age.
  23 This is usually the case. However, as shown in Table 1, the EU data is reported at Nomenclature of Territorial Units
for Statistics 2nd (NUTS2) level, and Japan reports mortality at the first administrative level.



                                                           15
tation in the annual ADM2-level vector Rit . We construct Rit as a second-order polynomial of daily
precipitation, summed across the year, and estimate an age- and country-specific linear function of
this vector, represented by qac (·).
    The core appeal of Equation 10 is that the mortality-temperature response function is identified
from the plausibly random year-to-year variation in temperature within a geographic unit (Desch^      enes
and Greenstone, 2007). Specifically, the age × ADM 2 fixed effects ai ensure that we isolate within-
location year-to-year variation in temperature and rainfall exposure, which is as good as randomly
assigned. The age × country × year fixed effects act account for any time-varying trends or shocks to
age-specific mortality rates which are unrelated to the climate.
    We fit the multi-country pooled model in Equation 10 using weighted least squares, weighting
by age-specific population so that the coefficients correspond to the average person in the relevant
age category and to account for the greater precision associated with mortality estimates from larger
populations.24 Standard errors are clustered at the first administrative level (ADM1, e.g., state),
instead of at the unit of treatment (ADM2, e.g., county), to account for spatial as well as temporal
correlation in error structure. Robustness of this model to alternative fixed effects and error structures
is shown in Section 5, and to alternative climate datasets in Appendix D.1.


4.2     Heterogeneity in the mortality-temperature response function based
        on climate and income
The average treatment effect identified through Equation 10 is likely to mask important differences in
the sensitivity of mortality rates to changes in temperature across the diverse populations included in
our sample. These differences in sensitivity reflect differential investments in adaptation ­ i.e., different
levels of b . We cannot observe the level of b directly, but we can observe those factors that influence
how poplations select an optimal b and condition on those directly to model heterogeneity in the
temperature-mortality relationship. We develop a simple two-factor interaction model using average
temperature (i.e., long-run climate) and average per capita incomes to explain cross-sectional varia-
tion in the estimated mortality-temperature relationship. This approach provides provides separate
estimates for the effect of climate-driven adaptation and income growth on shape of the temperature-
mortality relationship, as they are observed in the historical record.
    The two factors defining this interaction model come directly from the theoretical framework in
Section 2. First, a higher average temperature incentivizes investment in heat-related adaptive be-
haviors, as the return to any given adaptive mechanism is higher the more frequently the population
experiences days with life-threatening temperatures. In Section 2, this was represented by b being a
function of climate C . In our empirical specification, we use a parsimonious parameterization of the
climate, interacting our nonlinear temperature response function with the location-specific long-run
average temperature.25 Second, higher incomes relax agents' budget constraints and hence facilitate
adaptive behavior. In Section 2, this was captured by optimal adaptation b being an implicit function
   24 We constrain population weights to sum to one for each year in the sample, across all observations. That is, our
                                                                   a = popa /
weight for an observation in region i in year t for age group a is it                      a
                                                                            it    i   a popit . This adjustment of weights
is important in our context, as we have a very unbalanced panel, due to the merging of heterogeneous country-specific
mortality datasets.
   25 In Appendix D.5, we show robustness of this parsimonious characterization of the long-run climate to a more complex

specification.


                                                           16
of income Y . To capture this effect, we interact the temperature polynomial with location-specific per
capita income.
    In addition to these theoretical arguments, there is a practical reason to restrict ourselves to these
two covariates when estimating this interaction model. In order to predict responses around the world
and inform projections of damages in the future, it is necessary for all key covariates in the specification
to be available globally today, at high spatial resolution, and that credible projections of their future
evolution are available. Unlike other covariates that may be of interest, average incomes and climate
can be extracted from the SSPs and the climate simulations, respectively. These two factors have been
the focus of studies modeling heterogeneity across the broader climate-economy literature.26
    We capture heterogeneous patterns of temperature sensitivity via the interaction model:

                   Mait =ga (Tit | T M EANs , log(GDP pc)s ) + qca (Rit ) + ai + act + ait                             (11)

where s refers to ADM1-level (e.g., state or province), T M EAN is the sample-period average annual
temperature, GDP pc is the sample-period average of annual GDP per capita, and all other variables
are defined as in Equation 10. We implement a form of ga (·) that exploits linear interactions between
each ADM1-level covariate and all nonlinear elements of the temperature vector Tit . The model does
not include uninteracted terms for T M EAN and GDP pc because they are collinear with ai . In
contrast to the uninteracted models in Equation 10, we estimate Equation 11 without any regression
weights since we are explicitly modeling heterogeneity in treatment effects rather than integrating
over it (Solon, Haider, and Wooldridge, 2015). This specification allows for the same flexibility in the
functional form of temperature as in Equation 10, it is just conditional on income and climate. More
details on implementation of this regression are given in Appendix D.4.27
    Equation 11 relies on both plausibly random year-to-year fluctuations in temperature within loca-
tions and cross-sectional variation in climate and income between administrative units. We rely on
cross-sectional variation to identify the interaction effects, because a representative sample of mod-
ern populations have not experienced an alternative climate that could be exploited to identify these
terms. The consequence is that the case for causally interpreting the coefficients capturing interactions
in Equation 11 is weaker than for other coefficients in Equation 11 and those in Equation 10.
    We nonetheless view the resulting estimates as informative for at least two reasons. First, the
objects of interest are the interactions, not the level of mortality, so while unobserved factors like
institutions undoubtedly affect the overall mortality rate (Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2001),
  26 See Mendelsohn, Nordhaus, and Shaw (1994); Kahn (2005); Auffhammer and Aroonruengsawat (2011); Hsiang,

Meng, and Cane (2011); Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014); Moore and Lobell (2014); Davis and Gertler (2015); Heutel,
Miller, and Molitor (2017); Isen, Rossin-Slater, and Walker (2017).
  27 To see how we implement Equation 11 in practice, note that in Equation 10, we estimate g (·) as the inner product
                                                                                                   a
between the nonlinear functions of temperature Tit and a vector of coefficients a ; that is, ga (Tit ) = a Tit . For example,
in the polynomial case, Tit is a vector of length P and contains the annual sum of daily average temperatures raised
to the powers p = 1, ..., P and aggregated across grid cells. The coefficients a therefore fully describe the age-specific
nonlinear response function. In Equation 11, we allow ga (Tit ) to change with climate and income by allowing each
element of a to be a linear function of these two variables. Using this notation, our estimating equation is:
                 Mait = (0,a + 1,a T M EANs + 2,a log(GDP pc)s ) Tit + qca (Rit ) + ai + act + ait
                                               a

where 0,a , 1,a , and 2,a are each vectors of length P , the latter two describing the effects of T M EAN and log(GDP pc)
on the sensitivity of mortality Mait to temperature Tit .



                                                             17
their potential influence on the mortality sensitivity of temperature is less direct, particularly after
adjustment for income and climate. Second, we probed the reliability of the interaction coefficients in
several ways and found them to be robust. For example, we found that the estimation off Equation 11
in the main sample provides reliable estimates of the mortality temperature sensitivity in India (see
Appendix section D.6), providing an out-of-sample test of Equation 11. Additionally, the coefficients
are qualitatively unchanged when we use alternative characterizations of the climate (see Appendix
Section D.5) and weather (see Appendix Section F).


4.3       Spatial extrapolation: Constructing a globally representative response
The fact that carbon emissions are a global pollutant requires that estimates of climate damages used
to inform an SCC must be global in scope. A key challenge for generating such globally-comprehensive
estimates in the case of mortality is the absence of data throughout much of the world. Often,
registration of births and deaths does not occur systematically. Although we have, to the best of our
knowledge, compiled the most comprehensive mortality data file ever collected, our 40 countries only
account for 38% of the global population (55% if India is included, although it only contains all-age
mortality rates). This leaves more than 4.2 billion people unrepresented in the sample of available
data, which is especially troubling because these populations have incomes and live in climates that
may differ from the parts of the world where data are available.
    To achieve the global coverage essential to understanding the costs of climate change, we use the
results from the estimation of Equation 11 on the observed 38% global sample to estimate the sensitivity
of mortality to temperature everywhere, including the unobserved 62% of the world's population.
Specifically, the results from this model enable us to use two observable characteristics ­ average
temperature and income ­ to predict the mortality-temperature response function for each of our
24,378 impact regions. Importantly, it is not necessary to recover the overall mortality rate for these
purposes.
    To see how this is done, we note that the projected response function for any impact region
r requires three ingredients. The first are the estimated coefficients g    ^a (·) from Equation 11. The
                                                                       28
second are estimates of GDP per capita at the impact region level. And third is the average annual
temperature (i.e., a measure of the long-run climate) for each impact region, where we use the same
temperature data that were assembled for the regressions in Equations 10 and 11.
    We then predict the shape of the response function for each age group a, impact region r, and year t,
up to a constant: g ^art = g
                           ^a (Trt | T M EANrt , log(GDP pc)rt ) for t = 2015. The various fixed effects in
Equation 11 are unknown and omitted, since they were nuisance parameters in the original regression.
This results in a unique, spatially heterogeneous, and globally comprehensive set of predicted response
functions for each location on Earth.
    The accuracy of the predicted response functions will depend, in part, on its ability to capture
responses in regions where mortality data are unavailable. An imperfect but helpful exercise when
considering whether our model is representative is to evaluate the extent of common overlap between
the two samples. Figure 3A shows this overlap in 2015, where the grey squares reflect the joint
distribution of GDP and climate in the full global partition of 24,378 impact regions and orange
 28 The   procedure is described in Section 3.2 and Appendix B.3.2



                                                          18
                             A                                                 B


                                                                                                                                  Number of
                                                                                                                                  impact regions
                                                                                                                                      1600
                      10.0
log(GDP per capita)




                                                                                                                                      1200
                                                                                                                                             Full sample
                                                                                                                                      800
                                                                                                                                      400



                                                                                                                                      900
                      7.5
                                                                                                                                      600    Estimating
                                                                                                                                             sample
                                                                                                                                      300



                                 Regions globally in 2015                          Regions globally in 2100
                      5.0
                                 Regions within estimating sample                  Regions within estimating sample
                                  -20              0            20        40         -20              0           20         40
                                        Annual average temperature (°C)                    Annual average temperature (°C)


Figure 3: Joint coverage of income and long-run average temperature for estimating
and full samples. Joint distribution of income and long-run average annual temperature in the estimating sample
(red-orange), as compared to the global sample of impact regions (grey-black). Panel A shows in grey-black the global
sample for regions in 2015. Panel B shows in grey-black the global sample for regions in 2100 under a high-emissions
scenario (RCP8.5) and a median growth scenario (SSP3). In both panels, the in-sample frequency in red-orange indicates
coverage for impact regions within our data sample in 2015.



squares represent the analogous distribution only for the impact regions in the sample used to estimate
Equations 10 and 11. It is evident that temperatures in the global sample are generally well-covered
by our data, although we lack coverage for the poorer end of the global income distribution due to
the absence of mortality data in poorer countries. We explore this extrapolation to lower incomes
with a set of robustness checks in Appendix D; we find the model to perform well in an out-of-sample
test and to be robust to alternative functional form assumptions. We do a similar type of prediction
when we project temperature-mortality relationships into the future, discussed in the next section,
and thus make a similar comparison of samples. We find that, at the end of the century, the overlap
is generally better, although unsurprisingly the support of our historical data does not extend to the
highest projected temperatures and incomes. Thus, in our projections of the future, in some location
and year combinations, we must make out-of-sample predictions about how temperature sensitivity
will diminish beyond that observed anywhere in the world today, as temperatures and incomes rise
outside of the support in existing global cross-section. We assess the robustness of our results to
different assumptions regarding impacts of out-of-sample temperatures in Section 5.4 and Appendix
F.3.


4.4                          Temporal projection: Accounting for future adaptation benefits
As discussed in Section 2, a measure of the full mortality risk of climate change must account for the
benefits that populations realize from optimally adapting to a gradually warming climate, as well as
from income growth relaxing the budget constraint and enabling compensatory investments. Thus,
we allow each impact region's mortality-temperature response function to evolve over time, reflecting
how we might plausibly expect climate and incomes to change--as described in a set of internationally


                                                                                   19
standardized and widely used scenarios. We model the evolution of response functions based on
projected changes to average climate and GDP per capita, again using the estimation results from
fitting Equation 11.
     We allow the response function in region r and in year t to evolve over time as follows. First, a
13-year moving average of income per capita in region r is calculated using national forecasts from
the Shared Socioeconomics Pathways (SSP), combined with a within-country allocation of income
based on present-day nighttime lights (see Appendix B.3.2), to generate a new value of log(GDP pc)rt .
The length of this time window is chosen based on a goodness-of-fit test across alternative win-
dow lengths (see Appendix E.1). Second, a 30-year moving average of temperatures for region
r is updated in each year t to generate a new level of T M EANrt . Finally, the response curves
g
^art = g^a (Trt | T M EANrt , log(GDP pc)rt ) are calculated for each region for each age group in each
year with these updated values of T M EANrt and log(GDP pc)rt .
     The calculation of future mortality-temperature response functions is conceptually straightforward
and mirrors the procedure used to extrapolate response functions across locations that do not have
historical data. However, as we are generating projections decades into the future, we must impose
a set of reasonable constraints on this calculation in order to ensure plausible out-of-sample projec-
tions. The following two constraints, guided by economic theory and by the physiological literature,
ensure that future response functions are consistent with the fundamental characteristics of mortality-
temperature responses that we observe in the historical record and demonstrate plausible out-of-sample
projections.29 First, we impose the constraint that the response function must be weakly monotonic
around an empirically estimated, location-specific, optimal mortality temperature, called the minimum
mortality temperature (MMT). That is, we assume that temperatures farther from the MMT (either
colder or hotter) must be at least as harmful as temperatures closer to the MMT. This assumption
is important because Equation 11 uses within-sample variation to parameterize how the U-shaped
response function flattens; with extrapolation beyond the support of historically observed income and
climate, this behavior could go "beyond flat" and the response function would invert (Figure E.1).
In fact, this is guaranteed to occur mechanically if enough time elapses, because our main specifica-
tion only allowed income and climate to interact with the response functions linearly. However, such
behavior, in which extreme temperatures are less damaging to mortality rates than more moderate
temperatures, is inconsistent with a large body of epidemiological and econometric literature recovering
U-shaped response functions for mortality-temperature relationships under a wide range of functional
form assumptions and across diverse locations globally (Gasparrini et al., 2015; Burgess et al., 2017;
Desch^ enes and Greenstone, 2011), as well as what we observe in our data. As a measure of its role in
our results, the weak monotonicity assumption binds for the >64 age category at 35 C in 9% and 18%
of impact regions in 2050 and 2100, respectively.30 31
  29 See  Appendix E.2 for details on these assumptions and their implementation.
  30 The   frequency with which the weak monotonicity assumption binds will depend on the climate model and the
emissions and socioeconomic trajectories used; reported statistics refer to the CCSM4 model under RCP8.5 with SSP3.
   31 In imposing this constraint, we hold the MMT fixed over time at its baseline level in 2015 (Figure E.1D). We do

so because the use of spatial and temporal fixed effects in Equation 11 implies that response function levels are not
identified; thus, while we allow the shape of response functions to evolve over time as incomes and climate change, we
must hold fixed their level by centering each response function at its time-invariant MMT. Note that these fixed effects
are by definition not affected by a changing weather distribution. Thus, their omission does not influence estimates of
climate change impacts.




                                                          20
       Second, we assume that rising income cannot make individuals worse off, in the sense of increasing
   the temperature sensitivity of mortality. Because increased income per capita strictly expands the
   choice set of individuals considering whether to make adaptive investments, it should not increase the
   effect of temperature on mortality rates. We place no restrictions on the cross-sectional effect of income
   on the temperature sensitivity when estimating Equation 11, but we constrain the marginal effect of
   income on temperature sensitivity to be weakly negative in future projections. This assumption never
   binds for temperature sensitivity to hot days (>35 C).32
       Under these two constraints, we estimate projected impacts separately for each impact region
   and age group for each year from 2015 to 2100 by applying projected changes in the climate to these
   spatially and temporally heterogeneous response functions. We compute the nonlinear transformations
   of daily average temperature that are used in the function ga (Trt ) under both the RCP4.5 and RCP8.5
   emissions scenarios for all 33 climate projections in the SMME (as described in Section 3.2). This
   distribution of climate models captures uncertainties in the climate system through 2100.


   4.5     Computing adaptation costs using empirical estimates
   As shown in Section 2, the full cost of the mortality risk due to climate change is the sum of the
   observable change in mortality and adaptation costs (Equation 3). The latter cannot be observed
   directly; however, as derived in Section 2.2, we can recover an expression for adaptation costs that is,
   in principle, empirically tractable. Specifically, these costs can be computed by taking the difference
   between the total and partial derivative of expected mortality risk with respect to changes in the
   climate, and integrating this difference (Equation 6). Here, we describe a practical implementation for
   this calculation.
       Our empirical approximation of the adaptation costs incurred as the climate changes gradually
   from t = 1 to t = 2 is:

                                             2            ^           ^
                                                          ~(b , Ct )  f
                                                                      ~(b , Ct ) dCt
                                                         df  t           t
A(b (Y2 , C2 )) - A(b (Y2 , C1 ))  -             V SLt              -                dt
                                         1                  dC          C         dt
                                             t2
                                                               E[^
                                                                 g]
                                  -                V SL                               (T M EAN - T M EAN -1 ) , (12)
                                         =t1 +1
                                                            T M EAN           C ,Y2

                                                                   ^1 E[T ]



   where the first line of Equation 12 is identical to Equation 6, except that we use "hat" notation
                      ^
                      ~(·) is an empirical estimate of expected mortality risk. The second (approximate)
   to indicate that f
   equality follows from (i) taking the total and partial derivative of our estimating equation (Equation
   11) with respect to climate -- where the total derivative accounts for adaptation while the partial
   does not, (ii) substituting terms and simplifying the expression, and (iii) implementing a discrete-
   time approximation for the continuous integral (see Appendix A.3 for a full derivation). The under-
   braced object,  ^1 E[T ] , is the product of the expectation of temperature and the coefficient associated
     32 The assumption that rising income cannot increase the temperature sensitivity of mortality does not bind for hot

   days because our estimated marginal effects of income are negative for high temperatures (see Table D.3). However, it
   does bind for the >64 age category under realized temperatures in 30% and 24% of impact regions days in 2050 and
   2100, respectively.



                                                              21
with the interaction between temperature and climate from estimating equation 11: it represents our
estimate of marginal adaptation benefits.33 This derivative is then multiplied by the change in average
temperature between each period.34
    In implementation of Equation 12, we treat the VSL as a function of income, which evolves with
time, but as invariant to changes in the climate (see Section 6). Note that these adaptation cost
estimates are calculated for each impact region, age group, and year, using t = 2015 as the baseline
year, for each of our 33 high-resolution climate model projections.


4.6     Accounting for uncertainty in projected mortality effects of climate
        change
An important feature of the analysis is to develop estimates of the mortality impacts of climate change
that reflect the inherent uncertainty in these future projections.35 As discussed in Sections 4.4 and 4.5,
we construct estimates of the mortality risk of climate change for each of 33 distinct climate projections
in the SMME, capturing uncertainty in the climate system.36 Additionally, there exists an important
second source of uncertainty in our projected impacts that is independent of physical uncertainty,
arising from the econometric estimates of response functions; i.e., uncertainty in the estimate of g ^a (·).
    In order to account for both of these sources of uncertainty, we execute a Monte Carlo simulation
following the procedure in Hsiang et al. (2017). First, for each age category, we randomly draw a
set of parameters, corresponding to the terms composing g   ^a (·), from an empirical multivariate normal
distribution characterized by the covariance between all of the parameters from the estimation of
Equation 11.37 Second, using these parameters in combination with location- and time-specific values
of income and average climate provided by a given SSP scenario and RCP-specific climate projection
from each of the 33 climate projections in the SMME, we construct a predicted response function for
each of our 24,378 impact regions. Third, with these response functions in hand, we use daily weather
realizations for each impact region from the corresponding simulation to predict an annual mortality
impact. Finally, this process is repeated until approximately 1,000 projection estimates are complete
for each impact region, age group, and RCP-SSP combination.
    With these 1,000 response functions, we calculate the full mortality risk (i.e., inclusive of adap-
tation benefits and costs) for each impact region for each year between 1981 and 2100. The resulting
calculation is computationally intensive (requiring 94,000 hours of CPU time across all scenarios
reported in the main text and Appendix) but incorporates important uncertainty from climate and
   33 Recall that the specific functional form we use to estimate mortality risk as a function of temperature, climate,
                                                                                                       E[^g]
and income is g (·) = (0 + 1 T M EANt + 2 log(GDP pc)t ) Tt . Thus, the partial derivative T M EAN is equivalent to
^1 E[T ] .

   34 We assume that individuals use the recent past to form expectations about current temperature realizations, so this

expectation is computed over the prior 15 years, with weights of historical observations linearly declining in time.
   35 See Burke et al. (2015) for a discussion of combining physical uncertainty from multiple models in studies of climate

change impacts.
   36 Note that while the SMME fully represents the tails of the climate sensitivity distribution as defined by a probabilistic

simple climate model (see Appendix B.2.3), there remain important sources of climate uncertainty that are not captured
in our projections, due to the limitations of both the simple climate model and the GCMs. These include some climate
feedbacks that may amplify the increase of global mean surface temperature, as well as some factors affecting local
climate that are poorly simulated by GCMs.
   37 Note that coefficients for all age groups are estimated jointly in Equation 11, such that across-age-group covariances

are accounted for in this multivariate distribution.




                                                              22
econometric sources. When reporting projected impacts in any given year, we report summary statis-
tics (e.g., mean, median) of this entire distribution.


5     Results I: Full mortality risk of climate change
This section presents results describing temperature's impact on mortality, heterogeneity in that im-
pact, and projections of the full mortality risk of climate change into the future. Projections of global
climate change impacts rely on extrapolation of mortality-temperature responses to parts of the world
where historical mortality data are unavailable and to future time periods; applying the approaches
described in Sections 4.3 and 4.4. Using the approach outlined in Sections 4.5 and 4.6, we then calcu-
late the full global mortality risk of climate change, accounting for the benefits and costs of adaptation
and for climate model and econometric uncertainty.


5.1    The mortality-temperature relationship: Pooled multi-country results
Pooling subnational mortality records across 40 countries and all age groups, we first estimate a version
of Equation 10 in which g (Tit ) does not depend on age, showing results for the all-age mortality-
temperature response function obtained with a fourth-order polynomial in daily average temperature.
Table 2 displays this result, showing marginal effects at various temperatures. These estimates can be
interpreted as the change in the number of deaths per 100,000 per year resulting from one additional
day at each temperature, compared to the reference day of 20 C (68 F). Columns (1)-(3) increase the
saturation of temporal controls in the model specification, ranging from country-year fixed effects in
column (1) to country-year-age fixed effects in column (2) and adding age-specific state-level linear
trends in column (3). Our preferred specification is column (2), as column (1) does not account for
differential temporal shocks to mortality rates by age group, while in column (3) we cannot reject the
null of equal age-specific, ADM1-level trends.
    The data reveal the U-shaped response that is common in the prior literature across all specifica-
tions. This is a noteworthy finding because the previous literature has relied on samples with much
more restrictive geographic and population coverage. Examining column (2), we find that a day at
35 C (95 F) leads to an increase in the all-age mortality rate of approximately 0.4 deaths per 100,000,
relative to a day at 20 C. A day at -5 C (23 F) similarly increases the all-age mortality rate by 0.3
deaths per 100,000. This result is robust to alternative functional form assumptions (i.e., different
nonlinear functions of Tit ), including a non-parametric binned regression, as well as to the use of
alternative, independently-sourced, climate datasets (Figure D.1).
    Age group heterogeneity. As prior work has shown that age cohorts respond differently to
temperature, and because we expect considerable demographic transitions in the future, we test for
heterogeneity across age groups using Equation 10. Specifically, we allow for separate mortality-
temperature response functions ga (Tit ) for each of three age categories. Figure 4 displays the mortality-
temperature responses for each of our three age categories (<5, 5-64, >64) estimated from Equation
10 and using the pooled 41-country sample. These curves correspond with our primary specification
(equivalent to column (2) in Table D.1).38 This reveals substantial heterogeneity across age groups
 38 Regression   results for all specifications shown in Table 2 are also shown for the age-specific model in Table D.1.


                                                            23
Table 2: Temperature-mortality response function estimated using pooled subnational
data across 40 countries. This table shows coefficient estimates (standard errors) for a temperature-mortality
response function estimated using pooled subnational data across 40 countries and 38% of the global population. Re-
gression estimates are from a fourth-order polynomial in daily average temperature and are estimated using GMFD
temperature data with a sample that was winsorized at the top 1% level. Point estimates indicate the effect of a single
day at each daily average temperature value shown, relative to a day with an average temperature of 20 C (68 F).



                                                         All-age mortality rate (per 100,000)
                                                   (1)           (2)      (3)        (4)        (5)

                 35 C                           0.410***     0.446***   0.210*     0.675**   0.470***
                                                 (0.128)      (0.168)   (0.118)    (0.274)    (0.163)
                 30 C                           0.305***     0.307***   0.130**   0.338***   0.323***
                                                 (0.068)      (0.080)   (0.065)    (0.106)    (0.075)
                 25 C                           0.147***     0.141***    0.054    0.119***   0.150***
                                                 (0.037)      (0.035)   (0.039)    (0.031)    (0.034)
                 20 C                               ­            ­         ­          ­          ­
                                                    ­            ­         ­          ­          ­
                 0 C                              0.121        0.114     0.108    0.144**      0.070
                                                 (0.125)      (0.128)   (0.100)    (0.067)    (0.122)
                 -5 C                            0.307**      0.275*    0.193*    0.244**      0.212
                                                 (0.152)      (0.158)   (0.105)    (0.096)    (0.148)

                 Adj R-squared                    0.983      0.989      0.991      0.999       0.989
                 N                               820697     820237     820237     820237      820237
                 Age × ADM2 FE                     Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
                 Country × Year FE                 Yes
                 AGE × Country × Year FE                      Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
                 Age × ADM1 linear trend                                 Yes
                 Precision weighting (FGLS)                                         Yes
                 13-month exposure                                                              Yes
                 Standard errors clustered at the ADM1 (e.g., state) level.
                 Regressions in columns (1)-(3), and (5) are population-weighted.
                 Column (4) weights use a precision-weighting approach (see text).
                 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


within our multi-country sample. In our preferred specification, people over the age of 64 experience
approximately 4.7 extra deaths per 100,000 for a day at 35 C compared to a day at 20 C, a substantially
larger effect than that for younger cohorts, which exhibit little response. This age group is also more
severely affected by cold days; estimates suggest that people over the age of 64 experience 3.4 deaths
per 100,000 for a day at -5 C compared to a day at 20 C, while there is a relatively weak mortality
response to these cold days for other age categories. Overall, these results demonstrate that the elderly
are disproportionately harmed by additional hot days and disproportionately benefit from reductions
in cold days, consistent with prior evidence from the U.S. (Desch^enes and Moretti, 2009; Heutel, Miller,
and Molitor, 2017). It is important to note, however, that the oldest age group (over 64 years) accounts
for just 12% of the population in our historical sample, causing it to differ from the average treatment
effect in Table 2.
    Alternative specifications. In both Tables 2 and D.1, columns (4) and (5) provide results from
alternative specifications. In column (4), we address the fact that some of our data are drawn from
countries which may have less capacity for data collection than others in the sample. Because our
mortality data is collected by institutions in different countries, it is possible that some sources are


                                                            24
                       5
                       4
                Deaths per 100,000                                                       age >64
                             3
                                                                                         age 5-64
                     2




                                                                                         age <5
                       1




                                                                                         all-age 95%
                                                                                         confidence interval
                       0




                                     -15   -5   5               15           25   35
                                                    Daily Temperature (ºC)


Figure 4: Mortality-temperature response function with demographic heterogeneity.
Mortality-temperature response functions are estimated for populations <5 years of age (green), be-
tween 5 and 64 years of age (blue), and >64 years of age (red). Regression estimates shown are from
a fourth-order polynomial in daily average temperature and are estimated using GMFD weather data
with a sample that was winsorized at the 1% level. All response functions are estimated jointly in a
stacked regression model that is fully saturated with age-specific fixed effects (Equation 10).


systematically less precise. To account for this, we re-estimate our model using Feasible Generalized
Least Squares (FGLS) under the assumption of constant variance within each ADM1 unit.39 In column
(5), we address the possibility that temperatures can exhibit lagged effects on health and mortality
(e.g., Desch^enes and Moretti, 2009; Barreca et al., 2016; Guo et al., 2014). Lagged effects within and
across months in the same calendar year are accounted for in the net annual mortality totals used in
all specifications. However, it is possible that temperature exposure in December of each year affects
mortality in January of the following year. To account for this, in column (5) we define a 13-month
exposure window to additionally account for temperatures previous December.40 Tables 2 and D.1
show that the results for both of these alternative specifications are similar in sign and magnitude to
those from column (2).


5.2     Subnational heterogeneity in the mortality-temperature response
It is likely that Equation 10 obscures heterogeneity in the mortality-temperature response function;
this subsection evaluates whether mortality sensitivity to temperature varies with average climate and
average income through estimation of Equation 11. Tabular results are reported in Table D.3 for each
of three age groups. As these terms are difficult to interpret, we visualize this heterogeneity by dividing
  39 To do this, we estimate the model in Equation 10 using population weights and our preferred specification (column

(2)). Using the residuals from this regression, we calculate an ADM1-level weight that is equal to the average value of the
squared residuals, where averages are taken across all ADM2-age-year level observations that fall within a given ADM1.
We then inverse-weight the regression in a second stage, using this weight. All ADM2-age-year observations within a
given ADM1 are assigned the same weight in the second stage, where ADM1 locations with lower residual variance are
given higher weight. For some ADM2s, there are insufficient observations to identify age-specific variances; to ensure
stability, we dropped the ADM2s with less than 5 observations per age group. This leads us to drop 246 (of >800,000)
observations in this specification.
  40 The specification in column (5) defines the 13-month exposure window such that for a given year t, exposure is

calculated as January to December temperatures in year t and December temperature in year t - 1.



                                                                  25
the sample into terciles of income and climate (i.e., the two interaction terms), creating nine discrete
bins that partition the log(GDP pc) × T M EAN space. We plot predicted response functions at the
mean value of climate and income within each of these nine bins, using the coefficients in Table D.3.
This results in a set of predicted response functions that vary across the joint distribution of income
and average temperature within our sample data. The resulting response functions are shown in Figure
5 for the >64 age category (other age groups are shown in Appendix D.4), where average incomes are
increasing across bins vertically and average temperatures are increasing across bins horizontally.
    The Figure 5 results are broadly consistent with the predictions from the theoretical framework in
Section 2. Recall that we expect increased frequency of exposure to higher temperatures to incentivize
investment in adaptive behaviors or technologies, as the marginal mortality benefit of adaptation is
higher in hotter locations. This would lead to lower temperature sensitivities to heat in places which
are warmer. A striking visual finding is that within each income tercile, the effect of hot days (e.g., days
>35 C) declines as one moves from left (cold climates) to right (hot climates). Similarly, a loosening
of the budget constraint, as proxied by increasing GDP per capita, should enable individuals to invest
further in adaptation. Indeed, Figure 5 reveals that moving from the bottom (low income) to top (high
income) within a climate tercile causes a substantial flattening of the response function, especially at
high temperatures.
    Two statistics help to summarize the findings from Figure 5. First, in the >64 age category across
all income values, moving from the coldest to the hottest tercile saves on average 7.9 (p-value=0.06)
deaths per 100,000 at 35 C. Second, moving from the poorest to the richest tercile across all climate
values in the sample saves approximately 5.0 (p-value=0.1) deaths per 100,000 at 35 C for the > 64
age category.


5.3    Spatial extrapolation of temperature sensitivity
Figure 6 reports on our extrapolation of mortality-temperature response functions to the entire globe.
In panel A, these predicted mortality-temperature responses are plotted for each impact region for
2015 values of income and climate for the oldest age category and for the impact regions that fall
within the countries in our mortality dataset ("in-sample"). Despite a shared overall shape, panel
A reveals substantial heterogeneity across regions in this temperature response. Panel B shows an
analogous figure for the youngest age category. Geographic heterogeneity within our sample is shown
for hot days in the maps in panels C and D, where colors indicate the marginal effect of a day at 35 C
day, relative to a day at a location-specific minimum mortality temperature. Grey areas are locations
where mortality data are unavailable.
    Figure 6E­H show analogous plots, but now extrapolated to the entire globe. We can fill in the
estimated mortality effect of a 35 C day for regions without mortality data by using location-specific
information on income and climate during 2015. The predicted responses at the global scale imply that
a 35 C day increases the average mortality rate across the globe for the oldest age category by 10.1
deaths per 100,000 relative to a location-specific minimum mortality temperature.41 It is important
to note that the effect in locations without mortality data is 11.7 deaths per 100,000, versus 7.8 within
  41 This average impact of a 35 C is derived by taking the unweighted average level of the mortality-temperature

response function evaluated at 35 across each of 24,378 impact regions globally.



                                                       26
                                                % population in 2010: 1.5             % population in 2010: 6.5             % population in 2010: 5.5




                                                                                                                                                                  60
                                          60
                                                % population in 2100: 1               % population in 2100: 4.5             % population in 2100: 23




                                                                                                                                                                        Deaths per 100k
                        Deaths per 100k




                                                                                                                                                                  40
                                          40
               High




                                                                                                                                                                  20
                                          20
             income




                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                  -20
                                          -20
                                                % population in 2010: 3               % population in 2010: 2.5             % population in 2010: 9




                                                                                                                                                                  60
                                          60
                                                % population in 2100:0                % population in 2100: 0               % population in 2100: 55.5




                                                                                                                                                                        Deaths per 100k
                        Deaths per 100k




                                                                                                                                                                  40
                                          40
             Middle




                                                                                                                                                                  20
                                          20
             income




                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                  -20
                                          -20




                                                % population in 2010: 3               % population in 2010: 5               % population in 2010: 63.5




                                                                                                                                                                  60
                                          60




                                                % population in 2100: 0               % population in 2100: 0.5             % population in 2100: 16




                                                                                                                                                                        Deaths per 100k
                        Deaths per 100k




                                                                                                                                                                  40
                                          40




               Low




                                                                                                                                                                  20
                                          20




             income




                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                  -20
                                          -20




                                                -5      5       15          25   35   -5      5       15          25   35   -5      5       15          25   35
                                                       Temperature (°C)                      Temperature (°C)                      Temperature (°C)

                                                                Cold                              Temperate                                  Hot

Figure 5: Heterogeneity in the mortality-temperature relationship (age >64 mortality
rate). Each panel represents a predicted mortality-temperature response function for the >64 age group for a subset
of the income-average temperature covariate space within our data sample. Response functions in the lower left apply
to the low-income, cold regions of our sample, while those in the upper right apply to the high-income, hot regions of
our sample. Regression estimates are from a fourth-order polynomial in daily average temperature and are estimated
using GMFD weather data with a sample that was winsorized at the 1% level on the top end of the distribution only.
All response functions are estimated jointly in a stacked regression model that is fully saturated with age-specific fixed
effects, and where each temperature variable is interacted with each covariate. Values in the top left-hand corner of
each panel show the percentage of the global population that reside within each tercile of average income and average
temperature in 2010 (black text) and as projected in 2100 (red text, SSP3).



the sample of countries for which mortality data are available, largely driven by the fact that our
sample represents wealthier populations where temperature responses are more muted. Overall, there
is substantial heterogeneity across the planet and it is evident that the effects of temperature on human
well-being are quite different in places where we are and are not able to obtain subnational mortality
data.


5.4     Projection of future climate change impacts and adaptation
The previous subsection demonstrated that the model of heterogeneity outlined in Equation 11 allows
us to extrapolate mortality-temperature relationships to regions of the world without mortality data
today. However, to calculate the full global mortality risks of climate change, it is also necessary to
allow these response functions to change through time to capture the benefits of adaptation and the
effects of income growth. We use our model of heterogeneity and downscaled projections of income
and climate to predict impact region-level response functions for each age group and year, as described
in Section 4.4. Uncertainty in these estimated response functions is accounted for through Monte
Carlo simulation, as described in Section 4.6. Throughout this subsection, we show results relying on
income and population projections from the socioeconomic scenario SSP3; see Appendix F for results
using SSP2 and SSP4. The methodology we develop to estimate future impacts of climate change


                                                                                             27
Figure 6: Using income and climate to predict current response functions globally. In
panels A, B, E and F, grey lines are predicted response functions for impact regions, each representing a population
of 276,000 on average. Solid black lines are the unweighted average of the grey lines, where the opacity indicates the
density of realized temperatures (Hsiang, 2013). Panels C, D, G and H show each impact region's mortality sensitivity
to a day at 35 C, relative to a location-specific minimum mortality temperature. The top row shows all impact regions
in the sample of locations with historical mortality data (included in main regression tables), and the bottom row shows
extrapolation to all impact regions globally. Column titles indicate corresponding age categories. Predictions shown are
averages over the period 2001-2015.



on mortality, as well as a partial mortality-only SCC, can be applied to any available socioeconomic
scenario. We show results relying on SSP3 throughout the main text because its historic global growth
rates in GDP per capita and population match observed global growth rates over the 2000-2018 period
much more closely than either SSP2 or SSP4 (see Table B.3 in Appendix B.3.2).
    Projected adaptation benefits. Figure 7 provides an initial look into changes in the mortality-
temperature relationship over time, which is a key ingredient for projections of future damages and
adaptation. In particular, we plot the spatial distribution of the change in the mortality-temperature
relationship evaluated at 35 C between 2015 and 2050 (panel A) and 2015 and 2100 (panel B) for the
>64 age category.42 The maps reveal that in most regions of the world, there is a clear downward
trend in the sensitivity of mortality rates to high temperatures, as locations get both richer and hotter
as the century unfolds. For the >64 age group, the average global increase in the mortality rate on a
35 C day (relative to a day at location-specific minimum mortality temperatures) declines by roughly
75% between 2015 and 2100, going from 10.1 per 100,000 to just 2.4 per 100,000 in 2100. Increasing
incomes account for 77% of the decline in marginal damages for the >64 age category with adaptation
to climate explaining the remainder; income gains account for 89% and 82% of the decline for the <5
and 5-64 categories, respectively.43
    Defining four measures of expected climate change impacts. We now use our estimates
of adaptation benefits, adaptation costs, and changes in climate exposure to develop measures of the
  42 Specifically, these values are g
                                    ^a (T |T M EANr,2050 , log(GDP pc)r,2050 ) - g
                                                                                 ^a (T |T M EANr,2015 , log(GDP pc)r,2015 ) and
^a (T |T M EANr,2100 , log(GDP pc)r,2100 ) - g
g                                               ^a (T |T M EANr,2015 , log(GDP pc)r,2015 ), all evaluated at daily temperature
T = 35 C for age group a >64.
  43 These values apply to socioeconomic scenario SSP3.




                                                              28
Figure 7: Spatial and temporal heterogeneity in temperature sensitivity. Panels A and B
indicate the change in mortality sensitivity to hot days (35 C) for the oldest age category (>64) between 2015 and 2050
(A), and between 2015 and 2100 (B). Darker colors signify larger predicted adaptation to heat. All values shown refer
to the RCP8.5 emissions scenario and the SSP3 socioeconomic scenario.



expected costs of climate change induced mortality risk. In so doing, we separate the role of income
growth from that of adaptation to warming. While the central welfare metric of concern is the full
mortality-related costs of climate change, i.e., the sum of the increase in deaths and adaptation costs
(Equation 3), we also derive three other measures of climate change impacts that elucidate the roles of
adaptation and income growth in determining the full mortality-related costs. The empirical estimation
of each of these measures is first reported in units of deaths per 100,000, although it is straightforward
to monetize these measures using estimates of the value of a statistical life (VSL), and we do so at the
end of this section.
    Note that in all expressions of climate change impacts below, the first term represents the predicted
mortality rate under a future warming climate. The second term represents a counterfactual predicted
mortality rate that would be realized under current temperatures, but in a population that benefits
from rising incomes over the coming century. These counterfactuals thus include the prediction, for
example, that air conditioning will become much more prevalent in a country like India as the economy
grows, regardless of whether climate change unfolds or not. One exception is expression (i), where
the counterfactual is identical to that under current temperatures and incomes, as in this case the
climate change projection ignores income growth and adaptation entirely. By subtracting off these
counterfactuals, our predicted changes in mortality rates isolate the additional cost of climate change
on a population experiencing economic growth.
    The first measure is the mortality effects of climate change with neither adaptation nor income
growth, which provides an estimate of the increases in mortality rates when each impact region's
response function in each year t is a function of their 2015 level of income and average climate. In
other words, mortality sensitivity to temperature is assumed not to change with future income or
temperature. This is a benchmark model often employed in previous work. Specifically, the expected
climate induced mortality risk that we estimate for an impact region and age group in a future year t
under this measure are (omitting subscripts for impact regions and age groups for clarity):44
  44 Note   that in all estimates of climate change impacts in (i)­(iv), population growth is accounted for as an exogenous



                                                             29
  (i) Mortality effects of climate change with neither adaptation nor income growth :

               g
               ^(Tt | T M EAN2015 , log(GDP pc)2015 ) - g
                                                        ^(T2015 | T M EAN2015 , log(GDP pc)2015 )
                     mortality risk with climate change                        current mortality risk
                         and without adaptation


   The second measure is the mortality effects of climate change with benefits of income growth,
which allows response functions to change with future incomes. This measure captures the change in
mortality rates that would be expected from climate change if populations became richer, but they
did not respond optimally to warming by adapting above and beyond how they would otherwise cope
with their historical climate. This measure is defined as:

 (ii) Mortality effects of climate change with benefits of income growth :

                  g
                  ^(Tt | T M EAN2015 , log(GDP pc)t ) - g
                                                        ^(T2015 | T M EAN2015 , log(GDP pc)t )
                 mortality risk with benefits of income growth     mortality risk with benefits of income growth,
                              and climate change                               without climate change


   The third measure is the mortality effects of climate change with benefits of income growth and
adaptation, and in this case populations adjust to experienced temperatures in the warming scenario.
This metric is an estimate of the observable deaths that would be expected under a warming climate,
accounting for the benefits of optimal adaptation and income growth:

 (iii) Mortality effects of climate change with benefits of income growth and adaptation :

                    g
                    ^(Tt | T M EANt , log(GDP pc)t )             -g
                                                                  ^(T2015 | T M EAN2015 , log(GDP pc)t )
                 mortality risk with benefits of income growth     mortality risk with benefits of income growth,
                      and adaptation to climate change                        without climate change


    The final measure is the most complete, as it captures both the benefits and costs of adaptation.
Recall that adaptation costs cannot be observed directly, but that we construct estimates using the
revealed preference methodology detailed in Section 2. We call this measure the full mortality risk of
climate change, and it captures the opportunity costs of investing in the adaptation benefits described
by (iii):

 (iv) Full mortality risk of climate change (including adaptation costs, recall Equation 3):

                   g
                   ^(Tt | T M EANt , log(GDP pc)t ) - g
                                                      ^(T2015 | T M EAN2015 , log(GDP pc)t )
                    mortality effects of climate change with benefits of income growth and adaptation (iii)
                                       1
                                 +        A(T M EANt , GDP pct ) - A(T M EAN2015 , GDP pct )
                                     V SL
                                                            estimated adaptation costs


   In all of these measures, year t = 2015 is treated as the baseline year, meaning that climate change
impacts are defined to be zero in this year. These four measures are all reported below in units of
projection that does not depend on the climate.



                                                           30
Figure 8: The mortality risk of future climate change. The map indicates the full mortality risk of
climate change, measured in units of deaths per 100,000 population, in the year 2100. Estimates come from a model
accounting for both the costs and the benefits of adaptation, and the map shows the climate model weighted mean
estimate across Monte Carlo simulations conducted on 33 climate models; density plots for select regions indicate the
full distribution of estimated impacts across all Monte Carlo simulations. In each density plot, solid white lines indicate
the mean estimate shown on the map, while shading indicates one, two, and three standard deviations from the mean.
All values shown refer to the RCP8.5 emissions scenario and the SSP3 socioeconomic scenario. See Figure F.4 for a
comparison of impacts to RCP4.5 and SSP3



human lives. Using human lives serves as a natural numeraire in this revealed preference framework
since we estimate adaptation costs based on lives that could be saved via adaptation, but are not.
We refer to these as "death equivalents", i.e., the number of avoided deaths equal in value to the
adaptation costs incurred. Note that the use of the these units is why adaptation costs in expression
                         1
(iv) are multiplied by V SL , as the definition of adaptation costs A(·) in Equation 6 is given in dollars.
    The full mortality risk of climate change for 24,378 global regions. Figure 8 shows
the spatial distribution of the full mortality risk of climate change (expression (iv)) in 2100 under
the emissions scenario RCP8.5, expressed in death-equivalents per 100,000. All other measures of
climate change impacts (expressions (i)­(iii)) are mapped in Appendix Figure F.1. To construct these
estimates, we generate impact-region specific predictions of mortality damages from climate change for
all years between 2015 and 2100 (equal to expression (iii)), separately for each age group. Following
the approach outlined in Section 4.3, we simultaneously compute associated measures of adaptation
costs for each location and age at each point in time, and add them to expression (iii). The map
displays the spatial distribution of the climate-induced death equivalent (expression (iv)), depicting
the mean estimate across our ensemble of Monte Carlo simulations, accounting for both climate and
statistical uncertainty and pooling across all age groups.45 The density plots for select cities show the
full distribution of impacts across all Monte Carlo simulations, with the white line equal to the mean
estimate displayed on the map.
    Figure 8 makes clear that the costs of climate change induced mortality risks are distributed
unevenly around the world. Despite the gains from adaptation shown in Figure 7, there are large
  45 When   calculating mean values across estimates generated for each of the 33 climate models that form our ensemble,
we use model-specific weights. These weights are constructed as described in Appendix B.2.3 in order to accurately
reflect the full probability distribution of temperature responses to changes in greenhouse gas concentrations.



                                                            31
                                          A       Mortality e ects of climate change                      B          Full mortality risk of climate change
                                          200     without bene ts of income growth or adaptation                     accounting for statistical and climate model uncertainty
Change in deaths per 100,000 population


                                                  Mortality e ects of climate change
                                                  with bene ts of income growth                                               10th - 90th percentile range
                                          150     Mortality e ects of climate change                                          25th - 75th percentile range
                                                                                                                              Mean including adaptation                                   RCP 8.5
                                                  with bene ts of income growth and adaptation
                                                                                                                              costs and bene ts
                                                  Full mortality risk of climate change
                                          100


                                          50                                                                                                                                                  RCP 4.5


                                           0



                                           2000         2025                 2050           2075   2100       2000                   2025                     2050              2075   2100
                                                                             Year                                                                            Year


Figure 9: Time series of projected mortality risk of climate change. All lines show predicted
mortality effects of climate change across all age categories and are represented by a mean estimate across a set of Monte
Carlo simulations accounting for both climate model and statistical uncertainty. In panel A, each colored line represents
a partial mortality effect, while the black line shows the full mortality risk due to climate change, accounting for both
adaptation costs and benefits. Orange (expression (i)): mortality effects without adaptation. Yellow (expression (ii)):
mortality effects with benefits of income growth. Green (expression (iii)): mortality effects with benefits of income growth
and adaptation. Black (expression (iv)): full mortality risk calculated as the sum of mortality effects with adaptation and
income growth benefits plus estimates of costs incurred to achieve adaptation, measured in units of death equivalents.
Panel B shows the 10th -90th percentile range of the Monte Carlo simulations for the full mortality risk of climate change
(black line in panel A), as well as the mean and interquartile range. The boxplots show the distribution of full mortality
risk impacts in 2100 under both RCPs. All line estimates shown refer to the RCP8.5 emissions scenario and all line and
boxplot estimates refer to the SSP3 socioeconomic scenario. Figure F.5 shows the equivalent for SSP3 and RCP4.5.



increases in mortality risk in the global south. For example, in Accra, Ghana, climate change is
predicted to cause damages equivalent to approximately 160 additional deaths per 100,000 annually
under RCP8.5 in 2100. In contrast, there are gains in many impact regions in the global north,
including in Oslo, Norway, where we predict that the equivalent of approximately 230 lives per 100,000
are saved annually. These changes are equal to an 18% increase in Accra's annual mortality rate and
a 28% decline in Oslo's.
   Aggregate global mortality consequences of climate change. Figure 9 plots predictions of
global increases in the mortality rate (deaths per 100,000, including death equivalents for adaptation
costs) for all four measures of climate change impacts, under emissions scenario RCP8.5. The measures
are calculated for each of the 24,378 impact regions and then aggregated to the global level. In panel
A, each line shows a mean estimate for the corresponding climate change impact measure and year.
Averages are taken across the full set of Monte Carlo simulation results from all 33 climate models
and all draws from the empirical distribution of estimated regression parameters, as described in
Section 4.6. In panel B, the 25th -75th and 10th -90th percentile ranges of the Monte Carlo simulation
distribution are shown for the full mortality risk of climate change (expression (iv)); the black line
represents the same average value in both panels. Boxplots to the right summarize the distribution of
mortality impacts for both RCP8.5 and the moderate emissions scenario of RCP4.5, and Figure F.5
replicates the entire figure for RCP4.5.
    Figure 9A illustrates that the mortality cost of climate change would be 221 deaths per 100,000 by
2100, on average across simulation runs (orange line), if the beneficial impacts of adaptation and income
are shut down. This is an enormously large estimate; if it were correct, the mortality costs of climate
change would be roughly equivalent in magnitude to all global deaths from cardiovascular disease


                                                                                                          32
today (WHO, 2018). However, we estimate that future income growth and adaptation to climate
substantially reduce these impacts. Higher incomes lower the mortality effect of climate change to
an average of 104 deaths per 100,000 in 2100 (yellow line); climate adaptation reduces this further to
73 deaths per 100,000 (green line). Although substantially lower than the no adaptation projection,
these smaller counts of direct mortality remain economically meaningful--for comparison, the 2017
mortality rate from automobile accidents in the United States was 11.4 per 100,000.
    Figure 9A also demonstrates that climate adaptation is projected to be costly. Our estimates of
climate adaptation costs are valued at 12 death-equivalents per 100,000 in 2100. The net result is that
the full mortality risk due to climate change (i.e., expression (iv)) is projected to equal to 85 deaths
per 100,000 by the end of the century under RCP8.5. Had we accounted for the benefits of adaptation
but failed to account for their costs, we would have underestimated the total aggregate impact of these
changes, particularly in regions of the world where adaptation costs compose a substantial share of
total damages.46 Nonetheless, our estimate for the global average benefits of adaptation (31 deaths per
100,000) outweighs the costs of these adjustments (12 death-equivalents per 100,000), demonstrating
that the adaptation surplus discussed in Section 2 and detailed in Appendix A.2 is substantial.
    The values in Figure 9A are mean values aggregated across results from 33 high-resolution climate
models and all Monte Carlo simulation runs. However, the full distribution of our estimated damages
across climate models (panel B of Figure 9) is right-skewed with a tail of potential mortality risk far
higher than our central estimate. As evidence of this, the median value of the full mortality risk of
climate change under RCP8.5 at end of century is 56 deaths per 100,000, as compared to a mean value
of 85 and a 10th to 90th percentile range of [-21, 202].
    Figure 9B and Appendix Figure F.3 show the expected implications of emissions mitigation. The
average estimate of the full mortality risk of climate change of 85 deaths per 100,000 by the end of
the century under RCP8.5 falls to 14 under the emissions stabilization scenario of RCP4.5 (where
emissions decline after 2050). For RCP4.5, the median end-of-century estimate is 9, and the 10th
to 90th percentile range is [-30, 65]. As a point of comparison to the prior literature, we compare
these results to the FUND model, which is unique among the IAMs for calculating separate mortality
impacts as a component of its SCC calculation. Although it is difficult to make a direct comparison
due to differences in scenarios and lack of adaptation costs in the FUND estimates, the closest analog
is to compare our estimates including adaptation benefits but not adaptation costs, a change of 73
deaths per 100,000 by 2100, to FUND's change of -2 deaths per 100,000 in the same year (Tol, 1997).47
    A limit of our empirical approach is that we must sometimes extrapolate response functions to
temperatures outside of those historically observed within our data. To address the concern that out-of-
sample behavior is disproportionately influencing our results, we repeat the projections of mortality risk
changes with two extra sets of restrictions imposed upon our empirically-estimated response functions.
These two restrictions, described in Appendix F.3, involve either forcing the response function to be flat
for all temperatures outside the observed range, or setting the marginal effect to be linearly increasing
in the out-of-sample regions with a slope equal to the slope at the edge of the observed range. Figure
  46 We previously noted considerable heterogeneity across age-groups in our results. We will take this into account in

our approach to valuing mortality damages monetarily in subsequent sections, and we display the underlying age group
heterogeneity of these projections in Appendix F.
  47 This value was calculated by running the FUND model and extracting quantities from each sector of the model

separately.



                                                          33
F.9 reveals that these two restrictions on out-of-sample behavior have negligible effects on our overall
impacts. The value of the mortality impact of climate change including benefits of income growth and
adaptation is approximately 1 death per 100,000 smaller by 2100 under RCP 8.5 in the case of the flat
out-of-sample restriction.
    Unequal distribution of mortality risk from climate change. Whether the full mortality risk
caused by climate change is realized through actual deaths (first term in expression (iv)), as opposed to
costly compensatory investments (second term in expression (iv)), differs substantially across the globe.
While some locations suffer large increases in mortality rates, others avoid excess mortality through
expensive adaptation. Figures 10A-C demonstrate that present day income is strongly correlated with
the composition of future damages. In panel A, the negative correlation indicates that today's poor
locations tend to suffer large increases in mortality rates by end of century, while mortality rates tend
to decline due to climate change in today's rich locations. However, there is large variance across
impact regions within each income decile, implying that some poor regions are projected to experience
mortality rate declines, and some wealthy regions mortality rate increases. In panel B, the positive
correlation indicates that wealthier locations are predicted to pay for future adaptive investments,
while such costs are predicted to be much smaller in poor parts of the globe. Panel C shows that
the full mortality risk of climate change, the sum of both deaths and adaptation costs measured in
death-equivalents, is still borne disproportionately by regions that are poor today. On average, we
find that in the poorest decile of today's income distribution, just 9% of the total burden of climate
change induced mortality risk is borne as adaptation costs. In contrast, in the richest decile, on average
approximately 3 lives are saved per 100,000 in 2100 due to climate change, while adaptation costs are
three times larger than they are in today's poorest regions. It is also apparent that poorer regions face
higher uncertainty in the magnitude of their projected impacts (Figure F.6). Similar figures in panels
D­F demonstrate that the hottest locations today suffer the largest increase in death rates, while the
coldest pay the highest adaptation costs. The impacts in the top decile of the current long-run climate
distribution are noteworthy and raise questions about the habitability of these locations at the end of
the century.
    Climate change projection scenarios. The results in this section illustrate a single benchmark
emissions and socioeconomic scenario (RCP8.5, SSP3). In Appendix F we report on the sensitivity of
the results to alternative choices about the economic and population scenario, the emissions scenario,
and assumptions regarding the rate of adaptation. These exercises underscore that the projected
impacts of climate change over the remainder of the 21st century will depend greatly on difficult-
to-predict factors such as policy, technology, and demographics. However, we note that under both
emissions scenarios RCP8.5 and RPC4.5, under all SSP scenarios, and under an alternative projection
in which the rate of adaptation is deterministically slowed, the average estimate of the full mortality
risk due to climate change is positive (both RCPs) and steadily increasing (RCP8.5) throughout the
21st century.
    Monetized value of the full mortality risk of climate change To monetize the full mortality
risk of climate change, we use the value of a statistical life (VSL) to convert changes in mortality
rates into dollars. Our primary approach relies on the U.S. EPA's VSL estimate of $10.95 million




                                                   34
                                                                       Deaths                                            Adaptation costs                               Full mortality risk
                                                A                                                            B                                              C           of climate change


                                          400
      Impact of climate change in 2100
           (deaths per 100,000)




                                          200




                                           0




                                         -200 Mogadishu,                   Delhi,
                                                    Somalia                India            Chicago,
                                                                                             USA


                                                      1       2   3    4     5      6   7   8   9      10        1   2   3    4    5   6   7   8   9   10       1   2   3    4   5   6   7   8   9    10
                                                                      2015 Income decile                                     2015 Income decile                             2015 Income decile
                                               D                                                             E                                              F


                                         400
      Impact of climate change in 2100
           (deaths per 100,000)




                                         200




                                           0




                                                                         ~ Paulo,
                                                                        Sao                         Accra,
                                         -200
                                                           Oslo,          Brazil                    Ghana
                                                          Norway


                                                      1       2   3    4     5      6   7   8   9      10        1   2   3    4    5   6   7   8   9   10       1   2   3    4   5   6   7   8   9    10
                                                              2015 Average temperature decile                        2015 Average temperature decile                2015 Average temperature decile


Figure 10: Climate change impacts and adaptation costs are correlated with present-day
income and climate. Panels A and D show the change in annual mortality rates due to climate change in 2100
(RCP8.5, SSP3), accounting for the benefits of adaptation and income growth, against deciles of 2015 per capita income
(A) and average annual temperature (D). Panels B and E show the annual adaptation costs incurred due to climate
change in 2100, measured in death equivalents, from the same regions. Panels C and F show the full mortality risk due
to climate change, which is the sum of deaths and adaptation costs measured in death equivalents. The income and
average temperature deciles are calculated across 24,378 global impact regions and are population weighted using 2015
population values. All box plots show statistics of the distribution of estimated mean impacts across impact regions
within a decile, where means are taken for each impact region across Monte Carlo simulations that account both for
econometric and climate model uncertainty. Solid vertical lines in each box plot extend to the 5th and 95th percentiles
of this distribution, boxes indicate the interquartile range, white horizontal lines indicate the median, and white circles
indicate the mean.



(2019 USD).48 We transform the VSL into a value per life-year lost using a method described in
Appendix H.1, which allows us to compute the total value of expected life-years lost due to climate
change, accounting for the different mortality- temperature relationships among the three age groups
documented above. We allow the VSL to vary with income, as the level of consumption affects the
relative marginal utilities of a small increment of consumption and a small reduction in the probability
of death. Consistent with existing literature (e.g., Viscusi, 2015), in our primary estimate we use an
income elasticity of unity to adjust the U.S. estimates of the VSL to different income levels across the
  48 This VSL is from the 2012 U.S. EPA Regulatory Impact Analysis (RIA) for the Clean Power Plan Final Rule, which

provides a 2020 income-adjusted VSL in 2011 USD, which we convert to 2019 USD. This VSL is also consistent with
income- and inflation-adjusted versions of the VSL used in the U.S. EPA RIAs for the National Ambient Air Quality
Standards (NAAQS) for Particulate Matter (2012) and the Repeal of the Clean Power Plan (2019), among many other
RIAs.




                                                                                                                                  35
world and over time.49 When computing the mortality partial SCC in Section 6, we provide multiple
alternative valuation scenarios in addition to this benchmark case.
    Using the SSP3 socioeconomic scenario, we find that under RCP8.5, our benchmark monetized
value of the full mortality risk of climate change in 2100 amounts to 3.2% of global GDP on average,
with an interquartile range of [-5.4%, 9.1%]. In contrast, under RCP4.5, this value falls to just 0.6%
[-3.9%, 4.6%] of global GDP in 2100. While a direct comparison to leading IAMs is made difficult
by the use of distinct socioeconomic scenarios and climate models, among many other factors, these
mortality-related damages amount to 49-135% of the damages reported for all sectors of the economy
in FUND, PAGE, and DICE, when the damage functions from each model are evaluated at the mean
end-of-century warming observed in our multi-model ensemble under RCP8.5. Under RCP4.5, our
mortality-related damages amount to 32-61% of the damages from DICE and PAGE, while damages
from FUND are negative at RCP4.5 levels of warming.50 It is apparent that this paper's results indicate
that the mortality risks from climate change are much greater than had previously been understood.
Some plausible scenarios suggest that, by themselves, they are larger than previous understanding of
climate change's full impacts in 2100. The uncertainty around these estimates is also meaningful and
while we leave explicit pricing of this uncertainty to future work, accounting for it would only increase
the estimated welfare loss.


6     Results II: Partial mortality social cost of carbon
Section 5.3 provided results for the first key goal of this analysis: empirical estimates of the full
mortality risk of climate change at high resolution across the globe, for individual years and two
emissions scenarios. Here, we take on the second goal of the analysis: to monetize the full mortality-
related social cost generated by the emission of a marginal ton of CO2 (defined in Equation 9). This
calculation represents the component of the total SCC that is mediated through excess mortality, but
it leaves out adverse impacts in other sectors of the economy, such as reduced labor productivity or
changing food prices. Hence, it is a mortality partial SCC.
    One of two key building blocks of this exercise is an empirically-derived "damage function" (Nord-
haus, 1992; Hsiang et al., 2017), which describes economic losses to an economy as a function of the
change in the global climate. It is necessary to develop time-varying damage functions in our context,
because the mortality sensitivity of temperature and total monetized impacts of climate change evolve
over time due to changes in per capita income and the underlying population. Thus, the damages
from a marginal change in emissions will vary depending on the year in which they are evaluated.
Importantly, these damage functions are fully differentiable, so when they are combined with climate
model output determining the change in warming arising from any emissions trajectory, it is possible
to determine the losses from a marginal increase in emissions. The second key building block is a
   49 The EPA considers a range of income elasticity values for the VSL, from 0.1 to 1.7 (U.S. Environmental Protection

Agency, 2016b), although their central recommendations are 0.7 and 1.1 (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2016).
A review by Viscusi (2015) estimates an income-elasticity of the VSL of 1.1.
   50 To conduct this comparison, we use the damage functions reported for each IAM in the Interagency Working Group

on Social Cost of Carbon (2010), which are indexed against warming relative to the pre-industrial climate. We evaluate
each damage function at the mean end-of-century warming (4 C for RCP8.5 and 1.8 C for RCP4.5) across the SMME
climate model ensemble used in our analysis, after adjusting warming to align pre-industrial temperature anomalies from
the IAMs with the anomalies relative to 2001-2010 from our analysis (Lenssen et al., 2019).



                                                          36
climate model that is capable of simulating climate trajectories far into the future, and can capture
the global climate response of a marginal emission today. Combined, these two elements characterize
a trajectory of global impacts, which can then be valued and discounted to inform decisions today.
    In this section, we transform monetized projections of deaths due to climate change from Section
5.3 into damage functions for excess mortality risk. We then use these time-varying empirical damage
functions to compute marginal costs from a marginal CO2 emission, which is the mortality partial
SCC.


6.1     Constructing damage functions for excess mortality risk
For this paper, damage functions describe the total monetized losses due to changes in mortality risk,
inclusive of adaptation benefits and costs, as a function of the change in global mean surface temperature
(GMST), our empirical estimate of the change in the global climate.51 Due to differences in the
character of climate projections pre- and post-2100, and lack of available socioeconomic projections
after 2100, this subsection details some important differences in the approach for calculation of damage
functions before and after 2100. Additionally, it explains the approach to account for damage function
uncertainty.
    Computing damage functions through 2100. We estimate a set of time-varying quadratic
damage functions that relate the total global value of mortality-related climate change damages (D)
to the magnitude of global warming (GMST):

                    D(GM ST, t)irmt = t + 1
                                          t            t
                                            GM STrmt + 2      2
                                                         GM STrmt + irmt                                          (13)

To construct the data necessary to estimate Equation 13, damages (Dirmt ) are computed in each year
(t) using many climate models (m), two emissions scenarios (r), and a resampling of the economet-
ric parameters recovered from estimation of the mortality-temperature relationship in Equation 6 (i).
These multiple simulations lead to an empirically-derived distribution of potential economic outcomes
that are conditional on the GMST value determined by each climate model in each year for each
emissions scenario.52 To estimate Equation 13 for year t, we fit a quadratic function through these
simulated outcomes, using all 9,750 Monte Carlo simulation runs within a 5-year window of t, thereby
allowing D(GM ST, t)irmt to evolve flexibly over the century. We note that pre-2100 damage func-
tions are indistinguishable if we use a third-, fourth- or fifth-order polynomial, and we show robustness
of our mortality partial SCC estimates to functional form choice in Appendix H.4.
    Figure 11A illustrates the procedure for t = 2097, with Dirmt estimates from all Monte Carlo simu-
lations shown as points53 located along the horizontal axis based on their corresponding GMSTirmt .
  51 Global mean surface temperature is defined as the global area-weighted average of surface air temperature over

land and sea surface temperature over the oceans. Our climate change impacts are calculated relative to a baseline of
2001-2010. Therefore, we define changes in global mean surface temperature (GMST) as relative to this same period.
  52 Note that the GMST value in each climate model is a summary parameter, resulting from the complex interaction

of many physical elements of the model, including the equilibrium climate sensitivity, a number that describes how much
warming is associated with a specified change in greenhouse gas emissions. Differences in the spatial distributions of
warming across models, and their mapping on populations around the world, remain an additional unresolved uncertain
element of climate models that are idiosyncratic to each model.
  53 This scatterplot includes realizations under all RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 scenarios for all projections in our 33-member

ensemble under our benchmark method of valuation ­ the age-invariant EPA VSL with an income elasticity of one
applied to all impact regions ­ in the end-of-century years 2095-2100. See Appendix H for results across different



                                                          37
Figure 11: Empirically-derived mortality-only damage functions. Both panels show damage
functions relating empirically-derived total global mortality damages to anomalies in global mean surface temperature
(GMST). In panel A, each point (red = RCP8.5, blue = RCP4.5) indicates the value of the full mortality risk of climate
change in a single year (ranging from 2095 to 2100) for a single simulation of a single climate model, accounting for both
costs and benefits of adaptation. The black line is the quadratic damage function estimated through these points. The
distribution of temperature anomalies at end of century (2095-2100) under two emissions scenarios across our 33 climate
models is in the bottom panel. In panel B, the end-of-century damage function is repeated. Damage functions are shown
in dark blue for every 10 years pre-2100, each of which is estimated analogously to the end-of-century damage function and
is shown covering the support of GMST values observed in the SMME climate models for the associated year. Damage
functions are shown in light grey for every 50 years post-2100, each of which is extrapolated. Our projection results
generate mortality damages only through 2100, due to limited availability of climate and socioeconomic projections for
years beyond that date. To capture impacts after 2100, we extrapolate observed changes in damages over the 21st
century to generate time-varying damage functions through 2300. The distribution of temperature anomalies around
2200 (2181-2200) under two emissions scenarios using the FAIR simple climate model is in the bottom panel. To value
lives lost or saved, in both panels we use the age-varying U.S. EPA VSL and an income elasticity of one applied to all
impact regions.



The median end-of-century warming relative to 2001-2010 under RCP8.5 (red points) across our cli-
mate models is +3.7 C, while under RCP4.5 (blue points) it is +1.6 C. The black line is the quadratic
damage function estimated for the year 2097, the latest year for which a full 5-year window of damage
estimates can be constructed. The estimated damage function in 2097 recovers total (undiscounted)
damages with an age-varying VSL at 3.7 C and 1.6 C of $7.8 and $1.2 trillion USD, respectively.
Analogous curves are constructed for all years, 2015 to 2100.
    Computing post-2100 damage functions. Even with standard discount rates, a meaningful
fraction of the present discounted value of damages from the release of CO2 today will occur after 2100
(Kopp and Mignone, 2012), so it is important to develop post-2100 damage functions. The pre-2100
approach cannot be used for these later years because only 6 of the 21 GCMs that we use to build our
SMME ensemble (see Section 3.2) simulate the climate after 2100 for both RCP scenarios. Similarly,
valuation assumptions. Due to the dependence of damages D on GDP per capita and on demographics, we estimate
separate damage functions for every SSP scenario. Results across different scenarios are shown in Appendix H.


                                                           38
the SSPs needed to project the benefits of income growth and changes in demographic compositions
also end in 2100.
    To estimate post 2100-damages, we develop a method to extrapolate changes in the damage function
beyond 2100 using the observed evolution of damages near the end of the 21st century. The motivating
principle of our extrapolation approach is that these observed changes in the shape of the damage
function near the end of the century provide plausible estimates of future damage function evolution
after 2100. This reduced-form approach allows our empirical results to constrain and guide a projection
to years beyond 2100. To execute this extrapolation, we pool values Dirmt from 2085-2100 and estimate
a quadratic model similar to Equation 13, but interacting each term linearly with year t.54 This allows
estimation of a damage surface as a parametric function of year, which can then be used to predict
extrapolated damage functions for all years after 2100, smoothly transitioning from our climate model-
based damage functions prior to 2100. Appendix G provides a detailed explanation of the approach.
    The approach produces post-2100 damage functions that become more convex over time, suggesting
larger damages for a given level of warming. This finding comes directly from the estimation of
Equation 13 that found that in the latter half of the 21st century the full mortality damages are larger
when they occur later, holding constant the degree of warming. This finding that mortality costs rise
over time is the net result of countervailing forces. On the one hand, damages are larger in later years
because there are larger and older populations55 with higher VSLs due to rising incomes. On the other
hand, damages are smaller in later years because populations are better adapted due to higher incomes
and a slower rate of warming projected in later years. Our results suggest the former dominates by
end of century, causing damages to be trending upward when high-resolution simulations end in 2100.
    Panel B of Figure 11 illustrates damages functions every 10 years prior to 2100, as well as extrap-
olated damage functions for the years 2150, 2200, 2250, and 2300. In dollar terms, these extrapolated
damages continue to rise post-2100 and become steeper, as they did pre-2100. In Appendix H, we
explore the importance of this extrapolation by using an alternative approach to estimating post-2100
damages, instead calculating partial SCC estimates using a damage function frozen at its 2100 shape
for all years 2101-2300. With this alternative approach, our central estimate of the mortality partial
SCC falls 21%, indicating that extrapolation of the damage function has a modest impact on our
partial SCC estimates, due in part to the important role of discounting (Table H.6).
    Accounting for uncertainty in damage function estimation. As discussed, there is substan-
tial uncertainty in projected mortality effects of climate change due to statistical uncertainty in the
estimation of mortality-temperature response functions. The approach described above details the es-
timation of a damage function using the conditional expectation function through the full distribution
of simulation results. In addition to reporting the predicted damages resulting from this damage func-
tion describing (conditional) expected values, we also estimate a set of quantile regressions to capture
the full distribution of simulated mortality impacts.56 Just as above for the mean damage function, ex-
trapolation past the year 2100 is accomplished using a linear time interaction, estimated separately for
each quantile. Central estimates of the mortality partial SCC reported below use the mean regression,
  54 We use 2085-2100 because the evolution of damages over time becomes roughly linear conditional on GMST by

this period.
  55 In SSP3, the share of the global population in the most vulnerable >64 age category rises from 8.2% in 2015 to

16.2% in 2100.
  56 We estimate a damage function for every 5th percentile from the 5th to 95th .




                                                        39
while ranges incorporating damage uncertainty use the full set of time-varying quantile regressions.


6.2     Computing marginal damages from a marginal carbon dioxide emis-
        sions pulse
We empirically approximate the mortality partial SCC for emissions that occur in the year 2020
(Equation 9) as:

                                                   2300                 ^ (GM ST, t) dGM STt
                                                                        D
                Mortality partial SCC2020                  e-(t-2020)                          ,                    (14)
                                                  t=2020
                                                                          GM STt      dCO22020

where GMST approximates the multi-dimensional climate vector C , we use changes in CO2 to
represent changes in global emissions E ,57 we assume that discounted damages from an emissions
pulse in year 2020 become negligible after 2300, and we approximate the integral in Equation 9 with a
                                                         ^ (GM ST,t)
discrete sum using time steps of one year. The values  D  GM STt     are the marginal damages at each
moment in time that occur as a result of this small change in all future global temperatures; they are
computed using the damage functions described in the last subsection.
    The term d  GM STt
               dCO 22020 is the increase in GMST that occurs at each moment in time along a baseline
climate trajectory as a result of a marginal unit of emissions in 2020, which we approximate with
an "infinitesimally small" pulse of CO2 emissions. Its estimation requires a climate model capable of
estimating the global temperature response in each year to a single pulse of CO2 emissions. Because
we are interested in computing this value for a large number of scenarios, including ones that reflect
scientific uncertainty about the physical magnitude and timing of warming, referred to as the global
climate sensitivity, we use a "simple climate model" to estimate d GM STt
                                                                  dCO 22020 .
    Applying a simple climate model to the damage function. To calculate the change in
GMSTt due to a marginal pulse of CO2 in 2020, we use the Finite Amplitude Impulse Response
(FAIR) simple climate model that has been developed especially for this type of calculation (Millar
et al., 2017).58 We use FAIR to calculate GMSTt trajectories for emissions scenarios RCP4.5 and
RCP8.5, both with and without an exogenous impulse of 1 gigaton C (equivalent to 3.66Gt CO2 )
in the year 2020, an approximation of an infinitesimal emission for which the model numerics are
stable. In FAIR, this emissions impulse perturbs the trajectory of atmospheric CO2 concentrations
and GMST for 2020-2300, with dynamics that are influenced by the baseline RCP scenario. In
each scenario, the trajectory of GMSTt in the "RCP + pulse" simulation is differenced from the
baseline "RCP only" simulation to compute d      GM STt
                                                dCO 2t , and the resulting damages are converted into
USD per one ton CO2 . There is naturally uncertainty in these trajectories, and our approach accounts
for uncertainty associated with four key parameters of the FAIR model (i.e., the transient climate
response, equilibrium climate sensitivity, the short thermal adjustment time, and the time scale of
rapid carbon uptake by the ocean mixed layer). This approach, detailed in Section G, ensures that
the distribution of transient warming responses we use to generate partial SCC values matches the
  57 We use CO to represent changes in all global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions as it is the most abundant GHG
                 2
and the warming potential of all other GHGs are generally reported in terms of their CO2 equivalence.
  58 FAIR is a zero-dimensional structural representation of the global climate designed to capture the temporal dynamics

and equilibrium response of GMST to greenhouse gas forcing. Appendix G shows that our simulation runs with FAIR
create GMST distributions that match those from the climate projections in the high-resolution models in the SMME.


                                                            40
 A       Fossil CO2emissions              B   CO2 concentrations        C Temperature change (ºC)   D     Present value of
               (GtCO2 )                             (ppm)                                               damages ($/ton CO2)




               median                                                                                        median
               interquartile range from                                                                      interquartile range from
               climate sensitivity                                                                           climate sensitivity & damage
               uncertainty                                                                                   function uncertainty




              Year                               Year                              Year                       Year


Figure 12: Change in emissions, concentrations, temperature, and damages due to a
marginal emissions pulse in 2020. Panel A shows a 1GtC emissions pulse (equivalent to 3.66Gt CO2 ) in 2020
for emissions scenario RCP8.5. Panel B displays the effect of this pulse on atmospheric CO2 concentrations, relative
to the baseline. In panel C, the impact of the pulse of CO2 on temperature is shown where the levels are anomalies
in global mean surface temperature (GMST) in Celsius. In panels A-C, shaded areas indicate the inter-quartile range
due to climate sensitivity uncertainty, while solid lines are median estimates. Panel D shows the change in discounted
damages over time due to a 1 Gt pulse of CO2 in 2020, as estimated by our empirically-derived damage functions, using
a 2% annual discount rate and the age-varying EPA VSL. The shaded area indicates the inter-quartile range due to
climate sensitivity and damage function uncertainty, while the solid line is the median estimate.



corresponding distributions from the IPCC Assessment Report 5 (AR5).
    Summarizing the impacts of a marginal increase in CO2 emissions Figure 12 graphically
depicts the difference between the "RCP + pulse" and baseline RCP trajectories for four key out-
comes.59 The pulse in emissions is shown in panel A. Its influence on CO2 concentrations is reported
in panel B; the immediate decline followed by a century-long increase is largely due to dynamics
involving the ocean's storage and release of emissions. Panel C displays the resulting change in tem-
perature, which makes clear that a pulse today will influence temperatures for over three centuries.
The shaded green area in panels A-C represents the inter-quartile range of each year's outcome, and
reflects uncertainty in the climate system (see Appendix G for details).
    Panel D plots the discounted (2% discount rate) stream of damages due to this marginal pulse of
emissions. The temporal pattern of the present value of mortality damages reflects the nonlinearity
of the damage function (e.g., Figure 11), which itself depends on nonlinearities in location-specific
mortality-temperature relationships (e.g., Figure 5), as well as the discount rate and the dynamic
temperature response to emissions (panel C). The peak damages from a ton of CO2 emissions are
$0.16 in year 2104; by year 2277, annual damages are always less than $0.02. It is noteworthy that
67.9% of the present value of damages occur after the year 2100. The shaded grey area represents the
inter-quartile range of each year's outcome, and reflects uncertainty in the climate system as well as
uncertainty in the damage function. RCP 4.5 results are shown in Figure G.3 and additional details
are in Appendix G.
  59 Using the trajectories in Figure 12 is consistent with the "SCC experiment" that is used in IAMs to calculate an

SCC (National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, 2017). We discuss uncertainties in FAIR configuration
parameters below and in Appendix G. The median values of parameter-specific distributions used for the central mortality
partial SCC estimate include a transient climate response (TCR) of 1.6 and an equilibrium climate sensitivity (ECS) of
2.7.




                                                                   41
6.3     Estimates of the partial social cost of carbon due to excess mortality
        risk
Table 3 reports mortality partial SCC estimates. The columns apply four different annual discount
rates ­ three used in prior estimates of the SCC (2.5%, 3%, and 5%) (Interagency Working Group on
Social Cost of Carbon, 2010; National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, 2017), and
one lower rate that aligns more closely with recent global capital markets (2%) (Board of Governors
of the US Federal Reserve System, 2020). Panel A uses the U.S. EPA's VSL of $10.95 million (2019
USD), transformed into value per life-year lost (see Appendix H.1 for details). This accounts for the
different mortality-temperature relationships among the three age groups documented above.60 Panel
B uses age-invariant values of the VSL. Both valuations adjust for cross sectional variation in incomes
among contemporaries and global income growth. Appendix H presents results under a wide range of
additional valuation scenarios, including an alternative and lower Ashenfelter and Greenstone (2004)
VSL of $2.39 million (2019 USD),61 and an approach where the VSL is adjusted only based on global
average income such that the lives of contemporaries are valued equally, regardless of their relative
incomes.
    The estimates in Table 3 utilize the median values of FAIR's four key parameter distributions and
the mean global damage function. Interquartile ranges (IQRs) are reported, reflecting uncertainty
in climate sensitivity (uncertainty in the simple climate model FAIR) and in the damage function
(which includes uncertainty arising from econometric estimation and from climate model uncertainty
regarding the spatial distribution of warming). All values represent the global sum of each impact
region's MWTP today (2019 USD) to avoid the release of an additional metric ton of CO2 in 2020,
including both the costs and benefits of adaptation.
    In column 1 and panel A of Table 3, we report partial SCC values under a  = 2% discount rate and
using an age-varying VSL. Under this valuation approach, the mortality partial SCC is $17.1 [-$24.7,
$53.6] for the low to moderate emissions scenario and $36.6 [-$7.8, $73.0] for the high emissions scenario.
We highlight a 2% discount rate because it conservatively reflects changes in global capital markets over
the last several decades: while the Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Greenhouse Gases
(2016) recommends a discount rate of 3%, the average 10-year Treasury Inflation-Indexed Security
value over the available record of this index (2003-present) is just 1.01% (Board of Governors of the
US Federal Reserve System, 2020). We show results for a discount rate of 1.5% in Appendix Table
H.5. We emphasize the age-varying VSL approach because standard economic reasoning implies that
valuation of life lost should vary by age (Jones and Klenow, 2016; Murphy and Topel, 2006).
    When following the Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Greenhouse Gases (2016) pref-
erence for a discount rate of  = 3% and the use of an age-invariant VSL, the central estimate of
the mortality partial SCC is $6.7 per metric ton of CO2 for the low to moderate emissions scenario
(RCP4.5), with an IQR of [-$15.7, $32.1], and $22.1 [-$5.6, $53.4] per metric ton for the high emissions
scenario (RCP8.5).
  60 In the main text, a simple life-years calculation that assigns each life-year lost the same economic value is used. In

Appendix H, we also show calculations that adjust the value of remaining life by age at death using the estimates of
age-specific value of remaining life from Murphy and Topel (2006), which produces results that differ only slightly from
those under the primary approach.
  61 See Appendix Table H.1 for a comparison of these VSL values with values from the OECD, which are higher than

Ashenfelter and Greenstone (2004), but lower than the U.S. EPA's VSL.


                                                            42
Table 3: Estimates of a partial social cost of carbon for excess mortality risk incorporating
the costs and benefits of adaptation

                                                                           Annual discount rate
                                                         = 2%              = 2.5%        = 3%                    = 5%

      Panel A: Age-adjusted globally varying value of a statistical life (2019 US Dollars)

 Moderate emissions scenario (RCP4.5)                     17.1              11.2                7.9                2.9
   Full uncertainty IQR                              [-24.7, 53.6]      [-18.9, 36.0]      [-15.2, 26.3]       [-8.5, 11.5]
 High emissions scenario (RCP8.5)                         36.6              22.0               14.2                3.7
   Full uncertainty IQR                               [-7.8, 73.0]      [-10.6, 46.8]      [-11.4, 32.9]       [-8.9, 13.0]

               Panel B: Globally varying value of a statistical life (2019 US Dollars)

  Moderate emissions scenario (RCP4.5)                    14.9                9.8                6.7                1.7
   Full uncertainty IQR                              [-21.2, 63.5]      [-17.9, 43.5]      [-15.7, 32.1]      [-11.8, 14.7]
  High emissions scenario (RCP8.5)                        65.1               36.9               22.1               3.5
   Full uncertainty IQR                               [3.0, 139.0]       [-2.4, 83.1]       [-5.6, 53.4]       [-9.3, 16.0]

 In both panels, an income elasticity of one is used to scale the U.S. EPA VSL value (alternative values using the VSL esti-
 mate from (Ashenfelter and Greenstone, 2004) are shown in Appendix H). All regions thus have heterogeneous valuation,
 based on local income. All SCC values are for the year 2020, measured in PPP-adjusted 2019 USD, and are calculated
 from damage functions estimated from projected results under the socioeconomic scenario SSP3 (alternative values using
 other SSP scenarios are shown in Appendix sec:appsccrobustness). In panel A, SCC estimates use an age adjustment that
 values deaths by the expected number of life-years lost, using an equal value per life-year (see Appendix H.1 for details
 and Appendix H.2 for alternative calculations that allow the value of a life-year to vary with age, based on Murphy and
 Topel (2006)). In panel B, SCC calculations use value of a statistical life estimates that do not vary with age. Point
 estimates rely on the median values of the four key input parameters into the climate model FAIR and a conditional mean
 estimate of the damage function. The uncertainty ranges are interquartile ranges [IQRs] including both climate sensitivity
 uncertainty and damage function uncertainty (see Appendix G for details).



    Some other features of these results are worth underscoring. First, mortality partial SCC estimates
for RCP4.5 are systematically lower than RCP8.5 primarily because the damage function is convex, so
marginal damages increase in the high emissions scenario. Second, the combination of this convexity,
which itself is accentuated at higher quantiles of the damage function, and the skewness of the climate
sensitivity distribution causes the distribution of partial SCCs to also be right skewed with a long right
tail. For example, the 95th and 99th percentiles of the partial SCC for  = 2% and an age-varying VSL
for RCP8.5 are $290.3 and $704.1, respectively; with  = 3% and an age-invariant VSL these values are
$175.3 and $391.9. Third, in Appendix G we show that uncertainty in the partial SCC is consistently
dominated by uncertainty in the damage function, as opposed to uncertainty in climate sensitivity.
Finally, while Table 3 reflects what we believe to be mainstream valuation and socioeconomic scenar-
ios, Appendix Tables H.2-H.7 report estimates based on multiple alternative approaches. Naturally,
the resulting SCC estimates vary under different valuation assumptions and baseline socioeconomic
trajectories, and we point readers to these specifications for a more comprehensive set of results.




                                                          43
7    Limitations
As the paper has detailed, the mortality risk changes from climate change and the mortality risk partial
SCC have many ingredients. We have tried to probe the robustness of the results to each of them,
but there are four issues that merit special attention when interpreting the results, because they are
outside the scope of the analysis.
    Migration responses First, the estimates in the paper do not reflect the possibility of migration
responses to climate change. If migration were costless, it seems likely that the mortality risk partial
SCC would be smaller, as people from regions with high damages (such as sub-Saharan Africa) may
move to regions with low or even negative damages (such as Scandinavia). However, both distant and
recent history in the U.S. and around the globe underscores that borders are meaningful and that there
are substantial costs to migration which might limit the scale of feasible migrations. Indeed, existing
empirical evidence of climate-induced migration, based on observable changes in climate to date, is
mixed (Carleton and Hsiang, 2016).
    Humidity Second, our estimates do not directly incorporate the role of humidity in historical
mortality-temperature relationships nor in projections of future impacts. There is growing evidence
that humidity influences human health through making it more difficult for the human body to cool
itself during hot conditions (e.g., Sherwood and Huber, 2010; Barreca, 2012). While temperature and
humidity are highly correlated over time, they are differentially correlated across space, implying that
our measures of heterogeneous mortality-temperature relationships may be influenced by the role of
humidity. To date, lack of high-resolution historical humidity data and highly uncertain projections
of humidity under climate change (Sherwood and Fu, 2014) have limited our ability to include this
heterogeneity in our work. However, emerging work on this topic (Yuan, Stein, and Kopp, 2019; Li,
Yuan, and Kopp, 2020) will provide opportunities to explore humidity in future research.
    Technological change Third, the paper's projections incorporate advancements in technology
that enhance adaptive ability, even though we have not explicitly modeled technological change. In
particular, we allow mortality-temperature response functions to evolve in accordance with rising
incomes and temperatures and do not restrict them to stay within the bounds of the current observed
distribution of temperature responses. However, while our estimates reflect technical advancement
as it historically relates to incomes and climate, they do not reflect the likely passing of climate-
biased technical change that lowers the relative costs of goods which reduce the health risks of high
temperatures. Therefore, the paper's results will overstate the mortality risk of climate change if
directed technological innovations lower the relative costs of adapting to high temperatures.
    Uncertainty Throughout this paper, we have emphasized central estimates of the mortality risk
damages of climate change and the partial SCC, but also noted the meaningful uncertainty associated
with these estimates. However, this paper's estimates of damages do not reflect efforts to price this
uncertainty. With risk averse agents, this uncertainty would undoubtedly increase the estimates of
the climate change mortality risk damages and the mortality partial SCC (Weitzman, 2011; Traeger,
2014).




                                                  44
8     Conclusion
This paper has outlined a new method for empirically estimating the costs of climate change for a
single sector of the economy and implemented it in the context of mortality risks associated with
temperature change. Specifically, we highlight two primary contributions: a framework for estimating
the total impact of climate change on mortality risk both globally and for more than 24,000 regions
that comprise the planet, and a framework for estimating a mortality partial SCC. There are several
noteworthy methodological innovations and intermediate findings.

            Deaths per 100,000 population
                                              Adaptation costs
                                              (death equivalents)                                                             Stroke
            225
                                              Deaths


                                                   Impact of climate change in 2100
            175
                                                                                                  hot
                                                                                               climate                         Heart
                                                                                                                              disease
                                                                      low
                                                                    income
            125                            Global
                                           Average                                                                                      Breast
                                                                                                                                         Liver
                                                                                                                      cold
                                                                                                                    climate             Lung


             75                                                                                                                         Other    Vectors
                                                                                                                                                   HIV        Inten-
                                 Gains from                                             high             moderate                                             tional
                   Deaths




                                 mitigation                                           income              climate                                  TB
                                                                             middle                                                                        Uninten-
                                                                             income                                                                         tional
             25                                                                                                                                   Other

                                                                                                                              Other
                                                                                                                              Ca



                                                                                                                              Ca



                                                                                                                                                 In isea



                                                                                                                                                              In
                                                                                                                                                   fe s



                                                                                                                                                                ju
                                                                                                                                rd



                                                                                                                                nc


                                                                                                                                                    d

                                                                                                                                                     ct e



                                                                                                                                                                  ry
             -25
                                                                                                                                  io



                                                                                                                                   er



                                                                                                                                                       io
                   Lives saved




                                                                                                                                     va




                                                                                                                                                         us
                                                                                                                                       sc
                                                                                                                                         ul
                                                                                                                                           ar




             -75

                                 RCP 4.5                                       RCP 8.5



Figure 13: The impact of climate change in 2100 is comparable to contemporary leading
causes of death. Impacts of climate change (grey, teal, and coral) are calculated for the year 2100 for SSP3
and include changes in death rates (solid colors) and changes in adaptation costs, measured in death equivalents (light
shading). Global averages for RCP 8.5 and RCP 4.5 are shown in grey, demonstrating the gains from mitigation. Income
and average climate groups under RCP8.5 are separated by tercile of the 2015 global distribution across all 24,378 impact
regions. Blue bars on the right indicate average mortality rates globally in 2018, with values from WHO (2018). Figure
F.7 provides an RCP4.5 version of this figure.


    First, the relationship between mortality rates and temperature is highly nonlinear and varies with
a location's income and climate. These findings were only possible due to the collection and analysis
of highly resolved data covering roughly half of the world's population, which enabled us to estimate
flexible empirical models relating mortality rates to temperature, climate, and income.
    Second, the costs of climate change induced mortality risks are distributed unevenly across the
24,378 regions that we use to create local-level projections. For example, by 2100, we project that
climate change will cause annual damages equivalent to approximately 160 additional deaths per
100,000 in Accra, Ghana, but will also generate annual benefits equivalent to approximately 230 lives
per 100,000 in Oslo, Norway. To put these numbers in perspective, Figure 13 reveals that the projected


                                                                                                    45
impact of climate change on mortality will be comparable globally to leading causes of death today,
such as cancer and infectious disease. It also demonstrates the benefits from mitigation, as the end
of century estimate of mortality risk of climate change falls from 85 deaths per 100,000 under RCP
8.5 to just 14 per 100,000 under RCP 4.5, though much of the inequality in impacts evidence here
remains under RCP4.5 (see Figure F.7). Today's poor bear a disproportionately high share of the
global mortality risks of climate change, as current incomes (as well as current average temperatures)
are strongly correlated with future climate change impacts.
    Third, the heterogeneous impacts appear to reflect investments that individuals and societies make
based on the costs and benefits of responding to differences in climate. Estimated mortality impacts
that do not account for adaptation overstate the mortality impacts of climate change in 2100 by more
than a factor of 2.6. We outline and implement a revealed preference method to recover the costs of
these adaptation investments, even though they cannot be directly observed. Notably, the degree to
which the full mortality risk of climate change is realized through actual deaths, as opposed to costly
adaptation, varies widely across space and time. For example, Figure 13 shows that today's poor
locations tend to bear a larger share of the projected burden in the form of direct mortality impacts,
while today's rich face large increases in projected adaptation costs.
    Fourth, there is substantial climate and statistical uncertainty around these estimates and we find
that the distribution of projected losses is right skewed; for example the mean loss in 2100 is about
51% larger than the median loss. Although we do not account for risk aversion, it is evident that doing
so would increase the valuations of these impacts.
    The paper's ultimate goal is to develop the first empirically grounded estimates of climate damages
and partial SCC that reflects the consequences of climate change on mortality and investments in
adaptation. The estimates suggest that the mortality risk damages account for 3.2% of global GDP in
2100 under a high emissions scenario and 0.6% under a moderate one. Our estimates of the mortality
risk partial SCC imply that with a 2% discount rate and an age-varying VSL, the present value of
excess mortality risk due to climate change imposed by a marginal metric ton of CO2 emissions in
2020 is roughly $36.6 [-$7.8, $73.0] (in 2019 USD) with a high emissions scenario (RCP8.5) and $17.1
[-$24.7, $53.6] with a moderate one (RCP4.5), where brackets indicate interquartile ranges accounting
for both climate sensitivity and damage function uncertainty. Under a 3% discount rate and age-
invariant VSL, assumptions preferred by the Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Carbon
(2010), these values are $22.1 [-$5.6, $53.4] and $6.7 [-$15.7, $32.1], respectively.
    These findings suggest that previous research has significantly understated climate change damages
due to mortality. For example, the mortality damages we estimate in 2100 account for 49% to 135% of
total damages across all sectors of the economy according to leading IAMs. Moreover, the mortality
partial SCC reported here, under comparable valuation assumptions, is more than 10 times larger than
the total health impacts embedded in the FUND IAM (Diaz, 2014).62 Further, the high emissions and
3% discount rate partial SCC that is most similar to the scenario underlying the Obama Administration
SCC produces an excess mortality partial SCC that is 44% of the Administration's full SCC.
    The climate change challenge is considered existential by some and a relatively small risk by others,
  62 Diaz (2014) computes comparable partial SCC values for the FUND model (3% discount rate, "business as usual"

emissions scenario) and reports values for three comparable health impacts (diarrhea, vector born diseases, and cardio-
vascular/respiratory impacts) that total less than $2.0 (2019 USD).



                                                          46
yet much of what is known about its overall impacts, particularly the SCC, comes from integrated
assessment models that do not sit on a robust empirical foundation. In particular, many models
currently used to compute the SCC are either not calibrated against data, have a calibration that
is not documented, or are calibrated against empirical estimates that are not derived from modern
empirical techniques and are unlikely to be globally representative. Advances in access to data and
computing render these modeling choices unnecessary.
    We believe that this paper has highlighted a key role for systematic empirical analysis in providing
a clearer picture of how, why, and where costs of climate change are likely to emerge in the future.
Looking ahead, this general approach developed in this paper can be applied to other aspects of the
global economy besides mortality risk, and doing so is a promising area for future research.




                                                  47
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. 2001. "The Colonial Origins of Compar-
  ative Development: An Empirical Investigation." American Economic Review 91 (5):1369­1401.
  URL https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.91.5.1369.

Ashenfelter, Orley and Michael Greenstone. 2004. "Using mandated speed limits to measure the value
  of a statistical life." Journal of Political Economy 112 (S1):S226­S267.

Auffhammer, Maximilian. 2018a. "Climate adaptive response estimation: Short and long run impacts
 of climate change on residential electricity and natural gas consumption using big data." NBER
 Working paper .

------. 2018b. "Quantifying economic damages from climate change." Journal of Economic Perspec-
  tives 32 (4):33­52.

Auffhammer, Maximilian and Anin Aroonruengsawat. 2011. "Simulating the impacts of climate
 change, prices and population on California's residential electricity consumption." Climatic Change
 109 (1):191­210. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10584-011-0299-y.

Barreca, Alan, Karen Clay, Olivier Desch^enes, Michael Greenstone, and Joseph S Shapiro. 2015.
  "Convergence in adaptation to climate change: Evidence from high temperatures and mortality,
  1900­2004." The American Economic Review 105 (5):247­251.

Barreca, Alan, Karen Clay, Olivier Deschenes, Michael Greenstone, and Joseph S. Shapiro. 2016.
  "Adapting to climate change: The remarkable decline in the US temperature-mortality relationship
  over the twentieth century." Journal of Political Economy 124 (1):105­159. URL http://dx.doi.
  org/10.1086/684582.

Barreca, Alan I. 2012. "Climate change, humidity, and mortality in the United States." Journal of
  Environmental Economics and Management 63 (1):19­34.

Becker, Gary S. 2007. "Health as human capital: synthesis and extensions." Oxford Economic Papers
  59 (3):379­410.

Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System. 2020. "10-Year Treasury Inflation-Indexed
  Security, Constant Maturity [DFII10]." Tech. rep., FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. URL
  https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/DFII10.

Bright, E. A., P. R. Coleman, A. N. Rose, and M. L. Urban. 2012. "LandScan 2011." Digital dataset:
  web.ornl.gov/sci/landscan/index.shtml.

Burgess, Robin, Olivier Deschenes, Dave Donaldson, and Michael Greenstone. 2017. "The unequal
  effects of weather and climate change: Evidence from mortality in India." NBER Working paper .

Burke, Marshall, John Dykema, David B Lobell, Edward Miguel, and Shanker Satyanath. 2015. "In-
  corporating climate uncertainty into estimates of climate change impacts." Review of Economics
  and Statistics 97 (2):461­471.

                                                48
Carleton, Tamma A and Solomon M Hsiang. 2016. "Social and economic impacts of climate." Science
  353 (6304):aad9837.

Davis, Lucas W and Paul J Gertler. 2015. "Contribution of air conditioning adoption to future energy
  use under global warming." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112 (19):5962­5967.

Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F Jones, and Benjamin A Olken. 2014. "What do we learn from the weather?
  The new climate­economy literature." Journal of Economic Literature 52 (3):740­798.

Dellink, Rob, Jean Chateau, Elisa Lanzi, and Bertrand Magn´ e. 2015. "Long-term economic growth
  projections in the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways." Global Environmental Change .

Deryugina, Tatyana and Solomon Hsiang. 2017. "The Marginal Product of Climate." NBER Working
  paper .

Deschenes, Olivier. 2018. "Temperature Variability and Mortality: Evidence from 16 Asian Countries."
  Asian Development Review 35 (2):1­30.

Desch^enes, Olivier and Michael Greenstone. 2007. "The economic impacts of climate change: evidence
  from agricultural output and random fluctuations in weather." The American Economic Review
  97 (1):354­385.

------. 2011. "Climate change, mortality, and adaptation: Evidence from annual fluctuations in
  weather in the US." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3 (October):152­185. URL
  http://www.nber.org/papers/w13178.

Desch^
     enes, Olivier, Michael Greenstone, and Joseph S Shapiro. 2017. "Defensive investments and the
  demand for air quality: Evidence from the NOx budget program." American Economic Review
  107 (10):2958­89.

Desch^
     enes, Olivier and Enrico Moretti. 2009. "Extreme weather events, mortality, and migration."
  The Review of Economics and Statistics 91 (4):659­681.

Diaz, Delavane. 2014. "Evaluating the Key Drivers of the US Government's Social Cost of Carbon: A
  Model Diagnostic and Inter-Comparison Study of Climate Impacts in DICE, FUND, and PAGE."
  Working paper .

Eurostat. 2013. Europe in Figures: Eurostat Yearbook 2013. Publications Office of the European
  Union.

Fetzer, Thiemo. 2014. "Can workfare programs moderate violence? Evidence from India." .

Gasparrini, Antonio, Yuming Guo, Masahiro Hashizume, Eric Lavigne, Antonella Zanobetti, Joel
 Schwartz, Aurelio Tobias, Shilu Tong, Joacim Rockl¨ov, Bertil Forsberg et al. 2015. "Mortality risk
 attributable to high and low ambient temperature: A multicountry observational study." The Lancet
 386 (9991):369­375.




                                                49
Gennaioli, Nicola, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez De Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2014. "Growth
 in regions." Journal of Economic Growth 19 (3):259­309. URL https://ideas.repec.org/a/kap/
 jecgro/v19y2014i3p259-309.html.

Graff Zivin, Joshua and Matthew Neidell. 2014. "Temperature and the allocation of time: Implications
  for climate change." Journal of Labor Economics 32 (1):1­26.

Guo, Christopher and Christopher Costello. 2013. "The value of adaption: Climate change and tim-
 berland management." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 65 (3):452­468.

Guo, Yuming, Antonio Gasparrini, Ben Armstrong, Shanshan Li, Benjawan Tawatsupa, Aurelio To-
 bias, Eric Lavigne, Micheline de Sousa Zanotti Stagliorio Coelho, Michela Leone, Xiaochuan Pan
 et al. 2014. "Global variation in the effects of ambient temperature on mortality: a systematic
 evaluation." Epidemiology (Cambridge, Mass.) 25 (6):781.

Heutel, Garth, Nolan H Miller, and David Molitor. 2017. "Adaptation and the Mortality Effects of
  Temperature Across US Climate Regions." National Bureau of Economic Research .

Hsiang, Solomon. 2013. "Visually-weighted regression." SSRN Working Paper .

------. 2016. "Climate econometrics." Annual Review of Resource Economics 8:43­75.

Hsiang, Solomon, Robert Kopp, Amir Jina, James Rising, Michael Delgado, Shashank Mohan, DJ Ras-
  mussen, Robert Muir-Wood, Paul Wilson, Michael Oppenheimer et al. 2017. "Estimating economic
  damage from climate change in the United States." Science 356 (6345):1362­1369.

Hsiang, Solomon and Robert E Kopp. 2018. "An Economist's Guide to Climate Change Science."
  Journal of Economic Perspectives 32 (4):3­32.

Hsiang, Solomon M and Amir S Jina. 2014. "The causal effect of environmental catastrophe on long-
  run economic growth: Evidence from 6,700 cyclones." Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Hsiang, Solomon M, Kyle C Meng, and Mark A Cane. 2011. "Civil conflicts are associated with the
  global climate." Nature 476 (7361):438.

Hsiang, Solomon M and Daiju Narita. 2012. "Adaptation to cyclone risk: Evidence from the global
  cross-section." Climate Change Economics 3 (02):1250011.

IIASA Energy Program. 2016. "SSP Database, Version 1.1 [Data set]." Tech. rep., National Bureau
  of Economic Research. URL https://tntcat.iiasa.ac.at/SspDb.Accessed25December,2016.

Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Carbon. 2010. "Social Cost of Carbon for Regulatory
  Impact Analysis - Under Executive Order 12866." Tech. rep., United States Government.

Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Greenhouse Gases. 2016. "Technical Support Document:
  Technical Update of the Social Cost of Carbon for Regulatory Impact Analysis." Tech. rep., United
  States Government.


                                                50
Isen, Adam, Maya Rossin-Slater, and Reed Walker. 2017. "Relationship between season of birth,
   temperature exposure, and later life wellbeing." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
   114 (51):13447­13452.

Jones, Charles I and Peter J Klenow. 2016. "Beyond GDP? Welfare across countries and time."
  American Economic Review 106 (9):2426­57.

Kahn, Matthew E. 2005. "The death toll from natural disasters: the role of income, geography, and
 institutions." Review of Economics and Statistics 87 (2):271­284.

Kopp, Robert E and Bryan K Mignone. 2012. "The US government's social cost of carbon estimates
 after their first two years: Pathways for improvement." Working paper .

Lenssen, N., G. Schmidt, J. Hansen, M. Menne, A. Persin, R. Ruedy, and D. Zyss. 2019. "Improvements
  in the GISTEMP uncertainty model." J. Geophys. Res. Atmos. 124 (12):6307­6326.

Li, Dawei, Jiacan Yuan, and Robert Bob Kopp. 2020. "Escalating global exposure to compound
  heat-humidity extremes with warming." Environmental Research Letters .

Lobell, David B, Michael J Roberts, Wolfram Schlenker, Noah Braun, Bertis B Little, Roderick M
  Rejesus, and Graeme L Hammer. 2014. "Greater sensitivity to drought accompanies maize yield
  increase in the US Midwest." Science 344 (6183):516­519.

Matsuura, Kenji and Cort Willmott. 2007. "Terrestrial Air Temperature and Precipitation: 1900-2006
 Gridded Monthly Time Series, Version 1.01." University of Delaware. URL http://climate.geog.
 udel.edu/climate.

Mendelsohn, Robert, William D Nordhaus, and Daigee Shaw. 1994. "The impact of global warming
 on agriculture: A Ricardian analysis." The American Economic Review :753­771.

Millar, Richard J, Zebedee R Nicholls, Pierre Friedlingstein, and Myles R Allen. 2017. "A modified
 impulse-response representation of the global near-surface air temperature and atmospheric concen-
 tration response to carbon dioxide emissions." Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics 17 (11):7213­
 7228.

Millner, Antony and Geoffrey Heal. 2018. "Time consistency and time invariance in collective intertem-
 poral choice." Journal of Economic Theory 176:158­169.

Moore, Frances C and David B Lobell. 2014. "Adaptation potential of European agriculture in response
 to climate change." Nature Climate Change 4 (7):610.

Murphy, Kevin M and Robert H Topel. 2006. "The value of health and longevity." Journal of Political
 Economy 114 (5):871­904.

National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2017.     Valuing Climate
  Damages:   Updating Estimation of the Social Cost of Carbon Dioxide.      Washing-
  ton, DC: The National Academies Press.     URL https://www.nap.edu/catalog/24651/
  valuing-climate-damages-updating-estimation-of-the-social-cost-of.


                                                 51
Newell, Richard G and William A Pizer. 2004. "Uncertain discount rates in climate policy analysis."
  Energy Policy 32 (4):519­529.

Nordhaus, William D. 1992. "An optimal transition path for controlling greenhouse gases." Science
  258 (5086):1315­1319.

Park, R Jisung, Joshua Goodman, Michael Hurwitz, and Jonathan Smith. 2020. "Heat and learning."
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 12 (2):306­39.

Pindyck, Robert S. 2013. "Climate change policy: What do the models tell us?" Journal of Economic
  Literature 51 (3):860­872.

Rasmussen, D. J., Malte Meinshausen, and Robert E. Kopp. 2016. "Probability-weighted ensembles
  of U.S. county-level climate projections for climate risk analysis." Journal of Applied Meteorol-
  ogy and Climatology 55 (10):2301­2322. URL http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/abs/10.1175/
  JAMC-D-15-0302.1.

Riahi, Keywan, Detlef P Van Vuuren, Elmar Kriegler, Jae Edmonds, Brian C O'neill, Shinichiro
  Fujimori, Nico Bauer, Katherine Calvin, Rob Dellink, Oliver Fricko et al. 2017. "The shared so-
  cioeconomic pathways and their energy, land use, and greenhouse gas emissions implications: an
  overview." Global Environmental Change 42:153­168.

Rohde, Robert, Richard Muller, Robert Jacobsen, Saul Perlmutter, Arthur Rosenfeld, Jonathan
  Wurtele, J Curry, Charlotte Wickham, and S Mosher. 2013. "Berkeley Earth temperature aver-
  aging process." Geoinfor Geostat: An Overview 1 (2):1­13.

Schlenker, Wolfram and Michael J Roberts. 2009. "Nonlinear temperature effects indicate severe
  damages to US crop yields under climate change." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
  106 (37):15594­15598.

Schlenker, Wolfram, Michael J Roberts, and David B Lobell. 2013. "US maize adaptability." Nature
  Climate Change 3 (8):690­691.

Sheffield, Justin, Gopi Goteti, and Eric F Wood. 2006. "Development of a 50-year high-resolution global
  dataset of meteorological forcings for land surface modeling." Journal of Climate 19 (13):3088­3111.

Sherwood, Steven and Qiang Fu. 2014. "A drier future?" Science 343 (6172):737­739.

Sherwood, Steven C and Matthew Huber. 2010. "An adaptability limit to climate change due to heat
  stress." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107 (21):9552­9555.

Solon, Gary, Steven J Haider, and Jeffrey M Wooldridge. 2015. "What are we weighting for?" Journal
  of Human Resources 50 (2):301­316.

Stern, Nicholas. 2006. The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review. Cambridge University
  Press.

Taylor, Karl E, Ronald J Stouffer, and Gerald A Meehl. 2012. "An overview of CMIP5 and the
  experiment design." Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 93 (4):485.

                                                  52
Tebaldi, Claudia and Reto Knutti. 2007. "The use of the multi-model ensemble in probabilistic climate
  projections." Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical
  and Engineering Sciences 365 (1857):2053­2075. URL http://rsta.royalsocietypublishing.
  org/content/365/1857/2053.

Thomson, Allison M., Katherine V. Calvin, Steven J. Smith, G. Page Kyle, April Volke, Pralit Patel,
  Sabrina Delgado-Arias, Ben Bond-Lamberty, Marshall A. Wise, Leon E. Clarke, and James A.
  Edmonds. 2011. "RCP4.5: a pathway for stabilization of radiative forcing by 2100." Climatic
 Change 109 (1):77. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-011-0151-4.

Thrasher, Bridget, Edwin P Maurer, C McKellar, and PB Duffy. 2012. "Technical note: Bias correcting
  climate model simulated daily temperature extremes with quantile mapping." Hydrology and Earth
  System Sciences 16 (9):3309­3314.

Tol, Richard S.J. 1997. "On the optimal control of carbon dioxide emissions: an application of FUND."
  Environmental Modeling & Assessment 2 (3):151­163. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:
  1019017529030.

Traeger, Christian P. 2014. "Why uncertainty matters: discounting under intertemporal risk aversion
  and ambiguity." Economic Theory 56 (3):627­664.

United Nations. 2017. "World Mortality 2017." Tech. rep., United Nations Economic and Social
 Affairs.

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2016a. "Recommended Income Elasticity and Income Growth
  Estimates: Technical Memorandum." Tech. rep., U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Office of
  Air and Radiation and Office of Policy.

------. 2016b. "Valuing mortality risk reductions for policy: A meta-analytic approach." Tech.
  rep., U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Office of Policy, National Center for Environmental
  Economics.

Van Vuuren, Detlef P, Jae Edmonds, Mikiko Kainuma, Keywan Riahi, Allison Thomson, Kathy Hib-
  bard, George C Hurtt, Tom Kram, Volker Krey, Jean-Francois Lamarque et al. 2011. "The repre-
  sentative concentration pathways: An overview." Climatic Change 109 (1-2):5.

Viscusi, W Kip. 2015. "The role of publication selection bias in estimates of the value of a statistical
  life." American Journal of Health Economics .

Weitzman, Martin L. 2011. "Fat-tailed uncertainty in the economics of catastrophic climate change."
 Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 5 (2):275­292.

WHO. 2018. "Global Health Estimates 2016: Deaths by cause, age, sex, by country and by region,
 2000­2016." Tech. rep., World Health Organization.

Yuan, Jiacan, Michael L Stein, and Robert E Kopp. 2019. "The evolving distribution of relative
  humidity conditional upon daily maximum temperature in a warming climate." .



                                                  53
