                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    PATENT QUALITY: TOWARDS A SYSTEMATIC FRAMEWORK FOR ANALYSIS
                         AND MEASUREMENT

                                       Kyle W. Higham
                                     Gaétan de Rassenfosse
                                        Adam B. Jaffe

                                       Working Paper 27598
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27598


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Kyle W. Higham, Gaétan de Rassenfosse, and Adam B. Jaffe. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Patent Quality: Towards a Systematic Framework for Analysis and Measurement
Kyle W. Higham, Gaétan de Rassenfosse, and Adam B. Jaffe
NBER Working Paper No. 27598
September 2020
JEL No. O31,O34

                                           ABSTRACT

The 'quality' of novel technological innovations is extremely variable, and the ability to measure
innovation quality is essential to sensible, evidence-based policy. Patents, an often vital precursor
to a commercialised innovation, share this heterogeneous quality distribution. A pertinent
question then arises: How should we define and measure patent quality? Accepting that different
stakeholders have different views of this concept, we take a multi-dimensional view of patent
quality in this work. We first test the consistency of popular post-grant outcomes that are often
used as patent quality measures. Finding these measures to be generally inconsistent, we then use
a raft of patent indicators that are defined at the time of grant to dissect the characteristics
associated with different post-grant outcomes. We find broad disagreement in the relative
importance of individual characteristics between outcomes and, further, significant variation of
the same across technologies within outcomes. We conclude that measurement of patent quality
is highly sensitive to both stakeholder viewpoint and technology type. Our findings bear
implications for scholarly research using patent data as well as for policy discussions about patent
quality.

Kyle W. Higham                                    Adam B. Jaffe
Institute of Innovation Research,                 Brandeis University
Hitotsubashi University                           188 Brookline Avenue
2-1 Naka, Kunitachi                               Apartment 26A
Tokyo 186-8603                                    Boston, MA 02215
Japan                                             and Queensland University of Technology
higham@iir.hit-u.ac.jp                            and also NBER
                                                  adam.jaffe@motu.org.nz
Gaétan de Rassenfosse
Ecole polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne
College of Management of Technology
Odyssea Station 5
CH-1015 Lausanne
gaetan.derassenfosse@epfl.ch
1    Introduction

In order to study the sources and effects of innovation, or to formulate innovation policy, it

is necessary to measure the rate of innovation across a variety of social, geographical, and

technological dimensions. Measuring the rate of innovation is an inherently challenging task

because the magnitude or significance of innovations varies enormously (Scherer and Harhoff,

2000; Fleming, 2007). Hence any effort to quantify the extent or rate of innovation in a given

context requires some way to measure the relative significance of different innovations.

    Patents are frequently used as an indicator of the rate of invention, which is a crucial pre-

cursor to innovation (Roberts, 1988). In the context of patents, the inherent variability of

innovation significance rears its head in the form of enormous heterogeneity in patent impor-

tance, value or quality. As an early, accessible, and rich data source, availability of patent data

has kick-started a long line of fruitful research that has led to the development of a variety of

different metrics or indicators of the importance, impact, value or quality of individual patents

(see Section 2).

    We use the generic term `quality' to encompass the distinct and diverse concepts of impor-

tance, impact, value, or significance that have been associated with different metrics applied

to patents. In addition to semantic practicality, one reason for this simplification is that all

of the concepts that come under the quality umbrella are so stakeholder-dependent (Khanna,

2019) that these various terms are not specific enough to accurately convey useful information.

For example, a patent that is extremely valuable to the owner may actively harm economic

activity in the society-at-large. On the other hand, a groundbreaking patent may be quickly

built upon or around by competitors, reducing the useful life and value of the patent in the

long-term but providing great societal benefits in the form of new technologies or competitive

markets. The tension between different stakeholders of an effective patent system often forces

some political and philosophical framing before any we make any empirical measurements for a

particular application. As such, we refer to quality in the abstract and any specific indicators

by name to avoid forcing meaning onto them.

    To give ourselves the best opportunity to uncover empirically useful results, we develop a

systematic framework for analyzing how different quantitative indicators or metrics relate to the

different dimensions of quality and each other. Our goal is not to determine the `best' quality

metric; indeed, one of our messages is that because `quality' is an intrinsically multidimensional



                                                2
concept, there cannot be a single best metric. Instead, we suggest that analyzing the distinct

dimensions of quality in this systematic way provides the most meaningful way to understand

what can be known about the quality-related characteristics of individual inventions based on

patent data. Further, researchers have often associated specific metrics with specific dimensions

of quality; e.g., forward citations are interpreted as capturing technological impact. However,

these interpretations cannot be derived from first principles and, at times, tread dangerously

close to becoming definitional; e.g., a patent with high technological impact is defined as one

with a large number of forward citations. This vagueness becomes more problematic as one

continues to peruse the literature and finds, for example, forward citations being used as a

proxy for economic value. It is not incorrect, per se, to use the same metrics as proxies for

different patent properties, as long as we acknowledge that there is no single interpretation

for them. Accordingly, our approach is to examine the empirical relationships among and

between ex post metrics and ex ante characteristics to try to determine the extent to which

such interpretations have real empirical content.

   We first look directly at the relationships between some commonly used and easily accessible

post-grant patent quality indicators, referred to hereafter as outcomes. Finding that these

outcomes are generally not in agreement as to which patents are `high-quality,' we examine how

patent characteristics established at grant are associated with each outcome. In doing so, we

observe significant but (in light of the conflicting results in the empirical literature) expected

differences between antecedents of these outcomes. This result adds additional color to extant

qualitative explanations of patent quality, as seen through the eyes of different stakeholders (e.g.,

Guerrini, 2013; Khanna, 2019). Additionally, these results suggest that composite indicators

that simply average different quality measures, while useful in some contexts, may hurt attempts

to answer specific research questions if the outcomes that are combined reflect opposing views of

`quality.' Our empirical strategy also attempts to capture the true extent of heterogeneity across

technologies, with regard to the measurement of patent quality. Our empirical results highlight

patent characteristics that are particularly sensitive to the technology field. The relationships

between science dependence and ex-post outcomes, for example, appear to be quite technology-

dependent. A literature review also reveals that science dependence is likely very sensitive to the

specific operationalization as well. We do not believe this indicator is unique in these aspects

and suggest that extreme caution and comprehensive robustness testing are required before

drawing definitive conclusions from such indicators--both in terms of metric construction and


                                                 3
field of application.

   Further, many patent characteristics, from the properties of the underlying invention to the

applicant's drafting strategies, may hurt the perception of quality for some technologies more

than others, even when seen through the eyes of the same stakeholder. For example, the impact

of a (perhaps intentionally) prolonged prosecution process on the value of a patent may depend

on how the assignee intends to use it, which may, in turn, depend on its technological nature.

Indicators that are strongly related to the interplay between technology types and industry-

specific patent strategy norms, such as grant lag, claim counts, or family size, should be treated

with particular care.

   Finally, and most importantly, we urge an abundance of caution when attempting to measure

patent quality. This conclusion is not a wholly negative one at which to arrive, however.

Although we find even the most basic and well-established patent quality outcomes generally

do not agree on what `high-quality' means, and that significant technological heterogeneity

exists in the antecedents of these outcomes, we do not conclude that all attempts to measure

patent quality are futile. The conclusion is simply that a sensible one-size-fits-all approach

does not exist. Research questions should be well-defined, and the appropriate patent quality

dimension and technology areas selected (or controlled for) to obtain the best results. Patentable

inventions include everything from semiconductors to dog toys, and from pharmaceuticals to

turbines--situations where informative results can be obtained after applying quality measures

equally across technological space are, predictably, few and far between. In sum, patented

inventions are myriad and complex, as are the policies that govern and encourage them, and

average effects across the universe of patents may not be as informative as we have given them

credit for.

   We organize the remainder of this article as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of related

work and rationale for the departures from this literature in the current work. Section 3 briefly

describes data-set construction; however, due to the varied sources and empirical relevance of

these data, specifics are discussed in Sections 4 and 5. In the former of these sections, we test

the overlap between four common post-grant outcomes related to patent quality, while the latter

relates those outcomes to the patents' intrinsic properties. Section 6 concludes and relates the

measurement of patent quality to the overarching goals and social value of patent systems.




                                                4
2    Measurement of Patent Quality

Despite patent quality being of great interest to policymakers and researchers for decades,

surprisingly few works take a comparative view of this concept. Of course, comprehensive

articles concerning patent quality do exist (van Pottelsberghe, 2011; van Zeebroeck and van

Pottelsberghe, 2011b; Squicciarini et al., 2013), but there are only a small number of thorough

analyses of the consistency of the different aspects of patent quality. The most notable of those

that do, and the most similar to our analysis here, were provided by van Zeebroeck and van

Pottelsberghe (2011a) and van Zeebroeck (2011). These studies test the consistency of various

quality indicators using Spearman rank correlations.

    However, neither of these works aim to examine the relationships between these metrics

beyond their correlations. Indeed, one may expect significant levels of heterogeneity in these

relationships across different types of patentable inventions. Further, one can exploit easily-

observed or -calculated ex-ante characteristics (those established at or near grant) to understand

the antecedents of these heterogeneities. To capture both the general relationships and the

heterogeneities in these relationships, we leverage the United States Patent and Trademark

Office's (USPTO) docketing of each incoming patent application (and eventual grant) to a

single art unit. Art units are discussed in more detail in Section 4.3.

    The variables we have selected for the current analysis, and the justifications for these

choices, can be found in Section 4. There are two conspicuous omissions from our set of patent-

level outcomes, both of which were excluded for lack of data. The first is legal outcomes, such

as involvement in infringement suits or legal disputes concerning the validity of the patent or

one of its claims. Despite concerns about rising rates of litigation (Bessen and Meurer, 2013),

these events remain quite rare relative to the universe of patents and are concentrated in specific

technology sectors (Lanjouw and Schankerman, 2001; Helmers et al., 2018). These facts rule

out the use of these events for the kind of analyses presented here (where patents are grouped

by distinct technology types) due to their small sample size. Despite this, it is important to

note that litigation data are becoming more accessible with time (Marco et al., 2017; Miller,

2018), and the antecedents of patent disputes continue to be studied in depth by others (e.g.,

Mann and Underweiser, 2012; Love et al., 2019).

    The second is evidence of commercialization, for which it is not easy to obtain data. Patent-

ing without commercialization (or follow-on innovation resulting in commercialization) has a



                                                5
limited societal impact, and so information on the `real-world' status of patented inventions is

extremely valuable from a public policy viewpoint. Current commercialisation evidence based

on virtual patent marking websites (e.g., de Rassenfosse, 2018) or surveys (e.g., Giuri et al.,

2007; Webster and Jensen, 2011) are simply not sufficient on the fine-grain level required here.

   These omissions are symptomatic of a well-known phenomenon in the patent quality litera-

ture: most patents are simply not worth very much (Scherer and Harhoff, 2000; Silverberg and

Verspagen, 2007). Patents are filed very early in the invention process (Cotropia, 2009), and

many do not transition into fully-fledged, functional, and useful products. Of those that do,

many are not worth an expensive legal battle to keep in force. Some of the most explicit expres-

sions of patent quality are rare events. However, rare events comprise the tip of an iceberg of

inventive activity and represent inventions with sufficient private and technological value to be

rendered visible to the wider world. There is a place for the analysis of these events in particular

contexts and technological domains, but their inclusion is not compatible with the broad view

we aim for in this work.

   Apart from these omissions, there are a number of more abstract ways of thinking about

patent quality that are very difficult to measure directly (if at all), but remain useful for framing

concerns about patent quality or the contribution of patent systems to societal well-being and

technological progress. We present two examples. First, the quality of a patent may not be

reflective of the quality of the underlying invention that it protects. As such, the degree to

which the patent scope overlaps or eclipses the scope of the invention can be a measure of

quality in its own right. A valid patent that is much broader than the invention it covers may

be considered particularly high quality from several perspectives. Of course, measuring any

disparities between the scope of a patent and the invention it covers is only feasible on a case-

by-case basis, if at all. Second, the economic `quality' of a patent may be thought of as its net

benefit to society (Guellec and van Pottelsberghe, 2007). This requires a comparison between

the benefits realised by the existence of a patent on an invention and the counterfactuals to

this scenario: either the invention would not exist without the potential for patent protection

or the invention would exist but without a patent. The mutual exclusivity of these scenarios

means that simultaneous comparison is impossible for any individual invention, even if societal

benefit was well-defined and measurable. However, indirect estimations of the levels of follow-on

innovation via such a comparison have been calculated through invalidation events (See, e.g,

Galasso and Schankerman, 2015).


                                                 6
3    Data and Methodological Roadmap

The data used in the present work can be categorized by the way we use them. We broadly

delineate these categories as data that:

    · Define our focal cohort;

    · Constitute ex-post outcomes of the patents in the focal cohort;

    · Allow us to measure semantic differences between patents in the focal cohort.

    · Are used to construct ex-ante patent indicators characterizing the intrinsic properties of

      patents in the focal cohort;

    As far as the focal cohort is concerned, we select the cohort of patents granted by the United

States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) in the years 2001­2004. There are several reasons

for this choice. First, USPTO data are easily accessible and often augmented in interesting

ways by researchers working both inside and outside the USPTO, resulting in an extensive

literature base upon which to draw information and inspiration. Second, patent indicators,

including ours, are dependent on citation data for information about the nature of backward-

looking knowledge inputs and forward-looking impact measures. To maximize the information

content of our indicators, our cohort begins in the same complete calendar year (2001) that the

USPTO started explicitly distinguishing examiner citations and applicant citations. Each of

these parties has different reasons for adding citations, and so we believe it is worth separating

these citations where possible. Third, we want enough time after the final patent in the cohort

for specific outcomes to manifest themselves in the data. Most pertinently, the final maintenance

payment (or non-payment) needs to be observed and made available by the USPTO--it occurs

twelve years (at the latest) after the grant of the patent. We chose the year 2004 as the final

year of the cohort for this reason.

    All other categories of data incorporate information from a diverse set of sources, some of

which are external to the USPTO. Rather than introducing all these sources simultaneously,

we introduce these data at the points where they become empirically relevant. Specifically,

ex-post outcomes are described in Section 4.1, semantic data are described in Section 4.4 (and

in more detail in Appendix A), and ex-ante indicators are summarized in Table 1 with more

detail added in Appendix B.



                                                7
                            Full-text                                                      Section 4

                           Embeddings
      Ex-post                                                                            Overlap
     outcomes              Transform to                   Semantic matching for          analysis
                          binary outcomes               control-group construction




                                                                                           Section 5

                                                                                Relative importance
      Ex-ante                            Patent                                      of ex-ante
     indicators    Factor analysis    Characteristics   Dominance analysis       characteristics for
                                                                                 ex-post outcomes



          Figure 1: Analytical pipelines for the two empirical sections of this article.


    In this work we make use of a wide range of data sources and empirical methods. To make

our analytical pipeline explicit, Figure 1 outlines the various inputs, methodologies, and outputs

of the next two sections.



4    Consistency of Patent Quality Measures

We start our analysis with a simple test of outcome overlap to examine the consistency of the

selected ex-post outcomes. For the current work, we have selected three commonly-used ex-post

patent quality outcomes: the anomalous stock-market reaction to grant events (Kogan et al.,

2017), renewals, and forward citations (split into examiner and applicant citations). We chose

these particular indicators for a number of reasons:

    · They are all widely used as indicators of patent quality on the individual-patent level;

    · They are available for a significant fraction of all patents;

    · They afford simplicity in presentation and interpretation of results;

    · If even these most simple, common, and accessible metrics show significant disagreement

      in their definitions of what constitutes a high-quality patent, then it is highly likely that

      disagreement will be observed for any pair of quality metrics one could choose.

The next section describes these three outcomes in detail.

                                                    8
4.1     Ex-Post Outcome Variables

4.1.1    Anomalous Stock Market Returns

In their popular paper, Kogan et al. (2017) looked at fluctuations in the stock prices of publicly-

traded companies in the days after they were granted a patent. These data were made publicly

available, and many have used them as an indicator of patent financial value, hereafter referred

to as KPSS values after the authors of the associated paper. While this approach is certainly

an interesting way of measuring patent value, it is still unclear what precisely these measured

values mean in the real world, how accurate they are for different types of patents, or whether

they hold much information for patents not of high ex-ante value.1 Due to the skewness of

the observed value distribution, we take the log of these values to achieve an approximately

normally-distributed outcome,2 which we then use for all analyses involving this variable.


4.1.2    Patent Renewal

To keep a patent in force, patentees must pay renewal fees (referred to as maintenance fees by

the USPTO). At the USPTO, these fees are due at 3.5, 7.5, and 11.5 years after patent grant,

and will extend the life of the patent to 8, 12, and 17 years respectively. Patents that are not

renewed at all will fall into the public domain four years after grant.

    Patent renewal is generally considered to be an indicator of patent value to the firm holding

the patent (Lanjouw et al., 1998). This notion is sensible, as one would expect a firm to pay to

keep a patent in force only when the expected returns to this state exceed this cost, implying

the patent has a present value to the firm of at least that of the maintenance fee (Pakes and

Schankerman, 1984). In a world where many patents appear to be close to worthless (Scherer

and Harhoff, 2000; Silverberg and Verspagen, 2007), renewal information is valuable.


4.1.3    Forward Citations

Forward citations are those citations that are received from subsequently granted patents and

(in this work) are counted ten years after grant. These citations are made for numerous reasons

by inventors, attorneys, and examiners. Generally, they reflect either a disclosure regarding

knowledge of prior art (in the case of inventors and attorneys) or justification for the limiting
    1
      The authors show a power-law relationship between their patent values and forward citations; however, this
trend is non-existent for patents with less than the mean number of citations.
    2
      In fact, we observe a slightly bimodal distribution of values after this transformation, which may suggest a
lower limit in patent value detectable via this method, below which only noise might be observed.


                                                        9
of claims in the patent application under consideration (in the case of examiners). If we think

about patents as defining a technological space from which the patentee has the right to exclude

others from entering, citations act to delimit this space (Jaffe and de Rassenfosse, 2017). In

this geometric analogy, therefore, a patent that receives many citations likely occupies a newly

discovered frontier of this space--attracting many new neighbors that attempt to capture some

of this lucrative technological real estate.

   In the economic literature, forward citation counts were one of the first invention-level met-

rics available to measure what might be termed `technological importance' (Carpenter et al.,

1981; Narin et al., 1987; Griliches, 1990). Due to their availability and presumed informa-

tion content, the use of forward citations as indicators of patent quality has become well-

established (See, e.g., Albert et al., 1991; Trajtenberg et al., 1997; Benson and Magee, 2015).

Jaffe and de Rassenfosse (2017) offer a comprehensive review of the use of patent citations and

their relationship to observable outcomes of interest. With our choice of cohort, we can split

these citations into two distinct groups: examiner and applicant citations. Applicant citations

are those submitted by the patentee as part of their duty of candor and reflect the applicant's

knowledge of existing research. By contrast, examiner citations generally represent IP-limiting

prior art cited during the examination process (Cotropia et al., 2013). The mechanisms that

generate these two types of citations are, therefore, quite distinct and worth comparing.

   To isolate the more informative citations, we remove self-citations from our analysis of

forward citations. While forward self-citations may be the most direct way to observe follow-

on innovation within a firm (Hall et al., 2005; Moser et al., 2018), the number of patents

that are applied for in the course of an extensive research program is largely a matter of firm

strategy (Hegde et al., 2009). Before omission, self-citations constituted 10% of all forward

citations to patents in our cohort occurring within ten years of grant.


4.2   Conversion to Binary Quality Indicators

In order to fairly compare the different data types in which the above outcomes are encoded,

we convert all outcomes to binary indicators, where a 1 is consistent with extant notions of high

patent quality or value. As the outcomes in question are already known to be very noisy in their

ability to accurately measure these notions of high quality (Lanjouw and Schankerman, 2004;

van Zeebroeck, 2011), reducing them to binary indicators does not remove as much information

as one might expect a priori. Then, we can directly compare these outcomes to check their


                                               10
overlap relative to chance.

   We need to set a threshold for each outcome to separate the `high-quality' patents from the

`low-quality' patents. We set this threshold at the 90th percentile of total applicant forward

citations, examiner forward citations, and KPSS values. `High-quality' as renewal to full term is,

in fact, a very low bar, with about half of the patents in our cohort meeting this requirement.

Our solution to this problem is presented in Section 4.5. In brief, we focus on non-renewed

patents rather than patents renewed to full term.

   The overlap between these binary outcomes may differ by technology type, and there may

exist technological heterogeneity within predefined classifications. To obtain the fairest and

most comprehensive comparison between the outcomes as possible, we take additional measures

before any analysis; by first splitting the cohort by art unit, then by implementing semantic

matching to control for any remaining intra-unit technological variation (see Section 4.4).


4.3   On the Use of Art Units

We will study the consistency of patent quality measures at the level of art units. Art units are

groups of examiners with similar and particular expertise to examine a narrow set of technology

types. Each patent is only granted by one art unit, and working at the art unit level avoids

the problems associated with multiple classifications such as CPCs or IPCs. Grouping patents

by art unit, we obtain a set of non-overlapping blocks that we analyze individually. We can

then look at the distribution of outcomes across these art units for any analysis we choose.

This method reduces our reliance on average effect sizes and exposes the variation in effect sizes

across distinct technology groupings.

   Art units have additional advantages as well, such as a more uniform size distribution than

other classification systems (in terms of quantity of patents in each), and the fact that the

art unit a patent is sent to is determined by the knowledge required to examine the patent.

Conducting the analysis at the art unit level allows us to observe a distribution of results across

a wide range of different technologies.

   Yet. the size distribution of art units is not perfectly uniform by any means, so we implement

a minimum size threshold. The most restrictive data we use across all analyses are KPSS values,

which, after filtering out patents with undefined ex-ante indicators (see Section 5.1), are only

defined for 35% of patents in our cohort. Because we want to use the same set of art units for

all analyses, we must set the size threshold at a point that ensures a sufficient sample size for


                                                11
any analyses involving KPSS values. As such, all art units we consider here have at least 200

patents with defined KPSS values. While this selection may bias our set of art units towards

those that commonly grant patents to publicly traded companies, it still covers a wide range of

technologies. This threshold excluded 46% of all art units existing in the time frame we consider.

However, of those excluded, 65% have fewer than 50 patents granted in total (including those

without KPSS values), 31% have fewer than ten, and the patents in the excluded art units only

constitute 5% of the cohort.3 Of the 249 art units we include, the mean size is 2420 patents, and

the median is 2441 patents. Only six art units granted more than 5000 patents of the patents

remaining in our cohort, reflecting the natural size limitation of examiner teams at the patent

office.


4.4       Semantic Patent Matching

Even after grouping patents by their art units, some within-group technological heterogeneity

remains. In particular, art units, by their examiner-based construction, group technologies by

the skills required to examine the applications and not necessarily by technological function. Of

course, these concepts often overlap, but we do not want to assume that this is the case for every

art unit. Therefore, to boost the signal-to-noise ratio, we match every `high quality' case patent

with a semantically similar control patent. This way, for each outcome, we can compare the

frequency of another outcome in the high-quality group with its frequency in the lower-quality

control group without being as concerned about bias due to differences in technological profile

between the groups. Many measures of semantic similarity exist, and many of these have been

tested on patent text, from simple Jaccard indices (Arts et al., 2018) to unsupervised machine

learning techniques (Magerman et al., 2010). A review of some of these different methods for

use with patent data can be found in van Looy and Magerman (2019).

    For our purposes, we make use of the patent embeddings constructed by Google,4 wherein

patent full-texts are embedded in a low-dimensional vector-space as described in Appendix

A. However, the purpose for which we use natural language processing here is not to extract

semantic patterns or interpret the output of such semantic analysis. Rather, we only aim

to be able to measure the similarity of any pair of documents. As this does not require an
   3
      The two largest art units excluded (which were both about twice the size of the third-largest) were the units
that handled exercise devices and animal-related inventions often associated with hobbyists (fishing, beekeeping,
horse riding, etc.), where, respectively, only 5% and 7% of patents granted were to publicly traded companies.
    4
      https://tinyurl.com/googlepatentdata




                                                        12
understanding of exactly how documents are similar, we do not have to sacrifice the effectiveness

of matching in exchange for the interpretability of the raw output (such as imposed priors or

distributional assumptions (Deerwester et al., 1990; Blei et al., 2003)). However, the resultant

matching is still manually checked to ensure the calculated pairwise similarity measures roughly

align with our intuition.


4.5    Control Group Construction

To form our control groups, we match each case patent with a semantically similar non-case

patent.5 Mechanically, for each patent, we first find and order (from closest to furthest) the

50 most similar patents granted in the same year by the same art unit, as calculated via the

cosine distance between the embedding vectors. For each case patent (e.g., a patent in the top

10% most cited by applicants), we run through these similar patents to find the most similar

patent that is both non-case (e.g., not in the top 10% most cited by applicants) and does not

already fulfill this criterion for a previous patent (i.e., a non-case patent cannot be a control for

multiple case patents). This matching results in equal-sized sets of case and control patents for

each art unit. So we include only those art units with a sufficiently large set of case patents, a

minimum threshold is put in place at 20 case patents for this overlap analysis.

    In the case of patent renewals, there exists a problem with this approach: about half of

all patents granted by the USPTO in 2001­2004 are kept in force for the full term (17 years).

Further, the half that is kept in force may have a very different technological profile than the

half that is not, and so a one-to-one match between the groups is not possible. To remedy this

issue, therefore, we ask the inverse question: what are the characteristics of patents that are

not renewed at the first maintenance payment (3.5 years after grant)? As this is a much smaller

group, some 13% of patents, we can match these patents to those that were kept in force for

their full term. Note that while the definition of high-quality remains intuitive (renewed to full

term), the matching direction (low to high quality) is the opposite to that of the other patent

quality outcomes in this analysis.

    Unlike the percentile threshold of the other binary outcomes, we cannot automatically guar-

antee sufficient sample size for this overlap analysis in the case of renewals and place a threshold
   5
      Note that for all patent quality indicators considered here, the matching described will likely bias the
case group toward patents in specific technological subgroups--those which are almost always renewed, have
universally higher levels of citations, or have a lower ex-ante chance of grant (generating a larger anomalous
stock market reaction and thus KPSS value). However, our matching strategy will mitigate the technological
differences between the case and control groups that are included.



                                                     13
of at least 20 non-renewed patents--some smaller art units may have an extremely high renewal

rate, so the number of non-renewed patents available to match could be very low. Likewise, in

the other matching direction, if fewer patents are renewed to full term than those that are never

renewed, then matching will be incomplete. We remove any art units in this category, along-

side any falling below the threshold above. These restrictions (which apply only the `renewal'

outcome) result in the omission of six art units from the overlap comparison with both citation

outcomes, and 26 omissions from the overlap comparison to KPSS values.


4.6    Overlap of Patent Quality Measures: Results

We first present a measure of overlap between pairs of outcomes relative to chance. The cal-

culation for this overlap is exactly the Pearson correlation coefficient which, in the case of two

binary variables (i.e., high-quality dummies for each outcome variable), is equivalent to the

Matthews correlation coefficient (Matthews, 1975).

    With the current case-control method, the number of case and control patents are equal

for a particular outcome. Therefore, while one outcome in the overlap calculation is observed

50% of the time by construction, the other may be relatively rare. The correlation coefficient

takes this feature into account (Chicco and Jurman, 2020). Additionally, the case and control

patents are different for every outcome,6 so the overlap matrix for any given art unit is slightly

asymmetric. Figure 2 shows the distributions of overlap between a focal outcome (defining

case/control patents) and each of the other outcomes.

    These results display several interesting patterns. The strongest (and perhaps most ex-

pected) level of agreement we see between outcome pairs is between the number of application

citations and the number of examiner citations. This agreement is interesting because this im-

plies that there is no strong substitution effect when applicants submit many potential citations

in their knowledge disclosure statement. The nature of the technology appears to be driving

both sets of citations higher simultaneously--patents with many applicant citations generally

have many examiner citations.

    In contrast, there is a striking lack of agreement between the KPSS values and the other

outcomes. It makes sense that renewal is the most closely related to this measure, given that

it is also an indicator of financial values. However, our results here stand somewhat at odds to
   6
     In the case of overlaps with KPSS value, we remove patents with undefined value (i.e., patents assigned to
non-listed companies) before the matching procedure.




                                                      14
                    Applicant forward citations                               Examiner forward citations


             0.4                                                       0.4
  Overlap




             0.2




                                                            Overlap
                                                                       0.2


            0.0                                                       0.0


            -0.2                                                      -0.2


                   Examiner     Stock-      Renewals                         Applicant    Stock-    Renewals
                     Cites      Market                                         Cites      Market
                                Returns                                                   Returns


                               KPSS value                                                Renewals



             0.4                                                       0.4
                                                            Overlap




             0.2                                                       0.2
  Overlap




                                                                      0.0
            0.0


                                                                      -0.2
            -0.2

                                                                             Applicant   Examiner   Stock-
                   Applicant    Examiner    Renewals                           Cites       Cites    Market
                     Cites        Cites                                                             Returns



Figure 2: Distributions of overlap of high-quality outcome measures across art units, with a
high-quality patent defined as being: top-left : in 90th percentile of applicant forward citation
count after 10 years, top-right : in 90th percentile of examiner forward citation count after 10
years, bottom-left : in 90th percentile of KPSS values, and bottom-right : renewed to full term (17
years). Positive values indicate the overlap between outcomes within an art unit is greater than
chance, negative is less than chance, and zero is that expected by chance alone. Box represents
lower and upper quartiles of the results across art units, with median noted inside the box and
whiskers extending to 10th and 90th percentiles.




                                                       15
the relationship between citations and the KPSS values found in the work from which we source

these data (Kogan et al., 2017). We only look at the top decile (by art unit) in this work for

each outcome, which is where we may expect the relationship to be most robust--indeed, Kogan

et al. (2017) only report a strong positive relationship between the financial value measure and

citations for patents with an above-average number of citations. However, the authors also

describe a significant weakening of this relationship as controls for firm size are introduced.

This finding is consistent with what we observe here given that the most prolific firms (which

is presumably related to their size) patent most top-decile patents.7 Of course, this does not

mean that either citations or KPSS value must be a poor measure of patent quality; this result

could point to nearly orthogonal dimensions of patent quality, a much more exciting prospect.

    Finally, it is particularly interesting that renewals (i.e., patent lifetimes) appear to contain

a small but consistently positive amount of overlap with all other indicators. This relationship

may reflect the time patent quality can take to reveal itself; a patent renewed to full term will

likely be both financially valuable and technologically impactful. The KPSS value, because it

is measured so early in the patent's life, is a very noisy measure of financial expectations, but

only when this is paired with revealed technological usefulness is renewal a sensible decision.

    This simple analysis shows us the level of disagreement between popular ex-post measures

of patent quality. To investigate these relationships further, we look into the intrinsic char-

acteristics of patents reflected in each of these outcomes to gain insight into their possible

antecedents.



5       Patent Quality & Intrinsic Character

While technological importance and the financial value of a new invention are generally revealed

over time, patents do not change after grant and therefore have some intrinsic characteristics

that precede these qualities.8 Controlling for narrow technology categorizations, we can leverage

these intrinsic characteristics to see how they may be associated with different outcomes. To

do this, we collect ex-ante indicators that may add information about an invention, in terms of

both its technological traits and views on its ex-ante value or importance, that may influence
    7
      Among patents granted to publicly traded firms, we find the 1.2% most prolific firms were granted half of
all patents in our cohort. However, among patents in the top KPSS value decile, this number drops to 0.6% of
firms accounting for half of the top-decile patents.
    8
      Post-grant amendments are very rare. They occur as a result of a validity challenge, see, e.g., Chien et al.
(2018).




                                                       16
drafting or filing strategies. These indicators constitute the input into a factor analysis to

identify intrinsic components of patent character, which are then used as independent variables

in a dominance analysis to tease out their relative association with the outcomes presented in

Section 4.1. Dominance analysis, explained in greater details below, is a method of measuring

relative contributions of independent variables in a regression.


5.1    Ex-Ante Indicator Variables

To capture the intrinsic characteristics of a patent, we rely exclusively on ex-ante indicator

variables; that is, those defined at (or very close to) the grant of the patent. There are two

primary rationales for this choice. The first is that external factors unrelated to the patent or

invention's intrinsic characteristics may influence the perceived quality of a patent over time.

By temporally separating these intrinsic characteristics from the post-grant outcomes, we hope

to obtain a more `pure' signal regarding the relationships between these two sets of variables (at

the cost of explanatory power). The second rationale is that the ability to relate characteristics

of a patent at grant, systematically, to ex-post dimensions of quality is valuable information

from a technology management perspective. If we were to include ex-post indicators into our

analysis, the use of our framework for the characterization of newer patents (for any purpose)

would be delayed until the requisite ex-post information became available. Appendix B provides

a full descriptions of all indicator variables included in the factor analysis, while Table 1 lists

them and defines the abbreviations that we use for the remainder of this document.

    We transform all indicators before further analysis in order to reduce the influence of ex-

treme values--we add 1 and take the logarithm such that zero is the minimum value for every

indicator.9,10

    The specific ex-ante variables included in our analysis from this point forward, while nu-

merous relative to the existing literature on patent quality, are necessarily somewhat arbitrary.

However, the decision around what to include depends primarily on two factors: data avail-

ability and the breadth of patent characteristics captured. That is, providing the variable

is measurable and defined for the vast majority of patents, we have endeavored to include a

range of ex-ante variables that capture distinct (but not necessarily unrelated) characteristics

of a patent or invention. The fact that this set is incomplete and arbitrary by nature was an
   9
       Some indicators have 1 as a minimum by default; these have 1 subtracted from their raw values such that
all indicators have a theoretical minimum of zero before this transformation. This is indicated in Table 1.
    10
       Originality (BOR in Table 1) does not require a log transformation to achieve approximate normality.



                                                     17
   Variable                                                                  Abbreviation
   Backward citations to patents, applicant added                               BCA
   Backward citations to patents, examiner added                                BCE
   Backward self-citations to patents, applicant added                          BSA
   Backward self-citations to patents, examiner added                           BSE
   Backward citations to foreign patents                                        BFP
   Backward citations to scientific lit. (front page) (Marx & Fuegi, 2019)      BNP
   Backward citations to scientific lit. (in-text) (Bryan et al., 2019)          BIT
   Originality (Trajtenberg et al., 1997)                                       BOR
   Backward-citations' pedigree (Higham et al., 2019)                           BPE
   Average age of backward citations                                            BAG
   # independent claims - 1                                                      CIN
   # dependent claims per independent claim                                     CDE
   # words in first claim (Kuhn & Thompson, 2019)                               CFW
   # CPC technology class memberships - 1                                       TCM
   Grant lag                                                                    LAG
   Non-final rejections                                                         NFR
   Geographic Family size (# countries) - 1                                     GPF

Table 1: List of the variables used in this work as raw measures of intrinsic patent indicators
and their abbreviations.


important consideration in our chosen methods, as discussed in Sections 5.2 and 5.3.

   Some of the ex-ante variables we use are not defined for a small minority of patents, but we

consider them sufficiently meaningful to include. Specifically, we can extract much information

about a patent by looking at the patents that it cites. Some constructed variables (such as the

average age of cited patents) are simply not defined when no patents are cited. Weighing the

information content of these indicators against the number of patents excluded, we decided it

was worth the inclusion of these variables. A total of 4.8% of our cohort are excluded from all

analyses, with 3.3% due to a lack of backward citations. A further 1.5% of patents are excluded

due to patents with exclusively negative-time citation lags (see Appendix B for details).


5.2   Extracting Intrinsic Patent Characteristics

We conduct a factor analysis to construct quantitative measures of different ex-ante patent

characteristics that can be uncovered with the selected indicators. In prior work, this method

has both been successfully applied to the construction of composite quality indices (Lanjouw

and Schankerman, 2004), the interpretation of patent quality indicators (van Zeebroeck, 2011),

and models of patent citation dynamics (Higham et al., 2019), the latter building on a sim-

ple preferential attachment model as a description of forward citation accrual (Higham et al.,

2017a,b). We favored factor analysis over principal component analysis (another popular di-


                                              18
mensionality reduction technique) because we do not want to assume that the lower-dimensional

space can capture all variance among the original set of indicators. After having extracted a

lower-dimensional space, we use the relationship between the indicator variables and the ex-

tracted factors to assign a position to each patent within this space. We performed this factor

analysis on the whole cohort to gain a broad picture of this space of characteristics that is not

technology-specific.

   The dimensionality reduction is conducted by selecting factors based on a scree test (Cattell,

1966). This test is a graphical method whereby factors are ordered by variance explained,

and the factor retention threshold is chosen to be the point at which this quantity decreases

dramatically for additional factors. While somewhat subjective, this method is appropriate

for our purposes, as our goal is to find naturally occurring and interpretable components of

intrinsic (ex-ante) patent character, hereafter referred to as characteristics. Later, we use this

information as input into the dominance analysis described in Section 5.3 in order to determine

the characteristics that are generally associated with each ex-post patent quality measure--

our goal is not to predict these outcomes, so we keep the number of retained factors small for

the sake of interpretability. After discarding factors as described above, we apply an oblique

rotation to the factor loading matrix in order to obtain the human-interpretable results shown

in Figure 3. This rotation allows factors to become correlated if this provides a more optimal

result (in terms of a subjective, but explicit, notion of interpretability). Appendix C contains a

description of this rotation process and the objective function used in the optimization process.

Even with an oblique rotation, the factor analysis produces factors that appear to be mostly

independent of one another, as evidenced by the mostly small values displayed in the covariance

matrix in Table 2. We note that while the factors are mathematically defined in the same way

for all patents, the differences between covariance matrices for different technologies could be

substantial.

   Figure 3 shows the results of the factor analysis, after which we normalize each factor to unit

length and variance. Most of these factors correspond to intuitive notions of different patent

characteristics, such as science dependence and interdisciplinarity. Our interpretations for all of

these factors can be found in Table 3. In particular, we describe what we believe a large factor

score on a particular patent means, given the ex-ante indicator variables that contribute the

most to each factor. The shorthand for each characteristic will be used to refer to each factor

and will be written in italics.


                                                19
                                         Factor #
            1        2         3        4             5       6       7        8
   BCA
   BCE
   BSA
   BSE
      BFP
   BNP                                                                                  Loading
      BIT
   BOR                                                                                   0.4
      BPE
   BAG                                                                                   0.0
      CIN
   CDE                                                                                  -0.4

  CFW
   TCM
   LAG
   NFR
      SPF


Figure 3: Results of the exploratory factor analysis on ex-ante measurable input variables, after
an oblique rotation to increase interpretability. `Loading' in this context refers to the relative
contribution of each indicator to each factor. Factors in order of eigenvalue, an input-variable-
dependent quantity that should not be read into.

   2         3         4         5         6            7       8     Factor
  0.10      0.33      0.38      0.25     0.46         0.07    0.07      1
            0.02     -0.01      0.14      0.52        -0.44    0.11     2
                      0.52      0.35     0.21          0.10   0.14      3
                                0.23     0.17          0.36   0.26      4
                                         -0.21        0.16    -0.13     5
                                                      -0.20   0.57      6
                                                              -0.20     7

Table 2: Covariance matrix of factors after an oblique rotation. All factors are normalised to
unit variance and zero mean, so table is also the correlation matrix.


5.3     Dominance Analysis

The goal of dominance analysis is to sensibly decompose the explanatory power of a set of

correlated independent variables with respect to some dependent variable. This method is

most useful when one is concerned about the relative explanatory power of a particular variable

relative to others, and not in the direction of the relationship between this variable and the

outcome variable, which is indeed our intention here. After all, we have deliberately sacrificed

explanatory power by excluding ex-post variables from the factor analysis. For this reason, we

are only interested in obtaining a comprehensive picture of the parts that are explained.

                                                 20
                 Characteristic
 Factor #                                Large loadings          Interpretation of a high factor score
                  shorthand
                                                                 Many citations to scientific and technical
       1               Science               BNP, BIT                articles, likely a large basic science
                                                                                  dependence.
                                                                     Long grant lag and many non-final
       2          Firm Tenacitya         LAG, NFR, BCE           rejections justified with prior art cited by
                                                                                   examiners.
                                                                    Many citations made by applicant to
                                                                      established patents, both to the
                     Knowledge
       3                                 BCA, BSA, BAG              applicants own patents and those of
                     Synthesis
                                                                   others. Perhaps indicative of crowded
                                                                              technological fields.
                                                                  Many citations to foreign patents, while
       4           International             BFP, GPF              the family includes patents granted in
                                                                           many different countries.
                                                                 Cites patents from many different 4-digit
       5         Interdisciplinary          BOR, TCM                 CPC technology classes while also
                                                                           belonging to many itself.
                                                                 Cites patents that are new but well-cited
                                                                  compared to similar patents of the same
                                            BPE, -BAG,
       6           Cutting Edge                                   age. Long grant lags and many citations
                                            LAG, BNP
                                                                   to the scientific or technical literature
                                                                   suggest patent is difficult to examine.
                                                                     Few independent claims, and many
       7            Narrowness              -CIN, CDE            dependent claims per independent claim.
                                                                     Could reflect a dense patent space.
                                                                  Many self-citations to new patents from
                      Ongoing
       8                                 BSE, BSA, -BAG            both applicants and examiners, likely
                      Research
                                                                    part of an ongoing research program.

Table 3: Interpretation of factor analysis results and mapping to preliminary `characteristics'
that may be indicated by a large score on each factor. Large loadings column lists variables
with loadings > 0.15, listed in order of absolute magnitude (negative sign indicates negative
loading). The first column displays the factor numbers that correspond with those in Figure
3. a `Firm Tenacity' may be attributed in small part to intentional delays by the applicant throughout the
prosecution process (Zahringer et al., 2018). However, the evidence for this behaviour is much more limited for
applications to the USPTO than for other patent offices (Palangkaraya et al., 2008; Henkel and Jell, 2010; Mejer
and de la Potterie, 2011; Zhang et al., 2020). The relationships between the main components of tenacity (LAG
& NFR) and private economic value are discussed in Appendices B.3.3 & B.3.5.


    We use the most simple version of dominance analysis, as proposed by Budescu (1993) (see

also Azen and Budescu, 2003). Once a set of independent variables is constructed (such as the

factors extracted in Section 5.2), this method is designed to measure the average contribution of

any particular variable to a pre-defined goodness-of-fit measure, given the contributions of the

other variables in the same regression against some dependent variable. In practice, we conduct

our dominance analysis as follows:



                                                      21
   1. Define a quantity to capture explanatory power (usually R2 values or similar11 );

   2. Select a particular focal independent variable;

   3. Construct the set of all subsets of the other independent variables;

   4. For each subset, regress on the outcome variable with and without the addition of the focal

        variable. Calculate the explanatory power gained with the addition of the focal variable;

   5. Average these gains across all subsets;

   6. Repeat for every independent variable.

In short, paraphrasing Budescu (1993), this method averages, across all subsets, the difference

between the fit of the models that include a particular variable and the models that exclude it.

After we compute these averages, they are normalized to reflect the approximate percentage of

the explanatory power they contribute--we are not interested in goodness of fit per se; we are

only interested in understanding the different contributions to the explained variance. For this

reason, we do not report specific R2 or pseudo-R2 values but note that these are generally in

the 0.1­0.4 range and strongly depend on the outcome-art unit pair.12

    For this method, converting outcomes to binary quality indicators (as done in Section 4)

does not simplify the analysis. As such, we select a regression model for each outcome with

their natural data type in mind--ordinary least squares (OLS) for (log) KPSS value, Poisson

for both forward citation counts,13 and ordered logit for renewals.

    For our purposes, with the independent variables being the characteristics described in Table

3 and the outcome variables being those described in Section 4.1, we conducted this analysis

for each art unit individually with grant-year dummies to account for any systematic temporal

changes occurring over the four-year period considered (2001­2004) that may affect our selected
   11
       All non-OLS models use McFadden's pseudo R2 (McFadden, 1973).
   12
       We additionally note that even regressions resulting in very low R2 values are not necessarily misspecified,
and the model may still possess predictive power. For example, a low-R2 model that nonetheless has a 50%
chance of identifying a patent in the top 20% with respect to some outcome measure clearly has utility. More
generally, a model can have high precision (in the classification sense) without a high R2 , if one is willing to
accept many false negatives.
    13
       A negative binomial model was only computationally feasible using a heuristic version of dominance analy-
sis (Johnson, 2000) and results were qualitatively identical to the Poisson model. However, this method cannot
be applied to regressions on categorical data such as ordinal logit models (which we use to model renewal events).
We opted to avoid a mixture of dominance analysis methods that could render a comparison between outcomes
less convincing. Further, the Poisson count model is robust for the mean under misspecification (whereas the
negative binomial model may introduce bias) (Gourieroux et al., 1984). This property is ideal for our empirical
strategy as the dominance analysis runs independently for each art unit; using a Poisson model means that we
do not have to assume universal distributional properties for all art units. For these reasons, we continue to use
a Poisson model for forward citation data.


                                                        22
outcomes.14 We present the results in the same way as for the overlap analysis in Section 4, as

a distribution over art units.

   One advantage of dominance analysis, for our purposes, is the lowered sensitivity of this

method to the semi-arbitrariness of the independent variables we include. Even if we now

introduce an extremely predictive new independent variable into our analysis, many of the

subsets on which the dominance analysis is calculated (for any particular focal characteristic)

would not include this new variable. In this way, the variables we currently include will still be

recognized as having valuable explanatory information, and the new results will have obvious

qualitative similarities to the old.

   Figures 4 and 5 show the results of the dominance analysis, conducted for each art unit

meeting the criteria laid out in Section 4.3. The sign of the relationships between the dependent

variable and the characteristics in the full model (i.e., the regression with all characteristics

included) is averaged over all art units to indicate the level of agreement in the relationship's

direction. The usefulness of these results lies in their descriptions of the kinds of patents that are

likely to be deemed high (or low) quality when using a particular outcome measure.15 In other

words, this method depicts the biases that a researcher may wish to anticipate and control for

when using patent quality measures for multiple technology fields. For example, KPSS values

have clear biases against inventions granted in multiple countries, which may be more common

for particular technologies, larger firms, or non-U.S.-based assignees.

   We observe, for all outcomes, that there exists a significant amount of heterogeneity in their

relationships with characteristics (as defined in Table 3) across art units. This variation is, per-

haps, intuitive; we do not expect a high score on a particular characteristic to be consistently

associated with a particular outcome for all technologies. As such, we note that the most incon-

sistent and variable relationships (e.g., between Science or Knowledge Synthesis and Applicant

Forward Citations) could be the most interesting to dissect along technological divisions. We

also show the results for three technologically distinct art units (1648, 2122, and 2828, covering

inventions related to viruses, artificial intelligence, and lasers respectively), in Figures 6 and 7,

against the background of the distribution of results for all art units.

   However, the differences between these common patent quality measures are more strik-

ing. While examiner and applicant citations show obvious similarities, these outcomes contrast
  14
       Note that while the results presented do include these dummies, omitting them does not change the results.
  15
       It is worth emphasizing that the relationships observed in this work are not necessarily causal.




                                                        23
                                  Applicant forward citations

            Science

              Firm
           Tenacity

        Knowledge                                                                     % Positive
         Synthesis

      International                                                                      1.0


   Interdisciplinary                                                                     0.5

            Cutting
              Edge                                                                       0.0

       Narrowness

          Ongoing
          Research

                       0.0               0.2                     0.4
                                         Relative Importance

                                  Examiner forward citations

            Science

              Firm
           Tenacity

        Knowledge                                                                     % Positive
         Synthesis

      International                                                                      1.0


   Interdisciplinary                                                                     0.5

            Cutting
              Edge                                                                       0.0

       Narrowness

          Ongoing
          Research

                       0.0             0.2                 0.4                 0.6
                                         Relative Importance

Figure 4: Relative importance calculated via a dominance analysis of patent characteristics on:
Top : forward applicant citations after 10 years, and Bottom : examiner citations after 10 years.
Box represents lower and upper quartiles of the distribution of results of dominance analysis
across art units, with the median noted inside the box and whiskers extending to 10th and
90th percentiles. Color indicates the percentage of art units with positive-signed relationships
between each characteristic and the outcome in the full model (separate from the dominance
analysis).




                                               24
                                           KPSS value

            Science

              Firm
           Tenacity

        Knowledge                                                                    % Positive
         Synthesis

      International                                                                      1.0


   Interdisciplinary                                                                     0.5

            Cutting
              Edge                                                                       0.0

       Narrowness

          Ongoing
          Research

                       0.0         0.2               0.4            0.6
                                         Relative Importance

                                            Renewals

            Science

              Firm
           Tenacity

        Knowledge                                                                    % Positive
         Synthesis

      International                                                                      1.0


   Interdisciplinary                                                                     0.5

            Cutting
              Edge                                                                       0.0

       Narrowness

          Ongoing
          Research

                       0.0                0.2                    0.4
                                         Relative Importance

Figure 5: Relative importance calculated via a dominance analysis of patent characteristics
on: Top : KPSS value, and Bottom : renewal to full term relative to patents abandoned before
a single maintenance payment. Box represents lower and upper quartiles of the distribution
of results of dominance analysis across art units, with the median noted inside the box and
whiskers extending to 10th and 90th percentiles. Color indicates the percentage of art units
with positive-signed relationships between each characteristic and the outcome in the full model
(separate from the dominance analysis).




                                                25
against the results obtained for the more financially-orientated outcomes in Figure 5. The life-

time of patents, as evidenced by renewal data, is the outcome that is least consistently related to

ex-ante characteristics. Renewal is a decision made by patent holders, while the other outcomes

are the result of forces mostly outside of their control. As such, we may expect that renewal

has a stronger relationship to assignee characteristics than technological ones (Bessen, 2008).

    What becomes clear through this analysis is the potential pitfalls of composite patent quality

measures. The obvious exemplar here is the relationship between International and KPSS value,

aspects of both of which can be related to the financial value of a patent (Harhoff et al., 2003;

Fischer and Leidinger, 2014; Kogan et al., 2017) and, as such, have been used directly as proxies

for this value (Yang et al., 2015; Poege et al., 2019; Feng and Jaravel, 2020). Due to the generally

negative relationship between these two metrics shown in Figure 5,16 a composite measure where

both were included could be empirically problematic. On the level of technology categories, we

can see that in the case of lasers, Science is associated with poorer long-term citation outcomes

but a longer patent lifetime, while the exact opposite is true for Interdisciplinarity. Including

both forward citations and patent lifetime in a composite metric would, again, reduce the

information about the influence of both science-dependence and interdisciplinarity on patent

quality in this high-tech sector, while also reinforcing other influences such as that of the `Cutting

Edge' characteristic. Generalizing from these examples, it is easy to demonstrate how composite

indicators, while potentially reducing noise, can water-down or eliminate the information content

of the constituent metrics for particular use cases.

    Concerning specific outcome-characteristic relationships, there are almost no individual re-

sults that are surprising. The shear spread in the relationships between characteristics and

outcomes across technologies may have been dismissed as simple variance in the past. How-

ever, the nature of the spread here is quite different--each data point represents the average

difference in explanatory power between 128 pairs of regressions for a single art unit containing

about 900 patents (on average). Therefore, while there will undoubtedly be some noise in the

output of this process, the spread shown in Figures 4 and 5 is not analogous to the standard

error that could be calculated by aggregating all art units and regressing an outcome on the
   16
      Patent values obtained by anomalous stock market returns are a combination of the perceived value of the
patent and the level of surprise when the patent is granted. To obtain a financial value for each patent, Kogan
et al. (2017) scaled the measured value by the average probability of grant across all patents to account for this
`surprise.' If, however, an equivalent patent is granted first at a foreign office, which will generally have a larger
required inventive step for patentablity (de Rassenfosse et al., 2016), the US grant is less surprising. That is, the
firm stock price already has this information built-in by the time the US equivalent is granted, and the patent is
thus designated a lower value to reflect the lower level of surprise.



                                                         26
                                  Applicant forward citations

            Science

              Firm
           Tenacity

        Knowledge
         Synthesis
                                                                                       Art Unit:
      International
                                                                                           Viruses
   Interdisciplinary                                                                       AI
                                                                                           Lasers
            Cutting
              Edge

       Narrowness

          Ongoing
          Research

                       0.0               0.2                      0.4
                                         Relative Importance

                                  Examiner forward citations

            Science

              Firm
           Tenacity

        Knowledge
         Synthesis
                                                                                       Art Unit:
      International
                                                                                           Viruses
   Interdisciplinary                                                                       AI
                                                                                           Lasers
            Cutting
              Edge

       Narrowness

          Ongoing
          Research

                       0.0             0.2                  0.4                 0.6
                                         Relative Importance

Figure 6: Relative importance of patent characteristics calculated for particular art units
with respect to: Top : forward applicant citations after 10 years, and Bottom : examiner
citations after 10 years. Color represents sign of the relationship in the full model, and symbols
are overlaid on the distribution across all art units where the box represents lower and upper
quartiles, with median noted inside the box and whiskers extending to 10th and 90th percentiles.




                                               27
                                           KPSS value

            Science

              Firm
           Tenacity

        Knowledge
         Synthesis
                                                                                      Art Unit:
      International
                                                                                          Viruses
   Interdisciplinary                                                                      AI
                                                                                          Lasers
            Cutting
              Edge

       Narrowness

          Ongoing
          Research

                       0.0         0.2               0.4            0.6
                                         Relative Importance

                                             Renewals

            Science

              Firm
           Tenacity

        Knowledge
         Synthesis
                                                                                      Art Unit:
      International
                                                                                          Viruses
   Interdisciplinary                                                                      AI
                                                                                          Lasers
            Cutting
              Edge

       Narrowness

          Ongoing
          Research

                       0.0                0.2                     0.4
                                         Relative Importance

Figure 7: Relative importance of patent characteristics calculated for particular art units with
respect to: Top : KPSS value, and Bottom : renewal to full term relative to patents abandoned
before a single maintenance payment. Color represents sign of the relationship in the full model,
and symbols are overlaid on the distribution across all art units where the box represents lower
and upper quartiles, with median noted inside the box and whiskers extending to 10th and 90th
percentiles.




                                                28
characteristics. In addition, the usual presentation of these relationships may be biased towards

particular technology types simply because of the skewed distribution of patent volume across

these technologies (Lafond and Kim, 2019), which (by construction) is not a concern here.

    Relationships between ex-ante indicators and the outcome variables examined here have

been explored in the past, though often for a single technology field. To the extent that we can

compare this work to previous research, we find broad agreement. Answering questions about

specific relationships is not the goal of this work; however, Table 4 presents an overview of some

prominent work relating to the most common outcome used, forward citations (applicant and

examiner citations combined), that can easily be compared to the current results. The charac-

teristics constructed in this work are (naturally generated) composites of ex-ante indicators, but

it is generally straightforward to identify the characteristic in which any particular indicator

has the most weight. For example, prior work relating international-ness to forward citations

generally uses the simple family size--while not a perfect match to any of our characteristics,

this metric is most closely related to the International characteristic. While some subjectivity

is involved in this exercise, it is a good sanity check for our method. The only characteristics

for which we find significant disagreement with past work are Science and Narrowness. Science

dependence is a very technology- and operationalization-dependent quantity (consistent with

the moderate spread we see in this variable across technologies). Narrowness is defined some-

what unusually here--it decreases with the number of independent claims and increases with

the number of dependent claims per independent claim.



6    Discussion and Conclusions

Patent quality exists in the eyes of the beholder. Patent holders, courts, society-at-large, and all

other stakeholders in the patent system have different ideas about what makes a good patent.

While restricted to ex-post patent quality outcomes available at scale, we provide evidence that

these outcomes are generally not in agreement about what makes a `high-quality' patent and,

further, that ex-ante characteristics of patents themselves (both intrinsic and extrinsic to the

underlying invention) also differ significantly in their relationship to these outcomes. We also

observe these heterogeneities within ex-post outcomes--between different technology groupings

as defined by art units.

    While not previously presented in the comparative form shown here, these conclusions are



                                                29
                                 Sign of Relationship with Forward Citations
    Characterisic                 +                                                 -
                             Fleming and
                                                     Falk and Train
        Science            Sorenson (2004);                               Sapsalis et al. (2006)
                                                         (2017)
                         Jung and Lee (2016)
     Firm Tenacity
                             Fleming and
                           Sorenson (2004);
                            Sapsalis et al.
       Knowledge         (2006); Sapsalis and
       Synthesis          van Pottelsberghe
                          (2007); Petruzzelli
                          et al. (2015); Falk
                           and Train (2017)
                          Sapsalis and van
     International                               Sapsalis et al. (2006)
                        Pottelsberghe (2007)
                            Lerner (1994);
                             Fleming and
                           Sorenson (2004);
                                                     Petruzzelli et al.
    Interdisciplinary       Jung and Lee
                                                          (2015)
                          (2016); Mukherjee
                          et al. (2017); Falk
                           and Train (2017)
                             Fleming and
                           Sorenson (2004);
     Cutting Edge           Jung and Lee
                          (2016); Mukherjee
                             et al. (2017)
                          Petruzzelli et al.
                         (2015); Jung and
      Narrowness
                        Lee (2016); Falk and
                            Train (2017)
                                                                             Sapsalis et al.
        Ongoing                                                           (2006); Sapsalis and
                                                 Jung and Lee (2016)
        Research                                                           van Pottelsberghe
                                                                                 (2007)

Table 4: A tabular summary of previous work looking at specific relationships between one or
more of the ex-ante indicators included in the current work and forward citations in aggregate.
Shades indicate the level of agreement of art units as examined in this work, with darker shading
representing higher consistency; where results for applicant cites and examiner cites (shown in
Figure 4) have been subjectively aggregated.




                                                30
both intuitive and consistent with previous work on particular aspects of patent quality. Our

contribution here is to compare each of these outcomes directly and systematically to explicitly

demonstrate both the quantitative and qualitative differences between outcomes and technolo-

gies with respect to our ability to measure patent quality. In contrast to prior work on this

topic (e.g., van Zeebroeck and van Pottelsberghe, 2011a; Squicciarini et al., 2013), we do not

offer a composite indicator of patent quality. In fact, the inconsistency of ex-post patent quality

outcomes suggests that each outcome contains information that other outcomes do not. As

such, merely averaging these measures across all stakeholder viewpoints may dilute the useful

information that can be leveraged to answer specific questions.

   This point leads us directly to a discussion about the interaction between patent quality and

policy. Patent quality is a complex, multidimensional concept, and policies looking to improve

patent quality must consider this complexity. For example, while we do not examine patent

validity empirically in this work, a `high-quality' patent must be enforceable. That is, patent

owners need to have some confidence that their patent is valid; otherwise, they will not seek a

patent, and all the supposed benefits of the system are moot. At the same time, if policymakers

are attempting to put laws in place to reduce the incidence of invalid patents, this will not

necessarily be in the public's best interest. An extreme example, as noted by Guerrini (2013),

is a law that makes it impossible to challenge a patent's validity. This law would decrease

the incidence of patent invalidity to zero immediately--this does not mean patent quality has

increased, and, in fact, the effectiveness of the patent system (with respect to its purpose)

would likely decrease. Of course, any policy that makes challenging a patent more expensive or

unlikely to succeed will decrease invalidity rates, disproportionately hurt small businesses, and

incentivize the patenting of less novel and more obvious inventions.

   Further, policies that strongly increase quality in one dimension for one set of technologies

may decrease quality as measured via another dimension for a different set of technologies. A

policy that encourages, for example, broad diffusion of knowledge in the semiconductor industry,

could be counterproductive in the biotechnology industry. The results presented here suggest

that there is no panacea for improving any specific aspect of patent quality. If we accept

this, then very targeted policy changes (including non-patent innovation policies) are likely

the most efficient way to address many common criticisms of the patent system (Hemel and

Ouellette, 2018), which may, in turn, require system-wide structural changes to practically

implement (de Rassenfosse and Higham, 2019).


                                                31
   Our method's primary limitation is the inability to easily incorporate rare event data such

as patent litigation outcomes or commercialization of the underlying invention, which could be

argued to be more direct or informative indicators of patent quality. This restriction is simply a

sample size problem, and broader technology classes or cohort sizes (i.e., more than four years)

may provide a remedy that would allow a fair comparison.

   However, there is a more general limitation that afflicts all research on patent quality: high-

quality patents may not be associated with a high-quality invention, regardless of how we define

these concepts. One of the primary goals of the patent system, as a government institution,

is to serve (and presumably benefit) society. If the content of a patent does not eventually

find its way to the market, then that patent is economic dead-weight, and society would have

been better served by a defensive publication, academic article, or other contribution to the

intellectual commons. At their core, patent systems are a governmental policy response to the

risks associated with the development of new inventions and are accompanied by the assumption

that these inventions will confer a net benefit to society. If we were to dichotomize patent

quality, therefore, we suggest that a high-quality patent is one that facilitates the production

of such inventions where they otherwise would not exist. Measuring quality in this fashion is a

challenge, but recent policy changes such as virtual patent marking have made this task more

achievable in recent years (de Rassenfosse and Higham, 2020).

   Lastly, the unavoidably arbitrary selection of metrics, both ex-post and ex-ante, led us to

adopt the flexible and robust empirical methods described above. This allowed us to construct

a framework that is generalizable to research of an exploratory nature, particularly in situa-

tions where variables may be added or removed throughout the research process. For future

work that addresses more specific questions, where there exist theoretical bases for particular

relationships between indicators, alternative analysis frameworks such as a structural equation

model (J¨
        oreskog and Goldberger, 1975; Pakes and Griliches, 1980) may be more appropriate.



Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank participants at the Oxford Invention Novelty workshop, the

4th Leuven Summer School on Data and Algorithms for ST&I studies, 11th Hitotsubashi Uni-

versity Institute of Innovation Research Summer School for their excellent feedback, as well as

Dominique Guellec, Bronwyn Hall, and Ling Zhou for their insightful comments.



                                               32
References

M. B. Albert, D. Avery, F. Narin, and P. McAllister. Direct validation of citation counts as

  indicators of industrially important patents. Research Policy, 20(3):251­259, 1991.

S. Arts, B. Cassiman, and J. C. Gomez. Text matching to measure patent similarity. Strategic

  Management Journal, 39(1):62­84, 2018.

R. Azen and D. V. Budescu. The dominance analysis approach for comparing predictors in

  multiple regression. Psychological Methods, 8(2):129, 2003.

C. L. Benson and C. L. Magee. Quantitative determination of technological improvement from

  patent data. PLOS ONE, 10(4), 2015.

J. Bessen. The value of US patents by owner and patent characteristics. Research Policy, 37

  (5):932­945, 2008.

J. Bessen and M. J. Meurer. The patent litigation explosion. Loy. U. Chi. LJ, 45:401, 2013.

D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan. Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of machine Learning

  research, 3(Jan):993­1022, 2003.

K. A. Bryan, Y. Ozcan, and B. Sampat. In-text patent citations: A user's guide. Research

  Policy, 49(4):103946, 2020.

D. V. Budescu. Dominance analysis: a new approach to the problem of relative importance of

  predictors in multiple regression. Psychological Bulletin, 114(3):542, 1993.

M. P. Carpenter, F. Narin, and P. Woolf. Citation rates to technologically important patents.

  World Patent Information, 3(4):160­163, 1981.

J. B. Carroll. An analytical solution for approximating simple structure in factor analysis.

  Psychometrika, 18(1):23­38, 1953.

J. B. Carroll. Biquartimin criterion for rotation to oblique simple structure in factor analysis.

  Science, 1957.

R. B. Cattell. The scree test for the number of factors. Multivariate Behavioral Research, 1(2):

  245­276, 1966.



                                               33
D. Chicco and G. Jurman. The advantages of the Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) over

  F1 score and accuracy in binary classification evaluation. BMC Genomics, 21(1):6, 2020.

C. Chien, C. Helmers, and A. Spigarelli. Inter partes review and the design of post-grant patent

  reviews. Berkeley Tech. LJ, 33:817, 2018.

A. B. Costello and J. Osborne. Best practices in exploratory factor analysis: Four recom-

  mendations for getting the most from your analysis. Practical Assessment, Research, and

  Evaluation, 10(1):7, 2005.

C. A. Cotropia. The folly of early filing in patent law. Hastings LJ, 61:65, 2009.

C. A. Cotropia, M. A. Lemley, and B. Sampat. Do applicant patent citations matter? Research

  Policy, 42(4):844­854, 2013.

K. Cremers. Determinants of patent litigation in Germany. Discussion Paper 04-72, Zentrum

  f¨
   ur Europ¨
           aische Wirtschaftsforschung, May 2004.

D. Czarnitzki, B. H. Hall, and R. Oriani. The market valuation of knowledge assets in US and

  European firms. In The Management of Intellectual Property, pages 111­131. Edward Elgar

  Publishing, 2006.

G. de Rassenfosse. Notice failure revisited: Evidence on the use of virtual patent marking.

  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2018.

G. de Rassenfosse and K. Higham. Decentralising the patent system. Available at SSRN

  3446337, 2019.

G. de Rassenfosse and K. Higham. Wanted: a standard for virtual patent marking. Journal of

  Intellectual Property Law & Practice, 15(7):544­553, 06 2020. ISSN 1747-1532.

G. de Rassenfosse and A. B. Jaffe. Are patent fees effective at weeding out low-quality patents?

  Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 27:134­148, 2018. doi: 10.1111/jems.12219.

G. de Rassenfosse, H. Dernis, and G. Boedt. An introduction to the patstat database with

  example queries. Australian Economic Review, 47(3):395­408, 2014.

G. de Rassenfosse, W. E. Griffiths, A. B. Jaffe, and E. Webster. Low-quality patents in the

  eye of the beholder: Evidence from multiple examiners. Technical report, National Bureau

  of Economic Research, 2016.

                                               34
S. Deerwester, S. T. Dumais, G. W. Furnas, T. K. Landauer, and R. Harshman. Indexing by

  latent semantic analysis. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 41(6):

  391­407, 1990.

N. Falk and K. Train. Patent valuation with forecasts of forward citations. Journal of Business

  Valuation and Economic Loss Analysis, 12(1):101­121, 2017.

J. Feng and X. Jaravel. Crafting intellectual property rights: Implications for patent assertion

  entities, litigation, and innovation. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 12(1):

  140­81, 2020.

T. Fischer and J. Leidinger. Testing patent value indicators on directly observed patent value­

  An empirical analysis of Ocean Tomo patent auctions. Research Policy, 43(3):519­529, 2014.

L. Fleming. Breakthroughs and the "long tail" of innovation. MIT Sloan Management Review,

  49(1):69, 2007.

L. Fleming and O. Sorenson. Science as a map in technological search. Strategic Management

  Journal, 25(8-9):909­928, 2004.

A. Galasso and M. Schankerman. Patents and cumulative innovation: Causal evidence from

  the courts. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(1):317­369, 2015.

A. Gambardella, D. Harhoff, and B. Verspagen. The value of European patents. European

  Management Review, 5(2):69­84, 2008.

P. Giuri, M. Mariani, S. Brusoni, G. Crespi, D. Francoz, A. Gambardella, W. Garcia-Fontes,

  A. Geuna, R. Gonzales, D. Harhoff, et al. Inventors and invention processes in Europe:

  Results from the PatVal-EU survey. Research Policy, 36(8):1107­1127, 2007.

C. Gourieroux, A. Monfort, and A. Trognon. Pseudo maximum likelihood methods: Applica-

  tions to poisson models. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, pages 701­720,

  1984.

Z. Griliches. Patent statistics as economic indicators: A survey. Journal of Economic Literature,

  28(4):1661­1707, 1990.

D. Guellec and B. van Pottelsberghe. The economics of the European patent system: IP policy

  for innovation and competition. Oxford University Press, 2007.

                                               35
C. J. Guerrini. Defining patent quality. Fordham L. Rev., 82:3091, 2013.

B. H. Hall, A. B. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg. The NBER patent citation data file: Lessons,

  insights and methodological tools. Working Paper 8498, National Bureau of Economic Re-

  search, October 2001.

B. H. Hall, A. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg. Market value and patent citations. RAND Journal

  of Economics, 36(1):16­38, 2005.

D. Harhoff and S. Wagner. The duration of patent examination at the European Patent Office.

  Management Science, 55:1969­1984, 2009.

D. Harhoff, F. M. Scherer, and K. Vopel. Citations, family size, opposition and the value of

  patent rights. Research Policy, 32(8):1343­1363, 2003.

D. Hegde, D. C. Mowery, and S. J. Graham. Pioneering inventors or thicket builders: Which

  us firms use continuations in patenting? Management Science, 55(7):1214­1226, 2009.

C. Helmers et al. The economic analysis of patent litigation data, volume 48. WIPO, 2018.

D. J. Hemel and L. Ouellette. Innovation policy pluralism. Yale LJ, 128:544, 2018.

J. Henkel and F. Jell. Patent pending­why faster isn't always better. Available at SSRN

  1738912, 2010.

K. W. Higham, M. Governale, A. Jaffe, and U. Z¨
                                              ulicke. Fame and obsolescence: Disentangling

  growth and aging dynamics of patent citations. Physical Review E, 95(4):042309, 2017a.

K. W. Higham, M. Governale, A. Jaffe, and U. Z¨
                                              ulicke. Unraveling the dynamics of growth,

  aging and inflation for citations to scientific articles from specific research fields. Journal of

  Informetrics, 11(4):1190­1200, 2017b.

K. W. Higham, M. Governale, A. Jaffe, and U. Z¨
                                              ulicke. Ex-ante measure of patent quality

  reveals intrinsic fitness for citation-network growth. Physical Review E, 99(6):060301, 2019.

A. B. Jaffe and G. de Rassenfosse. Patent citation data in social science research: Overview

  and best practices. Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology, 68

  (6):1360­1374, 2017.




                                                36
A. B. Jaffe, M. Trajtenberg, and M. S. Fogarty. Knowledge spillovers and patent citations:

  Evidence from a survey of inventors. American Economic Review, 90(2):215­218, May 2000.

J. W. Johnson. A heuristic method for estimating the relative weight of predictor variables in

  multiple regression. Multivariate Behavioral Research, 35(1):1­19, 2000.

K. G. J¨
       oreskog and A. S. Goldberger. Estimation of a model with multiple indicators and

  multiple causes of a single latent variable. journal of the American Statistical Association, 70

  (351a):631­639, 1975.

H. J. Jung and J. Lee. The quest for originality: A new typology of knowledge search and

  breakthrough inventions. Academy of Management Journal, 59(5):1725­1753, 2016.

H. F. Kaiser. The varimax criterion for analytic rotation in factor analysis. Psychometrika, 23

  (3):187­200, 1958.

N. Khanna. Patent quality: Does one size fit all? 4iP Council, January, 2019.

L. Kogan, D. Papanikolaou, A. Seru, and N. Stoffman. Technological innovation, resource

  allocation, and growth. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(2):665­712, 2017.

J. M. Kuhn and N. C. Thompson. How to measure and draw causal inferences with patent

  scope. International Journal of the Economics of Business, 26(1):5­38, 2019.

F. Lafond and D. Kim. Long-run dynamics of the us patent classification system. Journal of

  Evolutionary Economics, 29(2):631­664, 2019.

Y.-H. Lai and H.-C. Che. Evaluating patents using damage awards of infringement lawsuits: A

  case study. Journal of Engineering and Technology Management, 26(3):167­180, 2009a.

Y.-H. Lai and H.-C. Che. Modeling patent legal value by extension neural network. Expert

  Systems with Applications, 36(7):10520­10528, 2009b.

J. O. Lanjouw and M. Schankerman. Characteristics of patent litigation: A window on compe-

  tition. RAND Journal of Economics, pages 129­151, 2001.

J. O. Lanjouw and M. Schankerman. Patent quality and research productivity: Measuring

  innovation with multiple indicators. The Economic Journal, 114(495):441­465, 2004.




                                               37
J. O. Lanjouw, A. Pakes, and J. Putnam. How to count patents and value intellectual property:

  The uses of patent renewal and application data. The Journal of Industrial Economics, 46

  (4):405­432, 1998.

J. Lerner. The importance of patent scope: An empirical analysis. RAND Journal of Economics,

  25:319­333, 1994.

B. J. Love, S. P. Miller, and S. Ambwani. Determinants of patent quality: Evidence from inter

  partes review proceedings. U. Colo. L. Rev., 90:67, 2019.

T. Magerman, B. van Looy, and X. Song. Exploring the feasibility and accuracy of latent

  semantic analysis based text mining techniques to detect similarity between patent documents

  and scientific publications. Scientometrics, 82(2):289­306, 2010.

R. J. Mann and M. Underweiser. A new look at patent quality: Relating patent prosecution to

  validity. Journal of Empirical Legal Studies, 9(1):1­32, 2012.

A. C. Marco, A. Tesfayesus, and A. A. Toole. Patent litigation data from US district court

  electronic records (1963-2015). Technical Report 2017-06, 2017.

A. C. Marco, J. D. Sarnoff, and A. Charles. Patent claims and patent scope. Research Policy,

  48(9):103790, 2019.

M. Marx and A. Fuegi. Reliance on science: Worldwide front-page patent citations to scientific

  articles. Strategic Management Journal, 2020.

B. W. Matthews. Comparison of the predicted and observed secondary structure of T4 phage

  lysozyme. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Protein Structure, 405(2):442­451, 1975.

D. McFadden. Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior. Frontiers in Economet-

  rics, pages 105­142, 1973.

M. Mejer and B. v. P. de la Potterie. Patent backlogs at uspto and epo: systemic failure vs

  deliberate delays. World Patent Information, 33(2):122­127, 2011.

S. P. Miller. Who's suing us: Decoding patent plaintiffs since 2000 with the Stanford NPE

  litigation dataset. Stan. Tech. L. Rev., 21:235, 2018.

P. Moser, J. Ohmstedt, and P. W. Rhode. Patent citations--an analysis of quality differences

  and citing practices in hybrid corn. Management Science, 64(4):1926­1940, 2018.

                                               38
S. Mukherjee, D. M. Romero, B. Jones, and B. Uzzi. The nearly universal link between the age

  of past knowledge and tomorrow's breakthroughs in science and technology: The hotspot.

  Science Advances, 3:e1601315, 2017. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.1601315.

S. A. Mulaik. Foundations of factor analysis. CRC Press, 2009.

F. Narin and E. Noma. Is technology becoming science? Scientometrics, 7(3-6):369­381, 1985.

F. Narin, E. Noma, and R. Perry. Patents as indicators of corporate technological strength.

  Research Policy, 16(2-4):143­155, 1987.

A. Pakes and Z. Griliches. Patents and r&d at the firm level: A first report. Economics letters,

  5(4):377­381, 1980.

A. Pakes and M. Schankerman. The rate of obsolescence of patents, research gestation lags,

  and the private rate of return to research resources. In R&D, patents, and productivity, pages

  73­88. University of Chicago Press, 1984.

A. Palangkaraya, P. H. Jensen, and E. Webster. Applicant behaviour in patent examination

  request lags. Economics Letters, 101(3):243­245, 2008.

A. M. Petruzzelli, D. Rotolo, and V. Albino. Determinants of patent citations in biotechnol-

  ogy: An analysis of patent influence across the industrial and organizational boundaries.

  Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 91:208­221, 2015.

F. Poege, D. Harhoff, F. Gaessler, and S. Baruffaldi. Science quality and the value of inventions.

  Science Advances, 5(12):eaay7323, 2019.

P. R´
    egibeau and K. Rockett. Innovation cycles and learning at the patent office: Does the

  early patent get the delay? The Journal of Industrial Economics, 58:222­246, 2010. doi:

  10.1111/j.1467-6451.2010.00418.x.

E. B. Roberts. What we've learned: Managing invention and innovation. Research-Technology

  Management, 31(1):11­29, 1988.

E. Sapsalis and B. van Pottelsberghe. The institutional sources of knowledge and the value of

  academic patents. Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 16(2):139­157, 2007.

E. Sapsalis, B. van Pottelsberghe, and R. Navon. Academic versus industry patenting: An

  in-depth analysis of what determines patent value. Research Policy, 35(10):1631­1645, 2006.

                                               39
F. M. Scherer and D. Harhoff. Technology policy for a world of skew-distributed outcomes.

  Research Policy, 29(4-5):559­566, 2000.

S. Scotchmer. Standing on the shoulders of giants: Cumulative research and the patent law.

  Journal of Economic Perspectives, 5(1):29­41, 1991.

G. Silverberg and B. Verspagen. The size distribution of innovations revisited: an application

  of extreme value statistics to citation and value measures of patent significance. Journal of

  Econometrics, 139(2):318­339, 2007.

M. Squicciarini, H. Dernis, and C. Criscuolo. Measuring patent quality: Indicators of technolog-

  ical and economic value. Working Paper 2013/03, OECD Science, Technology and Industry

  Working Papers, 2013.

M. Trajtenberg, R. Henderson, and A. Jaffe. University versus corporate patents: A window on

  the basicness of invention. Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 5(1):19­50, 1997.

B. van Looy and T. Magerman. Using text mining algorithms for patent documents and publi-

  cations. In Springer Handbook of Science and Technology Indicators, pages 929­956. Springer,

  2019.

B. van Pottelsberghe. The quality factor in patent systems. Industrial and Corporate Change,

  20(6):1755­1793, 2011.

N. van Zeebroeck. The puzzle of patent value indicators. Economics of Innovation and New

  Technology, 20(1):33­62, 2011.

N. van Zeebroeck and B. van Pottelsberghe. Filing strategies and patent value. Economics of

  Innovation and New Technology, 20(6):539­561, 2011a.

N. van Zeebroeck and B. van Pottelsberghe. The vulnerability of patent value determinants.

  Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 20(3):283­308, 2011b.

E. Webster and P. H. Jensen. Do patents matter for commercialization? The Journal of Law

  and Economics, 54(2):431­453, 2011.

J. Weston, S. Bengio, and N. Usunier. WSABIE: Scaling up to large vocabulary image annota-

  tion. In Twenty-Second International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2011.



                                              40
G.-C. Yang, G. Li, C.-Y. Li, Y.-H. Zhao, J. Zhang, T. Liu, D.-Z. Chen, and M.-H. Huang. Using

  the comprehensive patent citation network (cpc) to evaluate patent value. Scientometrics,

  105(3):1319­1346, 2015.

K. Zahringer, C. Kolympiris, and N. Kalaitzandonakes. Time to patent at the uspto: the case

  of emerging entrepreneurial firms. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 43(4):923­952, 2018.

G. Zhang, L. Xiong, H. Duan, and D. Huang. Obtaining certainty vs. creating uncertainty:

  Does firms' patent filing strategy work as expected? Technological Forecasting and Social

  Change, 160:120234, 2020.




Appendices

A      Semantic Embedding of Patents

To order to effectively use as much of the information available in the full-text patent specifica-

tions as possible (as opposed to a keyword-based approach), we can embed patent specifications

in a lower-dimensional (continuous) vector space, and compute the distance between patents in

this space. This kind of natural language processing can be very computationally expensive;

however, the team at Google Patents have generously made their document embeddings pub-

lic for research use. These document embeddings are the result of a bag-of-words approach,

trained to predict Cooperative Patent Classification (CPC) codes using the WSABIE classifi-

cation model (Weston et al., 2011) on full-text patent specifications.

    WSABIE jointly trains two functions to map two different sets of input data into the same

lower-dimensional space.17 In the current case, one set is the full-text bag-of-words for each

patent, and the other is the CPC classifications for the same patent. A machine-learning process

then trains each of these functions such that the bag-of-words and CPC classification for each

patent are mapped into approximately the same location in the lower-dimensional space. These

WSABIE-based embeddings complement our art-unit approach, as art units are not based on

the CPC system (instead, they are still defined by the United States Patent Classification

codes). We can then use the locations of these documents in this space to construct measures of
  17
     This dimensionality is predefined, and in the case of the Google Patents data utilized here, this was set to
64 dimensions.



                                                       41
patent similarity. The embeddings are 64-component vectors, with each component restricted

to the range [0,1]. As such, we can measure the cosine similarity between each pair of patents

to identify the semantically similar patents.



B     Indicator Variables for Factor Analysis

B.1    Backward-Citations-based Indicators

Backward citations are the citations a patent makes to related earlier patents and other sources

of knowledge. They contain not only information about the citing patent, but also information

on the inventions or ideas to which the citing patent is related.

    From the perspective of the patent owners, the number of backward citations should be

minimized for strategic reasons, as this would maximize the technological space this patent

allows them to exploit (Jaffe and de Rassenfosse, 2017). Therefore, one could expect many

backward citations to hurt the invention's prospects for economic-value generation. On the

other hand, many backward citations could also be an indicator of a technologically complex

invention reliant on or related to a wide array of technology types. To give us the best chance to

observe these potential effects, we consider specific subsets and properties of backward citations

separately.

    Backward citations to US patents can be split along two lines: whether or not the citation

is a self-citation, and whether the applicant or the examiner added it. The USPTO tag the

latter, which are added for different reasons by different parties (see Jaffe and de Rassenfosse,

2017, for an overview). In short, applicants are obliged to submit known prior art material

to patentability, and examiners find closely related prior art that they discover during the

prosecution process that impacts the assessment of novelty or non-obviousness of the application.

    Self-citations can either be inventor-centric or firm-centric in their definition. We choose to

define self-citations in the latter sense (firms citing their own patents) because identifying firms

is much simpler and less error-prone than identifying inventors--firms are given a USPTO as-

signee code while inventors are not systematically disambiguated in this way. Firm self-citations

are often interpreted as the result of cumulative research (Scotchmer, 1991; Moser et al., 2018),

which in turn is an indicator of a firm's willingness to invest in R&D to strengthen their compet-

itive position in a particular technology space (Hall et al., 2005; Czarnitzki et al., 2006). Firms

probably do not undertake this kind of research without the expectation that the technology, or


                                                42
the particular invention, will be valuable somehow. At the same time, self-citations could also

be indicative of incremental improvement rather than a technological breakthrough, which may

hinder impact (Sapsalis and van Pottelsberghe, 2007). As self-citations can be challenging to

identify in the presence of complex and dynamic corporate structures, we take advantage of the

work done by Kogan et al. (2017) to match the patent assignees to their publicly traded parent

companies. We identify self-citations through a two-stage matching procedure: we first check if

the cited-citing patent pairs were assigned to the same publicly-traded parent company, and if

not, whether they are assigned to the same assignee as recorded by the USPTO.

   The four mutually-exclusive categories of backward citations to patents are therefore18 :

backward non-self citations to patents, applicant added (BCA); backward non-self citations to

patents, examiner added (BCE); backward self-citations to patents, applicant added (BSA);

and backward self-citations to patents, examiner added (BSE).

   The age of these backward citations to patents can be indicative of the proximity of the citing

patent to the technological frontier (Benson and Magee, 2015); a large number of citations to

very recent inventions could indicate that a patent is `cutting edge.' Conversely, a patent

that cites mostly older inventions may be either a late addition to an increasingly obsolete

technological field or part of a generally slow-moving technological field. Perhaps intuitively,

therefore, technologically influential patents have been observed to be more likely to cite new

patents (Mukherjee et al., 2017). As such, we include as an indicator the average age of backward

citations (BAG), which is the arithmetic mean of the ages of the patents cited by a new patent
                                                                           (a)
i (including self-citations) at the latter's time of application Ti . We define the age of a citation

as the time between the grant of the cited patent and the application of the citing patent, thus

bypassing the noise added by grant lag. To avoid mathematical difficulties, we exclude citations

for which the citation lag is negative (i.e., when the application date of the citing patent is

earlier than the grant date of the cited patent).

   The relative popularity of cited patents (at the time they are cited) may also affect ex-post

outcomes of the citing patent, and could be particularly informative if the cited patents are still

young--this may imply that the citing patent is `riding a wave' at the technological frontier.

Backward-citations' pedigree (BPE) is a metric that is calculated based on the normalized

geometric mean of the number of forward citations accrued by the cited patents listed on a

particular patent document at the latter's time of application. Introduced by Higham et al.
  18
       All abbreviations for indicators derived exclusively from backward citations start with the letter B.



                                                         43
                                                                                                 (a)
(2019), the pedigree of patent i that has been applied for at time Ti                                  is defined as

                                                                                 1
                                                       Ni            (a)         Ni
                                                               kj Ti
                                             BPEi =                (a)
                                                                                          ,                               (1)
                                                   j =1        k Ti      Sj

                                                                                  (a)
where Ni is the number of patents cited by patent i, and kj Ti                                denotes the number of citations
                                       (a)
the cited patent j has at Ti . The citation counts of cited patents j are normalized by the
                            (a)
average number k Ti               Sj
                                        of citations of patents from the same CPC Section Sj of patent j

granted within the same three-month period. The geometric, rather than the arithmetic, mean

has been adopted because of the high skewness of citation distributions.

   Originality (BOR) is a popular metric that quantifies the diversity of technologies that a

patent cites (Trajtenberg et al., 1997). We define the originality of patent i as


                                                                       (i) 2
                                              BORi = 1 -             PC               ,                                   (2)
                                                                C

               (i)
where PC is the proportion of the Ni backward citations from patent i to other patents going

into a given Class C from the CPC system.19 Information about all Classes a cited patent j is

categorized into is utilized here, rather than just the first listed as was done in Ref. (Trajtenberg
                                                                                               (i)                        (cl)
et al., 1997). Specifically, each cited patent j contributes to PC for each one of the Nj
                                                        (cl)
classes it is listed under with a value (1/Nj                  ) · (1/Ni ). This construction ensures the relation
         (i)
  C    PC = 1 and, thus, the reasonability of the definition (2)--BOR is limited to the half-open

interval [0, 1). In particular, a patent with BORi = 0 will have all its backward citations to

patents from one particular class. In contrast, BORi will be large when the citations of a

given patent are distributed over many CPC Classes. In contrast to Ref. (Trajtenberg et al.,

1997), we use the CPC Classes rather than the technology classes defined in the NBER patent

database (Hall et al., 2001).

   There are two idiosyncrasies inherent in the originality variable. First, it is sensitive to

the classification system being used--a coarse system would skew the originality distribution

towards zero, and vice versa for a highly specific system. Second, it is correlated with the

number of backward citations because a greater number of citations creates more opportunity

for technological diversity in those citations. The CPC system makes adjusting for the first

problem quite straightforward; it is possible to tune the originality distribution by moving up
  19
       `Classes' are the second-highest hierarchy level in the CPC, just below `Sections.'



                                                               44
or down the classification hierarchy until a distribution with reasonable spread is obtained, and

we find CPC Class (CPC 2-digit level) suffices. Our factor analysis addresses the second issue.


B.2       Backward Citations to Other Literature

Backward citations can also reference information that is not contained in a granted USPTO

patent document. The following indicators are three such types of citations.20

   Front-page backward citations to scientific literature (BNP) is the count of front-page ci-

tations that can be matched to articles in Microsoft Academic, extracted by Marx and Fuegi

(2020). The vast majority of these citations originate with the applicant (as part of their duty

of candor) rather than with the examiner (Cotropia et al., 2013). In-text backward citations

to non-patent literature (BIT) appear in the invention description, and generally not the same

as the BNP citations that appear on the front page (20-30% overlap exists). These citations

generally act to illuminate the "history, usefulness, and development of the invention" (Narin

and Noma, 1985) and contribute to invention disclosure by providing pertinent information that

allows a person who is `skilled in the art' to replicate and use the invention. These citations

are extracted from the database associated with Ref. (Bryan et al., 2020), and correspond to

those that can be matched to articles in a pre-defined set of prominent journals representing

a broad range of fields. A patent with many citations of either of these types may indicate a

strong scientific grounding, or otherwise build on fundamental scientific research, and could be

more likely to be among the first patents granted in a new technological avenue.

   Lastly, backward citations to foreign patents (BFP) cover knowledge disclosed in patents

granted by a jurisdiction other than the USPTO. The vast majority of these citations are added

by the `applicant' rather than the examiner (Cotropia et al., 2013)--in reality, the foreign

patents cited are generally those listed in search reports compiled by a foreign office such as

the European Patent Office. As the applicant is aware of this prior art before the grant of the

patent, they are obliged to pass this information to the USPTO, where they are designated

`applicant citations.'
  20
       As these are still a form of backward citation, the abbreviations retain the initial B.




                                                          45
B.3     Variables Unrelated to Citations

B.3.1    Claims

Claim counts are a common indicator of both technological significance and economic value (van

Zeebroeck and van Pottelsberghe, 2011b). This metric appears to be a robust correlate of many

measurable dimensions of patent value across all technology categories (e.g., economic value in

surveys (Gambardella et al., 2008), probability of litigation (Lanjouw and Schankerman, 2001),

and forward-citation counts (Jaffe et al., 2000)). Also, the number of claims varies quite widely,

so bias or error due to the discretization of count data is smaller than for most other available

indicators.

   However, the relationship between claim counts and quality is ambiguous because the effect

of addition claims depends on its type- independent claims and dependent claims have very

different functions (Marco et al., 2019). Independent claims are written in broad terms and

serve to delineate the distinct components of an invention and stand on their own. On the other

hand, dependent claims generally specify the precise embodiment of the independent claims such

that the scope of each associated independent claim is well-defined. As such, we count these

two claim types independently and differently: as independent claims (CIN) and dependent

claims per independent claim (CDE) (de Rassenfosse and Jaffe, 2018; Marco et al., 2019). The

separation of claims into these two categories is an attempt to roughly distinguish the claims

that narrow technological breadth from those that broaden it, and as the total number of claims

is simply the sum of the independent and dependent claims, we can only gain information via

this separation. Generally, a dependent claim will narrow a single independent claim; as such,

we calculate the number of dependent claims per independent claim to capture the average

amount of narrowing present in each patent. Recent work has also found that independent

claim length may also play an important role in determining both the scope and pendency of

a patent (Kuhn and Thompson, 2019; Marco et al., 2019). Specifically, as independent claim

length (and particularly the length of the first claim) increases, the more specific the claim

becomes, and the narrower the patent may be, and the faster it can be granted. We include the

words in the first claim (CFW) in this work, as this has been expertly validated as a measure

of patent scope (Kuhn and Thompson, 2019).




                                               46
B.3.2      Class Membership

Class Membership (TCM), which has also been (perhaps confusingly) called `patent scope' (Lerner,

1994; Squicciarini et al., 2013), is simply a count of how many technology categories under which

a patent has been classified. It constitutes a measure for technological breadth and has been

linked to patent value (Lerner, 1994). For this work, we are using the CPC Classes21 as the

categories, as they represent a reasonable level of specification. If the categorization levels used

for this variable are too specific (e.g., using CPC Sub-Classes), we may expect the number of

classifications a patent has to become technology-dependent, and the explanatory power would

weaken when attempting to detect within-category variation in quality. On the other hand,

if the categories were too broad (e.g., when using the CPC Sections as categories), very few

patents will belong to more than one category, and therefore the information content of this

variable would be minimal.


B.3.3      Grant Lag

Grant Lag (LAG) is the length of time between the initial application date (not necessarily the

priority date) and the eventual grant date of a patent. While a very simple metric, there are

many ways this time lag may be relevant to technological influence. Recent work (Harhoff and

Wagner, 2009; R´
               egibeau and Rockett, 2010; Squicciarini et al., 2013) suggests that the grant

lag is inversely proportional to patent quality, for two factors. Firstly, the claims on a patent

that is marginal with respect to patentability, and therefore of lower quality, may take longer

to negotiate and examine. Secondly, in some jurisdictions, companies can pay for accelerated

examination of their most valuable patents. This latter phenomenon does not affect the patents

in our cohort--the USPTO instituted their accelerated-examination program after these patents

were granted. The former point may be relevant for us, but there is also evidence that both the

number of claims and the number of backward citations are positively correlated with forward

citations (Lanjouw and Schankerman, 2004), and one would expect that a more protracted

negotiation process would result in increases in both of these variables. Additionally, a longer

examination process requires a greater financial investment on the part of the inventor/assignee

because the attorney spends a longer time negotiating with the examiner during this process.

Thus, one would only expect an extended examination period to be tolerated if there was some

prospect of a return on this investment. Therefore, a long grant lag may reflect a firm's confi-
  21
       cooperativepatentclassification.org, accessed 10 July 2020


                                                    47
dence in the economic value of an invention, even if the invention is only marginally patentable.

Finally, the complexity of an invention may also affect the length of the examination period, as

the more components an invention has, or knowledge required to understand its function, the

longer it may take to determine its patentability.


B.3.4    Family Size

Geographic patent family size (GPF) is the number of jurisdictions in which a particular in-

vention (with the same inventors and priority date) has been patented (de Rassenfosse et al.,

2014). Patentees will often seek patent protection for their inventions in multiple jurisdictions.

This process can be very costly, with additional patenting fees, attorney costs, and translation

costs stacking up with each new application. There are options for simplifying this process (e.g.,

Patent Cooperation Treaty filings), but the costs listed above generally still apply. It is intu-

itive, therefore, that the number of countries in which a patent is granted should indicate the

confidence that the applicant has in the invention with regard to recouping all costs associated

with the invention and patenting process, and thus the economic value of the patent (Cremers,

2004; Gambardella et al., 2008; Lanjouw et al., 1998; van Zeebroeck and van Pottelsberghe,

2011b). Following Sapsalis and van Pottelsberghe (2007) and Squicciarini et al. (2013), we only

count one family member per jurisdiction--continuing patent applications that claim priority

from an application filed in the same jurisdiction appear to be less important and may increase

the noise in this indicator.


B.3.5    Non-Final Rejections

Similar to GPF, non-final rejections (NFR) are another indicator of an applicant's confidence

that a patent will more than recoup the costs associated with the invention and patenting

process. Non-final rejections are office actions that indicate that an examiner has decided that

a patent application is not valid and invites the applicant to reply to the criticism provided or

amend the patent application appropriately if they wish to continue the examination process.

If the applicant wishes to continue with the process, they will generally have to pay an attorney

to address the non-final rejection. Assuming that the applicant will only continue the process

if they expect to recoup the additional legal fees, the number of non-final rejections (with the

knowledge that the patent was eventually granted) may be an indicator of the financial value of

a patent to the assignee. Non-final rejections also extend the length of the examination process,


                                               48
and so may be useful for teasing out useful components of the grant lag, which, as mentioned

above, could reflect many different patent qualities. This indicator is particularly uncommon

in studies on patent quality and as far, as we can tell, have only been used to assist in the

estimation of damage awards in infringement lawsuits (Lai and Che, 2009b,a).



C     Oblique Factor Rotation

Unlike in the case of orthogonal factor rotation, there is often little difference between oblique

rotation strategies (Costello and Osborne, 2005), and we find the same is true for the current

analysis. For this reason, we a rotation from the oblimin family, which is both popular and

mathematically simple.

    The oblimin criterion has its roots in the oblique counterpart to the varimax criterion (as

used for the orthogonal rotation in our patent fitness paper). In words, oblimin is the minimiza-

tion of the covariances of squared (communality-normalized) factor loadings between each pair

of factors, summed across variables. Mathematically, the objective function is (Mulaik, 2009)



                             r   r     n                       n           n
                                               2  2
                                               ij ik                 2
                                                                     ij          2ik
                      B=                               -                               ,
                            j =1 k=1   i=1
                                                h4
                                                 i         n
                                                               i=1
                                                                     h2
                                                                      i   j =1
                                                                                 h2i


                        with j = k         ,                                                  (3)


in the case of r factors, n variables, factor loading matrix , and variable communalities hi .

Parameter  may be set to zero to obtain the `quartimin' criterion (Carroll, 1953), to unity

for the `covarimin' criterion (Kaiser, 1958), and a compromise known as `biquartimin' for the

case  = 0.5 (Carroll, 1957). However, this latter value does not appear to be special, and,

in fact, any value in [0,1] may be substituted to suit the situation faced by the factor analyst.

In general, the  = 0 produces the most oblique solutions, while  = 1 produces the most

orthogonal. The choice of gamma depends on how much freedom one would like to give to

the optimization procedure. In this work, we choose  = 0 to maximize the obliqueness of our

solution and find few highly correlated factors. We find that our results are not particularly

sensitive to this choice.




                                                       49
