                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             CO-BENEFITS AND REGULATORY IMPACT ANALYSIS:
       THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM FEDERAL AIR QUALITY REGULATIONS

                                           Joseph E. Aldy
                                          Matthew Kotchen
                                           Mary F. Evans
                                          Meredith Fowlie
                                           Arik Levinson
                                            Karen Palmer

                                        Working Paper 27603
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27603


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2020




This paper was prepared for inclusion in the Environmental and Energy Policy and the Economy
conference and publication, sponsored by the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER).
We are grateful to Sofia Caycedo and Tim Bialecki for valuable research assistance while
students at Yale. We thank participants at the NBER Environmental and Energy Policy and the
Economy conference, Sally Atwater, and Bill Hogan for constructive feedback on an earlier draft.
The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the NBER and the External
Environmental Economics Advisory Committee. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27603.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Joseph E. Aldy, Matthew Kotchen, Mary F. Evans, Meredith Fowlie, Arik Levinson, and
Karen Palmer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Co-Benefits and Regulatory Impact Analysis: Theory and Evidence from Federal Air Quality
Regulations
Joseph E. Aldy, Matthew Kotchen, Mary F. Evans, Meredith Fowlie, Arik Levinson, and Karen
Palmer
NBER Working Paper No. 27603
July 2020
JEL No. D61,Q53,Q58

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper considers the treatment of co-benefits in benefit-cost analysis of federal air quality regulations.
Using a comprehensive data set on all major Clean Air Act rules issued by the Environmental Protection
Agency over the period 1997-2019, we show that (1) co-benefits make up a significant share of the
monetized benefits; (2) among the categories of co-benefits, those associated with reductions in fine
particulate matter are the most significant; and (3) co-benefits have been pivotal to the quantified net
benefit calculation in exactly half of cases. Motivated by these trends, we develop a simple
conceptual framework that illustrates a critical point: co-benefits are simply a semantic category of
benefits that should be included in benefit-cost analyses. We also address common concerns about
whether the inclusion of co-benefits is problematic because of alternative regulatory approaches that
may be more cost-effective and the possibility for double counting.

Joseph E. Aldy                                      Meredith Fowlie
Harvard Kennedy School                              Department of Agricultural & Resource Economics
Ofer 403, Mailbox 114                               University of California, Berkeley
79 JFK Street                                       301 Giannini Hall
Cambridge, MA 02138                                 Berkeley, CA 94720-3310
and NBER                                            and NBER
joseph_aldy@hks.harvard.edu                         fowlie@berkeley.edu

Matthew Kotchen                                     Arik Levinson
School of the Environment,                          Department of Economics ICC 571
School of Management,                               Georgetown University
and Department of Economics                         3700 O St., NW
Yale University                                     Washington, DC 20057
195 Prospect Street                                 and NBER
New Haven, CT 06511                                 Arik.Levinson@georgetown.edu
and NBER
matthew.kotchen@yale.edu                            Karen Palmer
                                                    Resources for the Future 1616 P Street, NW
Mary F. Evans                                       Washington, DC 20036 palmer@rff.org
The Robert Day School of Economics
and Finance
Claremont McKenna College
500 E. Ninth Street
Claremont, CA 91711
Mary.Evans@ClaremontMcKenna.edu

A Database of Major Clean Air Act
Regulations, 1997-2019 is available at
https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/J2HWDA
1. Introduction
Benefit-cost analysis (BCA) is a useful and widely employed tool for informing
and evaluating public policy decisionmaking. Its primary objective is to assess
whether a particular policy or policy proposal promotes economic efficiency
compared with a baseline scenario. At the most general and comprehensive
level, BCA is a systematic aggregator of all anticipated or realized impacts,
positive and negative, to all relevant parties, and at all relevant points in time.
The benefit-cost criterion is simply a test of whether the benefits exceed the
costs: if the net benefits are positive, then the policy promotes economic
efficiency compared with the baseline status quo.

The use of BCA by agencies of the US federal government has a long bipartisan
history. President Reagan established a requirement for regulatory actions such
that "the potential benefits to society for the regulation outweigh the potential
costs to society" (EO 12291). As part of this objective, the Reagan administration
also required agencies to produce a regulatory impact analysis (RIA)--in effect,
a BCA in most cases--of major rules. 1 President Clinton continued the
requirement for BCA but modified the standard so that agencies "shall assess
both the costs and the benefits of the intended regulation and, recognizing that
some costs and benefits are difficult to quantify, propose or adopt a regulation
only upon a reasoned determination that the benefits of the intended
regulation justify its costs" (EO 12866). Every administration since has employed
this same approach to guide its review of federal regulations, including most
recently the Trump administration, which added new provisions seeking to
manage overall regulatory costs (EO 13771; OMB 2017).

BCA has played a particularly important role in support of federal regulations
aimed at protecting human health and environmental quality. Those analyses
applied to regulations focused on improving air quality often yield the greatest
quantified costs and benefits of all regulations across government agencies. For
example, in a review of all new federal regulations during the 10-year period
from FY 2007 to FY 2016, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB 2019)
finds that Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) rules account for 80 to 84


1
  A major rule is one that has an impact of $100 million or more in at least one year.
Only a small fraction of final rules are considered major. For example, according to OMB
(2019), only 609 of 36,255 final rules published in the Federal Register from FY 2007 to
FY 2016, or 1.7 percent, meet the criterion for major designation.

                                           1
percent of all monetized benefits and 63 to 71 percent of all monetized costs. 2
Moreover, rules coming out of EPA's Office of Air and Radiation in particular are
found to have especially high net benefits.

The anticipated impacts of many federal policies are broad, with some benefits
and costs directly linked to the policy's intended focus and other benefits and
costs arising only indirectly. Nevertheless, BCAs conducted in line with best
practices seek to count all significant benefits and costs, whether they arise as a
direct result of the policy's intended objectives or as a result of an ancillary
change attributed to the policy. Historically, BCAs conducted by EPA have
treated ancillary benefits and costs in ways consistent with economic theory
and regulatory guidance--on an equal footing with benefits more directly linked
to the policy. Recently, however, EPA has made decisions and solicited feedback
that indicate a potential shift in--or at least questioning of--its treatment of
ancillary benefits and costs, here referred to generally as "co-benefits" and "co-
costs." 3

It is within that context that the present paper considers the treatment of co-
benefits in BCAs, with a particular focus on air quality regulations, where the
issues are front and center. Specifically, the paper has two primary objectives:

            1. to provide a descriptive overview of the role co-benefits have
               played in BCAs of federal air quality regulations, using detailed data
               from all available RIAs, 1997 to the present; and
            2. to develop a simple theoretical framework to clarify how co-
               benefits are simply another category of benefits that should be
               included in BCAs and elucidate some of the unique challenges that
               arise for measuring them well.

The next section provides background on co-benefits in the context of energy
and environmental policy and recent policy actions. Section 3 describes our data
collection, reports a range of descriptive statistics and trends over time, and
discusses a few specific cases to illustrate salient issues. Section 4 develops a
theoretical framework that introduces major concepts and definitions, and it
explicitly addresses some concerns raised about co-benefits. Section 5
concludes with a summary of our findings and observations about the political

2
  The calculation includes four rules jointly promulgated by EPA and the Department of
Transportation (DOT) (OMB 2019, Table 1-1).
3
  We use the term co-benefits throughout the paper, though other terms are frequently
used as well in the literature and government analyses in reference to the same
concept. Impacts may be characterized as "secondary," "indirect," and "ancillary,"
among others. When referring to co-benefits, we also assume implicitly the possibility
for negative benefits--that is, co-costs.

                                            2
economy of why co-benefits have become increasingly important and a growing
topic of concern.




                                     3
2. Background and Recent Actions
2.A. Co-Benefits and Co-Costs
Co-benefits (or co-costs) arise when compliance with a regulation leads to
benefits (or costs) that are not directly tied to a regulation's intended target.
Although we focus on air quality regulations, the notions of co-benefits and co-
costs are not unique to this setting. Consider, for example, the Emergency
Highway Energy Conservation Act of 1974, which established a speed limit of 55
miles per hour. The purpose was to "conserve fuel during periods of current and
imminent fuel shortages," and thus the direct benefits of the act included fuel
savings. However, a co-benefit of the act was reduced road fatalities (Friedman
et al. 2009). Another example is the Americans with Disabilities Act, which
mandated that sidewalks have curb cuts to benefit individuals in wheelchairs,
but the curb cuts also helped pedestrians pushing strollers, pulling heavy carts,
or wheeling luggage, and those are considered co-benefits (Blackwell 2017).

There are many examples in the environmental economics literature where co-
benefits and co-costs have played a role. Sigman (1996) shows that regulations
of hazardous waste disposal lead to increases in air pollution emissions. Kotchen
et al. (2006) conduct an ex post BCA of a hydroelectric project's effect on river
flows, yet the analysis accounts for the co-benefits of reduced emissions
because of displaced electricity generation from fossil fuels. In another example,
Hansman et al. (2018) show that a regulation designed to limit overfishing
exacerbates air pollution from fishmeal processing plants.

A growing literature also explores the local air pollution implications of policies
targeting greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and climate change. Lutter and
Shogren (2002) illustrate how regulating carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions under a
cap-and-trade program improves local air quality, primarily through reductions
of particulate matter (PM). Burtraw et al. (2003) show co-benefits of taxing CO2
emissions in the form of reduced nitrous oxide (NOx) emissions and lower
compliance costs with other NOx and sulfur dioxide (SO2) regulations. More
generally and recently, Karlsson et al. (2020), reviewing 239 peer-reviewed
studies that assess the co-benefits of climate mitigation policies, find that most
studies focus on air pollution-related benefits, where the co-benefits alone
often outweigh compliance costs. Other co-benefits that emerge from their



                                         4
review include enhancements to biodiversity, energy security, and water
quality.

Overall, the range of studies in the academic literature recognize that the
ancillary pollutant effects could either worsen or improve as a consequence of
regulating the targeted pollutant. Moreover, these examples illustrate the
appropriateness and importance of accounting for both co-benefits and co-
costs.


2.B. Regulatory Guidelines
Federal agencies have formally recognized the potential importance of co-
benefits and co-costs to their rulemakings. They have therefore developed
guidance for systematically accounting for these indirect effects in evaluations
of regulatory proposals. OMB, which is responsible for reviewing major
regulations before they are finalized, directs all agencies to account for co-
benefits and co-costs in its guidance for agency RIAs. It states that when
evaluating the benefits and costs of regulations, agencies should "[i]dentify the
expected undesirable side-effects and ancillary benefits of the proposed
regulatory action and the alternatives. These should be added to the direct
benefits and costs as appropriate" (OMB 2003, 2-3). This general guidance
makes clear that the scope of regulatory analysis extends beyond determining
whether the regulation achieves the statute's primary goal. That is, co-benefits
and co-costs should be included in the analysis.

EPA's current Guidelines for Preparing Economic Analyses, with specific
provisions for conducting BCAs, likewise calls for explicit accounting of co-
benefits and co-costs: "An economic analysis of regulatory or policy options
should present all identifiable costs and benefits that are incremental to the
regulation or policy under consideration. These should include directly intended
effects and associated costs, as well as ancillary (or co-) benefits and costs" (EPA
2014, 11-2). 4




4
 In spring 2020, EPA drafted revisions to its economic guidelines and commissioned
their review by a panel convened by the agency's Science Advisory Board (EPA 2020a).
The topic of co-benefits (ancillary impacts) and its treatment in the economic guidelines
elicited substantial public comment (in writing and during oral remarks in the public
comments of the panel meetings) and feedback from panel members. Two coauthors of
this paper, Aldy and Levinson, are members of that review panel.

                                            5
2.C. Co-Benefits and the Clean Air Act
Air quality regulations have a long history of delivering multiple types of social
benefits, including co-benefits. Some of these were accounted for in the design
stages of the Clean Air Act (CAA); others were not fully understood until after
CAA regulations were introduced. Here we review several examples.

To reduce air pollution from cars and light trucks, EPA has often regulated both
vehicles and the fuels they use (Aldy 2018). This system-based approach has
delivered multiple emissions benefits. In 1973, EPA promulgated a regulation
requiring gasoline stations to market unleaded gasoline (EPA 1973). This
regulation was motivated by the fact that lead in the fuel harmed catalytic
converters, a new technology mandated by other CAA regulations intended to
reduce tailpipe emissions of carbon monoxide. EPA subsequently established a
national ambient air quality standard for lead in 1976 (EPA 1976). Removing
lead from gasoline therefore delivered on two air quality objectives in the 1970s
and 1980s: reducing ambient concentrations of carbon monoxide and of lead
(Nichols 1997).

The 1990 CAA Amendments authorized the first cap-and-trade program for
power plant SO2 emissions. The primary goal was to reduce the risks posed by
acid rain, including the acidification of forests and waterbodies (Schmalensee
and Stavins 2013). Most of the monetized benefits, however, have resulted
from reducing human exposure to fine PM that contributes to premature
mortality. In this case, the sizable health benefits caused by the reduction in
SO2--an important precursor to PM formation--were not fully appreciated or
anticipated at the time the regulation was implemented. Advances in
epidemiology after the 1990 CAA Amendments provided increasingly strong
evidence on the public health risk of fine PM.

Another prominent example is from 2015, when EPA promulgated the Clean
Power Plan to reduce CO2 emissions in the power sector (EPA 2015). Co-benefits
played an important role in this rulemaking because it was anticipated that, in
the process of reducing CO2, power plants would also significantly reduce SO2
and NOx, with subsequent reductions in fine PM and ozone because of chemical
precursor relationships. As a result, the agency projected billions of dollars of
monetized benefits per year from mitigating climate change and billions of
dollars of monetized benefits per year from reductions in premature mortality
due to reduced exposure to ambient PM and ozone.

                                         6
Sometimes Congress has specifically amended legislation to expand the target
objectives of existing rules, effectively converting co-benefits into targeted
benefits. This has happened when rules targeted at fossil fuel consumption
were expanded to mitigate climate change. For example, the 1975 Energy Policy
and Conservation Act created the corporate average fuel economy standards
and introduced fuel economy labels for new vehicles in response to the 1973-74
oil shock. The goal was to reduce fuel consumption. 5 The Energy Independence
and Security Act of 2007 added the goal of reducing GHG emissions, setting
more ambitious fuel efficiency standards and directing the Department of
Transportation (DOT) to revise fuel economy labels to include information about
GHG emissions. 6

A similar expansion occurred with respect to biofuels in transportation. The
Energy Policy Act of 2005 created renewable fuel standards with annual goals
for biofuel consumption, with the goal of reducing US oil consumption. 7 The
Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 revised this program, recognizing
GHG co-benefits by setting more ambitious biofuel volume goals and mandating
multiple low-carbon biofuel categories so that the policy could simultaneously
reduce oil consumption and CO2 emissions. 8


2.D. Recent Actions Related to the Inclusion of
Co-Benefits and Co-Costs
Despite the important role that co-benefits (and co-costs) have played in
shaping outcomes under past CAA regulations, and the well-established
regulatory guidance about including them, EPA has undertaken recent actions
with the potential to diminish the value of co-benefits or to question their
inclusion in economic analyses.

EPA Science Transparency Proposed Rule, 2018. EPA (2018c) issued the
proposed rule in the name of improving transparency and replicability of the


5
  Refer to Section 2 of the Energy Policy and Conservation Act, Public Law 94-163,
December 22, 1975, URL: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-
89/pdf/STATUTE-89-Pg871.pdf.
6
  Refer to Sections 102 and 105 of the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007,
Public Law 110-140, December 19, 2007. URL:
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/PLAW-110publ140/pdf/PLAW-110publ140.pdf.
7
  Refer to Section 1501 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005, Public Law 109-58, August 8,
2005. URL: https://www.congress.gov/109/plaws/publ58/PLAW-109publ58.pdf.
8
  Refer to Section 202 of the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007.

                                           7
science underlying its assessment of regulatory benefits and costs. This proposal
does not explicitly address co-benefits. Instead, it raises obstacles to including
monetized value of PM improvements that form the basis for many of the co-
benefits in recent EPA rulemakings. In particular, the proposed rule would limit
the EPA's use of proprietary or confidential health data, of the type commonly
used to evaluate the consequences of PM exposure. In many cases, these
studies are done with the understanding that individual information will be kept
confidential and thus not made publicly available.

EPA Affordable Clean Energy Final Rule, 2019. EPA (2019c) issued the Affordable
Clean Energy Rule (ACE), a replacement for the 2015 Clean Power Plan, which
set CO2 emissions standards for existing power plants. In its summarization of
the benefits and costs of ACE, EPA presented two tables. One followed the
standard practice, reporting the costs, climate benefits, ancillary health
benefits, and overall net benefits. The second summary table contained the
same information but with the ancillary benefits excluded. That exclusion runs
contrary to OMB guidance, EPA guidance, and standard practice. The
presentation of results in this way is significant because it substantially reduces
the overall net benefits and signals a shift within EPA away from counting all
benefits on an equal footing.

EPA Increasing Consistency and Transparency in Considering Benefits and Costs
in the Clean Air Act Rulemaking Process Proposed Rule, 2020. EPA (2018b)
solicited public feedback on the conduct of BCAs, including the following: "What
improvements would result from a general rule that specifies how the Agency
will factor the outcomes or key elements of the benefit-cost analysis into future
decision making? For example, to what extent should EPA develop a general rule
on how the Agency will weigh the benefits from reductions in pollutants that
were not directly regulated (often called `co-benefits' or `ancillary benefits') ...?"
(EPA 2018b, 27527, emphasis added). In 2020, EPA (2020b) proposed a new rule
focused on benefit-cost analyses of Clean Air Act regulations. Under the
proposal, future EPA CAA regulations would include two summaries of the RIA:
one characterizing all benefits and costs, as has been standard practice, and the
other including only "a listing of the benefit categories arising from the
environmental improvement that is targeted by the relevant statutory
provision, or provisions and would report the monetized value to society of
these benefits" (EPA 2020b, 35622).




                                          8
EPA MATS Appropriate and Necessary Determination, 2020. EPA (2020c)
finalized a new rule reversing its previous finding on the legal basis of the
Mercury and Air Toxics Standards (MATS), a regulation designed to reduce the
emissions of mercury and other hazardous air pollutants (HAPs) from power
plants. Whereas EPA concluded in 2011 and 2016 that it was "appropriate and
necessary" to regulate mercury and other HAPs under authority of the CAA, it
reversed this decision in 2020. The reversal rests entirely on omitting from
consideration the co-benefits of reducing fine PM, which accounted for the vast
majority of monetized benefits in the original 2011 RIA (Aldy et al. 2019, 2020).
EPA's new rationale is that only the target pollutant benefits should count when
making the legal determination.

EPA Oil and Natural Gas Sector: Emission Standards for New, Reconstructed, and
Modified Sources Review, 2019. EPA's new approach to the ancillary impacts of
regulation does not, however, appear to be consistently applied across
rulemakings. The proposed amendments to the New Source Performance
Standards (NSPS) for the oil and gas sector reflect an inconsistent regulatory
treatment of co-benefits. In the case of this proposed rule, EPA (2019b) argues
that regulating volatile organic compounds (VOCs) results in a co-benefit: lower
methane emissions. As a result, the agency's proposal opts against setting
methane-specific standards because they "are entirely redundant of the existing
NSPS for VOCs" (EPA 2019b, 50254).

EPA/DOT Tailpipe CO2/Fuel Economy Final Rule, 2020. EPA's new approach that
discounts the ancillary effects of regulations is also not represented in the
revision to the EPA tailpipe CO2 emission standards and National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration (NHTSA) fuel economy rules. Issued in 2020, this joint rule
targets fuel economy and GHG emissions from automobiles. But the EPA
analysis accounted for expected co-benefits and co-costs arising from changes
in traffic fatalities and traffic congestion (EPA and NHTSA 2020). These ancillary
changes were included in the calculations of the total net benefits of the rule,
not weighted differently from the primary objectives of EPA's authority for the
regulations under Title II of the CAA.

Those recent EPA rulemakings trouble us, for two reasons. First, as noted, they
appear to be inconsistent. Sometimes co-benefits and co-costs are excluded
from BCA analyses or listed separately, as in the case of ACE or MATS. But other
recent rulemakings include co-benefits and costs, as in the NSPS for oil and gas
and the joint EPA-NHTSA fuel economy rules. And second, treating co-benefits


                                         9
and co-costs differently from targeted benefits and costs departs from standard
EPA practice. To document the extent of that departure, in the next section we
review EPA's treatment of co-benefits in its regulatory impact analyses for
major CAA rules since 1997.




                                       10
3. Trends and Patterns across Clean
Air Act RIAs
We now examine long-term trends and patterns in the role of co-benefits in EPA
analysis of CAA rules and regulations. We begin with an overview of our data
collection and preparation, before turning to the results of our analysis. The
complete database that we created, along with additional details to those
described below, are available in the online Supplementary Information to this
paper. 9


3.A. Constructing the Sample
We focus on the category of major rules, since these consistently have well-
developed assessments of the economic impacts of the regulations in question.
We reviewed the OMB annual reports to Congress on the benefits and costs of
regulations to identify all major CAA rules issued by EPA over the period 1997-
2019. We provide further details in the Appendix, along with full citations and
hyperlinks to all rules and RIAs compiled in our data set. Over this 23-year
period, EPA issued 58 major regulations identified in the OMB annual reports,
and Figure 1 shows the number of rules issued in each year. In some cases,
especially for rules promulgated in the 1990s, EPA conducted cost-effectiveness
analysis rather than a BCA. This means that those RIAs focus on estimating the
regulatory expenditures per ton of emissions reduced, rather than on estimating
the monetized value of air quality benefits. After excluding these cases, we
compiled a sample of 48 air quality rules for which EPA published a prospective
BCA that explicitly monetized at least some of the rule's benefits in its RIA. 10




9
  The database and documentation can be accessed at
https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/J2HWDA.
10
   Although the RIAs for some rules mention nonmonetized benefits, given the nature of
our analysis, we necessarily restrict attention to monetized benefits and costs.

                                         11
Figure 1. Major CAA Regulations Promulgated by EPA, 1997­2019




Annual counts were produced by the authors based on a review of OMB reports to Congress.


              3.B. Distinguishing between "Targeted
              Benefits" and "Co-benefits"
              To determine the "targeted benefits" of a rule and distinguish these from the
              "co-benefits," we reviewed the RIAs and the promulgated regulations. Each EPA
              rule describes the relevant statutory authority or authorities that motivate the
              regulatory action, which can often identify the pollutant or pollutants targeted
              under the law. The rule and the RIA also describe the specific emissions
              standards by pollutant, and the identification of each pollutant that must be
              monitored under the rule is one way to identify those that are targeted. There
              are, however, a variety of cases in which the targeted benefit is identified in the
              statutory authority, yet the specific emission standards set in the rule apply to
              emission precursors for that pollutant. An example is ozone as a targeted


                                                       12
pollutant, with emissions standards that apply to the precursors of NOx and
VOCs.

In some cases, the identification of the targeted benefits appears quite
straightforward. For example, during our sample period, EPA issued National
Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) for lead, ozone, PM2.5 (particulate
matter less than 2.5 microns in diameter), and SO2. These regulations set the
maximum permissible ambient air quality concentrations for these specific air
pollutants--and thus the targeted benefits of the lead standard, for example,
are those benefits clearly associated with the reduction in lead pollution.

In other cases, the identification of the targeted benefits is more complicated.
To illustrate some of the challenges involved and to describe our procedure, we
walk through a particular example: the 1998 "NOx SIP Call" rule (regulation
identifier number, RIN, 2060-AH10). 11 The rule was motivated by the need to
address the cross-state transport of ozone pollution and the adverse public
health consequences of high ambient ozone concentrations (Napolitano et al.
2007). Indeed, it built on and expanded the then-existing Ozone Transport
Commission NOx trading program for Mid-Atlantic and Northeast states (Linn
2008). To achieve reductions in ozone, the rule focused on NOx, a precursor to
atmospheric ozone. The monetized benefits of the rule arise from reductions of
ozone, PM2.5, and water pollution through nitrogen deposition.

The question in this case is whether to treat the targeted pollutant as ozone or
NOx: the choice has important consequences for the categorization of benefits.
We treat ozone as the targeted pollutant because of the rule's clear intent and
classify the benefits associated with fine PM and water pollution--which result
from the NOx emissions but are distinct from ozone pollution--as co-benefits.

More generally, we apply the following classification procedures for identifying
the monetized targeted benefits from the monetized co-benefits. First, we
review the rule as published in the Federal Register to identify specific statutory
authorizations. Second, we review the rule and the RIA for information on
specific pollutant emission standards. Third, we review the rule and the RIA to
assess how regulating a precursor pollutant may connect to the targeted



11
  We use regulation identifier numbers to identify each regulation we describe in the
text. The appendix table lists all regulations with their RINs, publication dates, and
Federal Register cites that we have compiled for this analysis.

                                           13
pollutant under the statutory authority. Finally, we account for (but do not
automatically follow) EPA's specific description of some benefits as co-benefits.

Two further conventions that we employ are worth mentioning to clarify how
we made classifications. The first is that all benefits directly associated with a
targeted pollutant are considered targeted benefits. For example, ozone
benefits of the NOx SIP Call rule include those associated with ozone effects on
worker productivity, commodity crop production, and commercial forest
production, all of which go beyond the public health focus of the primary
NAAQS. The second convention is that when targeted pollutants are themselves
precursors to other pollutants for which reductions lead to monetized benefits,
these "downstream" benefits are considered co-benefits. This scenario is most
common when the target pollutant is SO2, which is a precursor for fine PM and
often generates significant co-benefits.

Finally, we recognize that, for some rules, the classification procedures we
employ require a degree of subjectivity. We have nevertheless sought to define
categories in ways that respond to emerging concerns about the role of co-
benefits in EPA RIAs. Although a central part of our theoretical contribution later
in the paper is that such categorizations should not matter in BCAs, having some
empirical foundation on which to anchor the discussion is important. We
provide additional information in our data appendix, including a link to our
database so that other scholars, analysts, and stakeholders can replicate,
modify, and expand on this analysis.


3.C. Selecting Benefits and Costs Estimates
Few of the RIAs in our sample produce present values for the streams of costs
and benefits over time. Notable exceptions are the joint EPA-NHTSA rules that
address CO2 emissions and fuel efficiency in vehicles. These RIAs produce annual
streams of benefits and costs out to 2050.

As we will show below, EPA RIAs have consistently accounted for all the
targeted and ancillary benefits and costs of regulations. But on other issues,
RIAs have been considerably less consistent. The most common practice is to
generate a "snapshot" estimate for the annual costs and benefits in a future
year during "full implementation" of the rule. In many but not all of these cases,
the benefits are not discounted to produce a present value in the year the
regulation is promulgated. They are the value of benefits and costs in some


                                           14
future year expressed in some base year dollar equivalent. In a subset of these
cases, the premature mortality benefits associated with PM--some of which
occur with a period of latency--are discounted back to the snapshot year at
either a 3 percent or a 7 percent discount rate. In addition, reducing CO2
emissions and methane (CH4) emissions that occur in a snapshot year generate
benefits, which are spread out over hundreds of years, that are monetized using
the social cost of carbon (SCC) and social cost of methane based on a 2.5, 3, or 5
percent discount rate.

Many RIAs also present ranges of estimates. Some may reflect differences in
assumptions on the premature mortality dose-response functions for ozone and
particulate matter. Some may reflect a range over multiple implementation and
compliance scenarios, especially in those cases where states have some
discretion on how they implement the rule (e.g., the Regional Haze Regulations,
RIN 2060-AF32).

The preceding discussion means that it is challenging to construct a consistent
set of benefits and costs that enable true apples-to-apples comparisons across
RIAs. In our analysis, we have nevertheless endeavored to create a data set that
produces measures of benefits and costs that are as comparable as possible,
given the information published in the RIAs. In general, we have opted for a full-
implementation, snapshot year measure of benefits and costs based on a 7
percent discount rate, where discounting is applied to the extent possible. 12 The
SCC and some compliance cost calculations will be exceptions because of the
differing rates used in the underlying analysis. Our database includes upper and
lower bound estimates, but here we report results based on the average of the
two, unless otherwise indicated. All values are reported in 2019 dollars, with
conversions made using the standard gross domestic product (GDP) deflator. 13

In some RIAs, the costs represent the amortization of capital and operating
costs for complying with the regulation over a specified time horizon. This



12
   We note that the choice of discount rate is less of a concern for this analysis because
of the way that benefits and costs are reported for a given snapshot year. There are two
categories of exceptions. First, some RIAs present latent fine PM premature mortality
risks. These RIAs estimate the present value of these risks over five years from the
snapshot year. Second, joint EPA-NHTSA regulations addressing fuel economy provide
the present value of the benefits from vehicles regulated in the snapshot year.
13
   We accessed the GDP Implicit Price Deflator annual series from the St. Louis Federal
Reserve Economic Data website on May 11, 2020.

                                           15
Figure 2. Net Social Benefits of Clean Air Act RIAs, 1997-2019




The amounts are based on one-year full-implementation snapshots of monetized benefits and costs. In each panel,
regulations are ordered chronologically. Panel (a) presents results for all 48 regulations in our database, and panel (b)
excludes 9 regulations with net social benefits in excess of $50 billion to better illustrate impacts of rules with smaller
net economic effects.

               approach is typically estimated with a 7 percent discount rate. In other RIAs, the
               snapshot year costs are simply the estimated compliance costs for that year,
               and it is unclear the extent to which these snapshots account for initial
               investments in pollution control equipment. In a few rules, the underlying
               model for estimating compliance uses discount rates other than 3 or 7 percent.
               For example, the model runs used for the NOx SIP Call rule are based on a 6
               percent rate. 14




               14
                    Refer to Table 4-1 in EPA (1998).

                                                            16
3.D. Results of Analysis of EPA Clean Air Act
RIAs
The EPA regulatory program consistently delivers the greatest monetized
benefits and imposes the largest costs of any federal regulatory agency's actions
(e.g., OMB 2019). To provide context for an assessment of co-benefits, Figure 2
illustrates the net social benefits for the CAA regulations in our database. The
median rule has about $4.1 billion in net social benefits, based on the average of
the lower and upper bounds of benefits and costs for that regulation's snapshot
of a full-implementation year. Every rule has positive net social benefits, with
five exceptions: (1) the 1997 NAAQS for ozone (RIN 2060-AE57), with an
estimated -$6 billion in net social benefits; (2) the 1997 medical waste
incinerator standards (RIN 2060-AC62), with an estimated -$125 million in net
social benefits; (3) the 2008 NAAQS for lead (RIN 2060-AN83), with an estimated
-$90 million net social benefits15; (4) the 2005 mercury power plant rule (RIN
2060-AJ65), with an estimated -$1 billion in net social benefits; and (5) the 2016
new source performance standards for methane at oil and gas operations (RIN
2060-AS30), with an estimated -$200 million in net social benefits.

We find that co-benefits account for about 46 percent of the monetized
benefits on average across all RIAs. As Figure 3 illustrates, this average masks
considerable heterogeneity among the rules. Some rules have no monetized co-
benefits, such as the 2013 fine PM NAAQS and the 2014 Tier 3 motor vehicle
and emissions standards, which targeted both fine PM and ozone. Other rules,
especially several of those focused on HAPs, have zero monetized benefits for
the targeted pollutant. In these cases, fine PM pollution reductions are the
primary, if not exclusive, source for monetized benefits. For the three joint EPA-
NHTSA regulations targeting carbon dioxide emissions and fuel economy (RINs
2060-AP61, 2060-AQ54, and 2060-AS16), we consider reduced fuel costs one of
the target benefits of the regulation, given NHTSA's statutory authority. If,
however, we were to consider reduced fuel costs a co-benefit from the
standpoint of EPA under its Clean Air Act authority, then about $130 billion of




15
  In the lead NAAQS RIA, the lower-bound benefits exceed the lower-bound costs
estimated with a 7 percent discount rate. Under a 3 percent discount rate, the lower
and upper bounds of the monetized benefits exceed their corresponding scenario's
costs.

                                          17
benefits over 2011-2016 would shift and several of the dark gray bars at the
bottom of Figure 3 would fall substantially.

The monetized co-benefits in CAA RIAs are primarily a story about fine PM. This
has long been acknowledged by EPA and OMB, the latter in its annual reports to
Congress on the benefits and costs of regulation (e.g., EPA 1997; OMB 2005). In
our assessment, the reductions in fine PM identified as co-benefits represent 96
percent of all monetized co-benefits over 1997-2019. The other categories are
visibility (2 percent) and SO2, ozone, CO2, and energy and electricity savings (less
than 1 percent each).

We should also note that in several cases, EPA estimated co-costs because the
regulation would increase emissions of a monetized pollutant. For example, the
lower bound of the SO2 co-benefits in the 1998 pulp and paper "cluster rule" are
negative, and the 2010 HAPs standards for Portland cement plants include CO2 co-
costs that result from the increased electricity demand expected under facilities'
compliance strategies.

Co-benefits and co-costs often play a pivotal role in determining the sign of net
social benefits among the monetized categories of costs and benefits for many
CAA regulations. For exactly 50 percent of the regulations in our database, the
monetized benefits from reductions in the targeted pollutant exceed the
monetized costs. That is, these rules would show positive net benefits even
without the inclusion of co-benefits. The flip side is that half of the rules in our
database would have negative net social benefits if co-benefits were omitted
from the analysis. In these rules, EPA also identifies but does not monetize a
variety of additional categories of benefits. In the conclusion, we address why
the agency may stop counting monetized benefits under the Clean Air Act after
it has demonstrated positive net benefits.

Some categories of rules have targeted benefits that consistently outweigh
monetized costs. For example, the 16 rules that explicitly target fine PM each
have positive net social benefits based on an exclusive accounting of monetized
benefits associated directly with the targeted pollutant. The joint EPA-NHTSA
rules addressing tailpipe CO2 emissions and fuel economy always have positive
net social benefits based only on targeted benefits; this finding follows because
of our accounting of fuel economy as a primary motivation of these rules and
the sizable fuel savings benefits estimated by the agencies.



                                         18
In contrast, regulations targeting HAPs--such as the National Emission
Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants--frequently have zero or modest
monetized benefits for the targeted pollutant. Most regulations that focused on
HAPs, 79 percent of those in our database, have monetized target benefits less
than the monetized costs. In these cases, the monetized co-benefits derive from
reductions in fine PM, and in some cases, the regulation explicitly limits PM
emissions as a proxy for the hazardous air pollutant. For example, the hazardous
air pollutant standard for combustion sources at various pulp mills (RIN 2060-
AI34) explicitly notes that the "rule promulgates PM emissions limits as a
surrogate for HAP metals" (66 Federal Register 3184). Although we classified the
PM benefits in this case as co-benefits, these PM emissions limits are explicitly
prescribed by the rule. Another reason, at least in the case of the MATS rule, is
that the science for and means of economic evaluation for mercury emissions
have evolved only recently, whereas the techniques for valuing the health
consequences for fine PM are well-established (Aldy et al. 2019). The value of
monetizing additional benefits based on recent science in the context of RIAs for
new air regulations is a topic to which we return later in the paper.

Co-benefits and co-costs have been an important part of EPA analysis of its
regulations for more than two decades. In nearly half the major rules,
monetized benefits would not exceed monetized costs without consideration of
co-benefits. EPA's approach was consistent over time, following OMB and EPA
guidance set long ago. Despite that, as we described in Section 2, EPA rules in
the past several years appear to be departing from this longstanding practice. In
part, that departure responds to legitimate-sounding questions about the
merits of counting untargeted benefits. In the next section, we look at the
questions that have arisen, then address them in a simple economic model.




                                        19
Figure 3. Relative Contribution of Target Pollutant Benefits and Co-Benefits to
Total Monetized Benefits




Regulations are listed by regulation identifier number (RIN) and ordered chronologically from top to bottom spanning
1997­2019. The Appendix lists each regulation with its associated RIN.
                                                         20
4. A Simple Theory of Co-Benefits
The previous section demonstrates how EPA has been considering co-benefits in
RIAs for decades. Have they been counted appropriately? Although we do not
answer this question on a case-by-case basis, this section describes a simple
theoretical framework to help make such determinations. That is, we make the
straightforward case for when co-benefits should or should not be fully counted
in any BCA. We also address a few of the specific questions that have been
raised about including co-benefits: (1) If co-benefits are large, wouldn't
regulating them directly be more efficient or cost-effective? (2) How do we
count co-benefits if the co-pollutant is already regulated? And (3) under what
circumstances does the inclusion of co-benefits result in double counting?


4.A. Decision Criteria
We begin with a discussion about the metrics used to judge the merits of
alternative pollution policies. These are important because, as we will show,
some of the questions and concerns raised about co-benefits are based on an
appeal to different decisionmaking criteria. The first metric, taught in every
Economics 101 course, is efficiency. In this context, efficiency requires that the
marginal benefit from abating a unit of each pollutant equal the marginal cost.
Though often the focus of conceptual discussions of pollution control policy,
efficiency is rarely the metric by which policies are judged in practice.
Establishing efficiency is a high bar, as it requires identifying and monetizing the
incremental benefits and costs of regulating each pollutant. 16

A second, less strict metric is cost-effectiveness, which is met when a given
policy goal is achieved at least cost. The policy goal might be defined in terms of
achieving an arbitrary regulated amount of pollution reduction or in terms of
the monetary social benefits of pollution. Either way, cost-effectiveness is a
weaker metric than efficiency. All efficient policies are cost-effective, but cost-
effective policies are not necessarily efficient. Relative to efficiency, cost-
effectiveness is easier to evaluate because it does not require knowing the


16
  We recognize, of course, other potential decision criteria, such as distributional
equity, employment, or export promotion. Indeed, some are mentioned explicitly in the
executive orders mandating RIAs, and most RIAs include chapters analyzing these other
economic outcomes. Our focus here, though, is on whether co-benefits belong in
calculations of net benefits.

                                          21
incremental benefit of abating pollution. OMB (2003) Circular A-4 recommends
that cost-effectiveness analysis, in addition to BCA, be used to support major
rulemakings.

Finally, the criterion used implicitly by most federal agencies, and the one
informed by BCA, is positive net benefits--that is, do the benefits of a policy
exceed its costs? Having positive net benefits guarantees neither efficiency nor
cost-effectiveness. Although all efficient policies have positive net benefits,
policies with positive net benefits are not necessarily efficient. Alternatively,
policies can minimize the cost of achieving a policy goal while incurring negative
net benefits, or they can have positive net benefits but fail to minimize the costs
of achieving a policy goal. We focus on this criterion in our discussion below
because agency practice has emphasized this objective. The CAA does not
provide an efficiency objective in setting pollutant and emission standards, and
the cost-effectiveness objective is permissible under some but not all statutory
authorities under the CAA. Moreover, the typical practice of regulatory agencies
under EO 12866 has been to demonstrate whether benefits justify costs, which
has typically been interpreted as a positive net benefits standard.


4.B. The Setup
Consider two pollutants, a target pollutant, denoted pollutant 1, and a co-
pollutant, denoted pollutant 2. Pollutant 1 is the direct focus of a particular
regulatory action, a policy, and pollutant 2 is secondary. 17 Each pollutant can be
reduced through costly investments in abatement (e.g., fuel switching, installing
abatement equipment). Abatement functions map investments in abatement
into units of pollution reduction. Suppose there are two abatement activities.
Let  denote investment in abatement activity  = 1,2. The quantity of each
pollutant ultimately reduced or the level of abatement, denoted 1 and 2 ,
depends on investments in abatement activities. To simplify the intuition (and
the math), we denominate the abatement activities 1 and 2 in units of
pollution abated--the same units as 1 and 2 .

To capture the idea of co-benefits, we assume that abatement activity 1 is a
more direct means of abating pollutant 1, but it has some spillover benefits in


17
  That is, the numbering indicates a pollutant's relative centrality to the particular
regulation's intended goal, not necessarily to the timing of regulation. Later in this
section, we consider the important case of when co-pollutant 2 has already been
regulated, and EPA is analyzing the net benefits of regulating target pollutant 1.

                                            22
the form of reductions in pollutant 2. The reverse is true for abatement activity
2: it is the most direct mechanism for abating pollutant 2 but also abates
pollutant 1. We write these abatement functions as


                    a1 = x1 + 2 x2 and a2 = x2 + 1 x1 ,                      (1)


where the 's are both less than one and greater than zero. A one-unit increase
in 1 yields one fewer units of pollutant 1 as well as 1 fewer units of pollutant 2.
Similarly, when 2 increases by one unit, abatement of pollutant 2 increases by
one unit and abatement of pollutant 1 increases by 1 units.

Figure 4 depicts this basic setup. Investments 1 and 2 are represented on the
two axes. Abatement and benefits are increasing to the northeast, as are costs.
An iso-cost curve  (1 , 2 ) shows all the combinations of investments 1 and 2
that lead to the same cost,  . Because we denominate the investments in
pollution abated, the marginal costs of abating each pollutant using investments
1 and 2 are increasing. This leads to a convex iso-cost curve, as depicted in
Figure 4.

Figure 4. Cost-Effective Compliance Using Two Activities (x1
and x2) with Regulation on One Target Pollutant (a1  k1).

        2

     1
      2
                      1 = 1 + 2 2




   2 (1 )
                                       =  (1 , 2 )



                      1 (1 )      1              1




                                        23
4.C. Policies
Now consider a policy that mandates a particular amount of abatement for the
target pollutant 1 at some arbitrary level 1 . In this case, suppose that the
regulator implements the target through a performance standard that permits
discretion by regulated entities on the choice over pollution control investment
so long as they limit their emissions to or below a specified emissions level or
rate. Note that the target level of abatement can be achieved entirely by
investment in abatement activity 1 (1 = 1 ), entirely by investment in
abatement activity 2 (2 = 1 /2 ), or by some linear combination of the two.
The constraint on abatement of the target pollutant imposed by the policy is
depicted as the straight line in Figure 4, corresponding to the equation 1 =
1 + 2 2 .

The least costly way to comply with the regulation is represented by the lowest
iso-cost curve tangent to this line. Depending on the shape of the iso-cost
function, that could be at the corner solution using only 1 , at the corner
solution using only 2 , or as depicted in the figure at an interior solution using
some of both. The least-cost combination 1 (1 ), 2 (1 ) is by definition cost-
effective.

In this example, compliance with regulation of the target pollutant in the least
costly way also results in some abatement of the second pollutant. In particular,


                            a2 = x2 (k1 ) + 1 x1 (k1 ).                        (2)


Equation (2) results from plugging in the cost-minimizing values of 1 and 2
from Figure 4 into the abatement function for 2 in equation (1). The
abatement 2 is a benefit of policy 1 that targets pollutant 1; it would not have
occurred absent the policy. The abatement of pollutant 2 arises from cost-
effective compliance with the policy on pollutant 1 through investments in both
abatement activities, 1 and 2 . Note that by equation (2), even with the corner
solution at which 2 (k1 ) = 0, there would still be abatement of 2 as long as 1
is positive. 18 Abatement of the co-pollutant is a co-benefit only in the semantic
sense that the regulatory policy goal was to reduce pollutant 1.


18
  Note that a technology standard--for example, setting 1 = k1--in lieu of a
performance standard would also yield co-benefits in this case.

                                         24
Any policy requiring 1  1 that passes a BCA while ignoring those co-benefits
would also pass a BCA considering those co-benefits. Nevertheless, some
policies that would fail a BCA ignoring co-benefits would pass a BCA once co-
benefits are considered. Moreover, in some cases, co-benefits alone may be
sufficient for a policy to pass a BCA. Of course, as discussed above, passing a
BCA does not mean that a policy is efficient or even cost-effective. This raises
one of the chief criticisms of counting co-benefits--that if they are important,
they should be regulated directly.


4.D. Targeting Co-Pollutants Directly
Concerns about co-benefits often focus on questions related to cost-
effectiveness. For example, when commenting on the MATS rule, Dudley (2012)
wrote, "If (PM2.5 co-benefits) are legitimate, certainly confronting them directly
would achieve PM2.5 reductions more cost-effectively than going after them
indirectly using statutory authority designed to reduce toxic air pollutants" (p.
173, emphasis added). Smith (2011) asserted that "PM2.5-related benefits would
be more certain and more cost-effectively obtained through a different
regulation altogether than an air toxics rule" (p. 14, emphasis added).

Figure 5. Cost Savings That Arise from Directly Targeting Co-
Benefits but Ignoring Reductions in Originally Targeted
Pollutant

        2

     1
      2
                       1 = 1 + 2 2




                                  2 = 2 + 1 1
   2 (1 )


                                        =  (1 , 2 )

                      1 (1 )       1              1




                                        25
To address this cost-effectiveness critique, suppose that the regulator considers
an alternative policy approach: designing a performance standard to regulate
pollutant 2 directly with the target of achieving at least as much abatement as
resulted indirectly from the policy targeting pollutant 1 (Subsection 4.C, above).
This approach would require a policy 2 that satisfies 2  2 = 2 (1 ) +
1 1 (1 ) as in equation (2). As earlier, this target level of abatement for
pollutant 2 can be met by any linear combination of 1 and 2 , depicted by the
new line added to Figure 5, which corresponds to the equation 2 = 2 + 1 1 .

Because the new policy rule is designed to meet the same level of reduction in
pollutant 2 achieved by the original policy, it must go through the original cost-
minimizing point for compliance with 1 . Note that one way to comply with the
new policy is to do exactly the same thing that complied with the original policy.
But the slope of the new 2 policy is less steep than the slope of the original 1
policy because -1 > -1/2. As shown in Figure 5, the line representing the
new policy necessarily passes below portions of the iso-cost curve that is
tangent to the original 1 line. This means that a different, lower iso-cost curve,
representing smaller investments in 1 and 2 , could achieve the same level of
abatement for pollutant 2 at lower cost than  .

But importantly, the cost savings do not come for free. The achievement--
abating pollutant 2 by an amount equal to the co-benefits from targeting
pollutant 1--occurs with an opportunity cost: reduced abatement of pollutant
1. In Figure 5, there are no points along the line 2 where both the original
pollutant 1 regulation is met (above 1 ) and costs are reduced (below  ).
Therefore, the argument against co-benefits ("Wouldn't it be better to target
them directly?") works only if we ignore the broader benefits of abating the
target pollutant. In this case of the policy targeting pollutant 2, abatement of
pollutant 1 arises as a co-benefit due to the same connected abatement
activities that resulted in reductions in pollutant 2 originally.

To put it bluntly, the efficiency argument against considering co-benefits holds
in general only if we ignore co-benefits. Ultimately, however, it is an empirical
question as to whether taking a more cost-effective approach to targeting
pollutant 2 results in greater net benefits relative to a counterfactual of
targeting pollutant 1. Regulatory decisionmaking is also critically important to a
reliance on the cost-effectiveness rationale. The assertion that it would be more
cost-effective to regulate pollutant 2 can hold only if the regulator decides to
adopt a regulation that targets pollutant 2. As an illustration of how lack of

                                          26
follow-up can come up short, EPA (2020c) promulgated on May 22, 2020, its
final rule withdrawing the "appropriate and necessary" determination of the
MATS rule (Subsection 2.D, above) by excluding consideration of PM2.5 benefits.
This final rule could have teed up the agency to pursue a new regulatory
approach to target PM2.5 directly and possibly obtain the associated benefits
more cost-effectively. Instead, EPA (2020d) issued a proposal against setting a
more stringent PM2.5 national ambient air quality standard at effectively the
same time (April 30, 2020).


4.E. Preexisting Policies
We have focused so far on examples in which no preexisting policies regulate
either pollutant. With no preexisting policies, benefits are never double
counted. Nevertheless, another argument related to the treatment of co-
benefits in BCA relates to the potential for double counting in the presence of
preexisting policies. For example, Gray (2015) argues that "whenever EPA
counts PM2.5 or ozone reductions in its cost-benefit analysis for other rules, it is
double-counting reductions already mandated ..." (p. 32).

To examine this concern, we add a preexisting policy targeting pollutant 2, such
that abatement must be at least as large as  2 = 1 1 + 2 . Figure 6 depicts
this case. Note that the preexisting policy can be met with any level of 2  2
and does not imply a specific level of abatement, as in the previous section.
Least-cost compliance with the preexisting policy on 2 occurs at point A in the
figure. The associated cost is  1 2 , 2 2 .




                                         27
Figure 6. Effect of Pre-Existing Policy on Possibility, or Lack
Thereof, of Co-Benefits



              x2
                                  
                                  1 = 1 + 2 2
                                   
                                   1 = 1 + 2 2

              2
                                         B

                                     A                  2 = 1 1 + 2
                                                        
         2 2 
                                                  C



                                                      1 2 , 2 ( 2 )

                                                        
                                 1 2              1     1                    x1



In the presence of the preexisting policy on pollutant 2, consider a new policy
that will target pollutant 1. Will this lead to co-benefits or co-costs associated
with changes in the abatement of pollutant 2? The answer turns out to depend
on the stringency of the new policy, the technology parameters (1 and 2 ), and
the cost functions. Figure 6 depicts several possibilities.

                                                         
The first case is trivial, and arises if the new policy, 1 in Figure 6, is nonbinding.
                                                         
In this example, compliance with the original policy 2 already led to abatement
of the first pollutant, 1 , sufficient to comply with the new regulation. There
were, in a sense, reverse co-benefits generated from reductions in 1 due to
compliance with the preexisting  2 policy, and these reductions were more than
                                       
sufficient to meet compliance with the 1 policy. Polluters therefore need to
make no changes, and cost minimization remains at point A in the figure. The
           
new policy 1 has no benefits or costs.

                                                                
The more interesting case arises if the new policy binds, as in 1 in Figure 6.
Here compliance with the new policy must increase costs, since the original
point A is insufficient to comply with the new policy targeting pollutant 1. In this
case there are two possibilities: an interior solution and a corner solution. In the


                                             28
first, depicted as point B, polluters must overcomply with the original policy 2
                         
in order to meet the new 1 policy. Compared with point A, abatement of both
pollutants is higher at point B, so benefits are also higher. The increase in 1
generates the target pollutant benefits from the new policy, and the new and
additional increase in 2 represents co-benefits. 19

In the corner-solution case, represented by point C, there are no co-benefits.
Polluters exactly comply with both policies. They comply with the original policy
 2 in a less cost-effective way, by increasing 1 and decreasing 2 , but in doing

                                   
so they comply with the new rule 1   . Emissions of pollutant 2 simply remain at
the level originally mandated under the policy  2, reflecting firms' investment
adjustments in the two abatement activities. Without accounting for these
adjustments, double counting would be a concern. We return to the subject
again later, but first we discuss the possibility for the relevant adjustments.




19
  This assumes the benefits can be added together--that is, they are additively
separable, which is an implicit assumption typical of EPA regulatory analyses.

                                          29
4.F. Regulatory Rebound
A more nuanced criticism of counting co-benefits on par with benefits
associated with the directly targeted pollutant relates to what Fowlie et al.
(2020) call "regulatory rebound." The argument is that when a preexisting
regulation limits the level of emissions of pollutant 2, a new policy that
indirectly generates reductions in pollutant 2 when it targets reductions in
pollutant 1 can induce a regulatory response that permits an increase in the
level of pollutant 2 back to the originally mandated level. 20 In the previous
discussion, this possibility was unlikely, except in the corner-solution case,
because we assumed the two abatement activities generated reciprocal co-
benefits; that is, both 1 and 2 were assumed to be greater than zero. If co-
benefits are not reciprocal, then there are two additional possibilities to
explore: 2 = 0 or 1 = 0. We start with the first.

Suppose 2 = 0 and 0 < 1 < 1 such that investments in abatement activity 1
reduce emissions of pollutant 2 (in addition to pollutant 1) but investments in
abatement activity 2 reduce only emissions of pollutant 2. 21 Also suppose there
is a preexisting policy on pollutant 2 such that 2   2. Since 2 = 1 1 + 2 ,
the policy constraint is just a sloped line as before, depicted in the left panel of
Figure 7. Cost-minimizing compliance with the      2 is depicted as
(1 2 , 2 2  ). If the regulator now adds a new policy targeting pollutant 1
and denoted as 1 , then the associated constraint can be represented by a
vertical line, as in the figure, because 2 = 0. The new policy effectively
mandates a minimum level of 1 , investment in abatement activity 1. Complying
with the new 1 policy involves higher costs, less 2 and more 1 , but no
additional abatement of pollutant 2 (i.e., 2 = 2 as before). In this case, there
are no co-benefits. Polluters merely comply with the new policy 1 in a way that
increases the cost of meeting the preexisting policy 2 , but that generates the


20
   Fullerton and Karney (2018) evaluate such co-benefit rebounds in a general
equilibrium model in which the regulator chooses between tax and cap-and-trade
instruments for two pollutants. Also note that this is similar to the overlapping policies
problem, where one policy instrument sets a quantitative emissions limit, as described
in Levinson (2011) and Goulder and Stavins (2011).
21
   For example, consider the relationship between SO2 (pollutant 1) and CO2 (pollutant
2). Reducing SO2 emissions at a coal-fired power plant with a scrubber would yield no
CO2 reductions (2 = 0), and technically it could result in a modest increase in CO2
emissions due to the energy penalty associated with operating a scrubber. In contrast,
reducing CO2 emissions by dispatching a natural gas power plant in lieu of the coal-fired
power plant would reduce both CO2 and SO2 emissions.

                                            30
same amount of reduction in pollutant 2. Compliance costs from the new policy
1 are represented in the graph by the difference between the two cost curves,
and the new policy's benefits arise from the increase in 1 . This is 100 percent
regulatory rebound and is a special case of the corner solution depicted as point
C in Figure 6 above, which occurs if the new policy 1 is sufficiently low. If
instead the new policy constraint were to the right of the horizontal intercept of
 2, there would be co-benefits.


Figure 7. Special Cases with Preexisting Policies




Case 1 is 100% regulatory rebound with increased costs and no co-benefits; Case 2 is
increased costs and either co-benefits (point B) or 100% regulatory rebound and no co-
benefits.


For completeness, examine the alternative scenario with no co-benefits from
the target pollutant to the previously regulated pollutant (1 = 0), but reverse
co-benefits from the previously regulated pollutant to the target pollutant
(0 < 2 < 1). This case is depicted in the right-hand panel of Figure 7. Here, the
preexisting policy 2 is represented as a horizontal line; because 1 = 0 the
preexisting policy targeting pollutant 2 effectively mandates a minimum level of
2 . Complying with the preexisting policy involves a corner solution, where 1 =
0. When the new policy targeting abatement of pollutant 2 is added such that
1  1 , then cost-minimizing compliance involves increasing 1 but not
necessarily increasing 2 . First consider point C, which depicts one possibility--
cost-minimizing compliance with no increase in 2 or 2 . This is another special
case of the corner solution depicted as point C in Figure 6 (Subsection 4.E,
above).

Now consider point B, which represents the cost-minimizing compliance
outcome at the tangency between the dashed iso-cost curve and the new policy


                                          31
1 (above the  2 constraint). In this case, the new policy 1 yields
overcompliance with the preexisting policy   2 , and therefore co-benefits, as in
the interior solution depicted as point B in Figure 6. Indeed, Figure 7 contains
nothing more than two exaggerated examples of what happens in Figure 6. In
Figure 7, as in all the figures, the 1 policy line is steeper than the  2 policy line,
by the assumption that 0 < 1 , 2 < 1.

In sum, when we add a policy targeting pollutant 1 in the presence of a
preexisting policy that targets pollutant 2, there are three possible outcomes.
The new policy is (1) moot, and there are no benefits or co-benefits (point A in
Figure 6); (2) a corner solution with no co-benefits (point C in Figure 6); or (3) an
interior solution with co-benefits (point B in Figure 6). Expanding the analysis in
Figure 6 by considering extreme values for the co-benefits, as done in Figure 7,
such that the 1 line is completely horizontal or the  2 line vertical, makes no
difference. We still get one of the three possible outcomes.


4.G. Double Counting
Returning now to the question: does considering co-benefits amount to double
counting? In some cases, the concern is that EPA does not follow its own
guidelines, which stipulate that baselines for RIAs must assume full compliance
with all previously enacted rules, even if those rules have not yet been
implemented or complied with (EPA 2014). In other cases, however, critics seem
to presume that any consideration of co-benefits would represent double
counting.

Our analysis addresses both concerns. Any analysis that ignores a previous
policy and assumes that all reductions in pollution stem from compliance with a
new policy will double-count benefits already counted in a BCA for the original
policy. That is why we consider co-benefits to be zero at points A and C in Figure
6, in Case 1 in Figure 7, and in the corner solution of Case 2 in Figure 7. In some
of these cases, an important mechanism to recognize is the regulatory rebound.
Even if the new policy initially reduces a co-pollutant, adjustments in
compliance to a preexisting existing policy may be such that actual co-pollutant
levels do not change after those adjustments take place. But if the original
benefits were already counted, double counting would result.

At the same time, co-benefits represent true benefits when they result in
overcompliance with the original rule, as in point B in Figure 6 or the dashed


                                          32
interior solution in Case 2 in Figure 7. Not considering those co-benefits would
represent undercounting, not double counting.




                                       33
5. Discussion and Conclusion
This paper considers the treatment of co-benefits in benefit-cost analyses, with
a particular focus on federal air quality regulations, for which questions and
concerns about the role of co-benefits have been gaining momentum. Using a
comprehensive data set on all major Clean Air Act rules issued by EPA over the
period 1997-2019, we show several trends and patterns. First, co-benefits make
up a significant share of the monetized benefits in EPA regulatory impact
analyses over this period. Second, among the categories of co-benefits, those
associated with reductions in adverse health effects due to fine particulate
matter are the most significant. Third, the inclusion of co-benefits has been
critical in the majority of RIAs for making the determination in prospective
analyses that the monetized benefits of the rule exceed the costs.

Are these findings cause for concern? We find that, in general and from a
welfare economics perspective, the answer is no. We develop a simple
conceptual framework to illustrate a critical point: co-benefits are simply a
semantic category of benefits that should be included in BCAs in order to make
an appropriate determination about whether a given policy promotes economic
efficiency compared with a baseline status quo. Indeed, this finding is not novel
and is covered in standard textbook treatments of best practice for BCAs (e.g.,
Boardman et al. 2018). 22

More novel is our consideration of specific questions and concerns about co-
benefits that have been raised in the context of CAA rules. First, if co-benefits
are large, wouldn't regulating them directly be more efficient or cost-effective?
While a regulator could deliver a given level of co-benefits more cost-effectively
by targeting the co-pollutant directly, such a direct policy is not necessarily a
more efficient alternative. In fact, we show that this line of argument against
considering co-benefits depends on a tautology, whereby it holds generally only
if one starts with the proposition that we should ignore co-benefits. The
argument also relies on the questionable starting point that a proposed
regulation for one pollutant can be replaced by one for another. Though




22
  This finding is common beyond economics. Refer to Castle and Revesz (2019) for a
discussion of how federal courts have typically ruled in favor of consideration of
ancillary impacts of regulations.

                                         34
possible in theory, the idea does not square with the required statutory basis for
most CAA regulations.

The second question relates to how we should count co-benefits if the co-
pollutant is already subject to a preexisting regulation. In this case, we show
how care needs be taken to measure only those benefits that are the
incremental consequence of the policy under consideration. But these
challenges are the same as those that arise more generally when regulators are
identifying the most appropriate baseline for analysis, and they are not unique
to the estimation of co-benefits. In doing so, however, particular attention
should be given to the potential for regulatory rebound--that is, the policy
under consideration may shift behaviors related to compliance with another
policy that targets the co-pollutant. Taking account of these effects will avoid
the possibility for double counting.

By carefully accounting for the co-benefits (and co-costs) of a proposed
regulatory action, EPA can better understand the impacts of the envisioned rule
on society and, in theory, use this information to craft a better regulation.
Exploiting the full information from a BCA could enable more efficient
regulatory design. It may also highlight the potential for greater benefits by
targeting both pollutants through regulation. Indeed, there are cases--such as
the 1998 pulp and paper cluster rule (RIN 2040-AB53) and the more recent joint
EPA-NHTSA tailpipe CO2--fuel economy standards (RINs 2060-AP61, 2060-AQ54,
and 2060-AS16)--where the agencies implemented multiple statutory
authorities to realize multiple types of societal benefits. 23

We conclude with some observations about the political economy underlying
why it appears that co-benefits are an increasing topic of debate,
notwithstanding how the questions are relatively "settled science" from the
perspective of how to conduct BCAs. First, it is important to recognize that in
practice, BCAs rarely (if ever) quantify and monetize all the expected benefits
and costs of an action. Even as the science and methods of valuation continue
to advance, many categories of benefits remain exceedingly difficult or
impossible to estimate. Estimating more categories of benefits also takes time
and resources, which are often scarce. It is nevertheless sufficient to show that
a subset of the benefits, which may arise entirely from co-benefits, are greater
than the costs to conclude that a regulation has positive net benefits. This aim in


23
     Thanks to Don Fullerton and Al McGartland for helpful suggestions on these topics.

                                             35
itself can explain why co-benefits are important to BCA of CAA regulations.
Research and the development of best practices tend to focus on the impacts
that have the greatest value, and the health benefits of reducing fine PM appear
to be dramatically larger than the health impacts of cutting other air pollutants.
Since the CAA does not require--and in some cases explicitly prohibits
consideration of--BCA to inform the setting of air quality standards and
regulations, the value of the information in an RIA lies in its communication to
the public, stakeholders, and Congress. For many consumers of this information,
once EPA has demonstrated that the monetized benefits exceed the monetized
costs, the value of incremental information on other benefits becomes quite
low.

Second, the distinction between the quantified, monetized benefits and the true
total benefits means that there are two possible interpretations of our findings.
It could be that co-benefits truly make up a large part of the actual total social
benefits. Alternatively, it could be that co-benefits just happen to be easier for
the EPA to monetize, and so make up a large share of the quantified, monetized
benefits reported in RIAs.

Finally, let us observe a fundamental tension in the implementation of federal
regulatory policy as it pertains to the CAA. As noted above, for four decades the
White House has directed regulatory agencies to adopt rules whose benefits
justify or exceed the costs and to pursue, where feasible, regulatory options
that maximize net social benefits. Since 2017, however, the Trump
administration has focused on the costs of regulations, both through a
"regulatory budget" that effectively places limits on the incremental costs new
rules can impose on society (regardless of net social benefits) and in its
deregulation agenda (CEA 2019). With virtually every CAA regulation since 1997
estimated to deliver monetized benefits in excess of monetized costs (see Figure
2), the removal of any of these rules through deregulatory actions would impose
social costs in excess of the benefits. 24 Casting doubt on the applicability or
validity of the benefits from reducing fine PM by questioning the
appropriateness of including co-benefits could enable a regulator to pursue
actions that reduce regulatory costs without appearing to impose net social
costs. But for reasons we have discussed, this conclusion would be wrong.




24
     Refer to Evans et al. (2020) for further discussion of this issue.

                                                36
6. Appendix
Table A.1. Major Clean Air Act Regulations, Compiled from OMB Reports
to Congress, 1997-2019
 RIN         Rule                                             Date        Federal      Monetized
                                                                          Register     benefits?

 2060-AE66   National Ambient Air Quality Standards for     7/18/1997    62 FR 38652      Y
             Particulate Matter

 2060-AE57   National Ambient Air Quality Standards for     7/18/1997    62 FR 38856      Y
             Ozone

 2060-AC62   Standards of Performance for New               9/15/1997    62 FR 48348      Y
             Stationary Sources and Emission Guidelines
             for Existing Sources:
             Hospital/Medical/Infectious Waste
             Incinerators

 2060-AF76   Control of Emissions of Air Pollution from     10/21/1997   62 FR 54694      N
             Highway Heavy-Duty Engines

 2040-AB53   National Emission Standards for Hazardous      4/15/1998    63 FR 18504      Y
             Air Pollutants for Source Category: Pulp and
             Paper Production; Effluent Limitations
             Guidelines, Pretreatment Standards, and
             New Source Performance Standards: Pulp,
             Paper, and Paperboard Category

 2060-AD33   Emission Standards for Locomotives and         4/16/1998    63 FR 18978      N
             Locomotive Engines

 2060-       Control of Emissions of Air Pollution from     10/1/1998    63 FR 56968      N
 AF76_98     Nonroad Diesel Engines

 2060-AH10   Finding of Significant Contribution and        10/27/1998   63 FR 57356      Y
             Rulemaking for Certain States in the Ozone
             Transport Assessment Group Region for
             Purposes of Reducing Regional Transport of
             Ozone

 2060-AE29   Phase 2 Emission Standards for New             3/30/1999    64 FR 15208      N
             Nonroad Spark-Ignition Nonhandheld
             Engines at or below 19 Kilowatts

 2060-AH88   Findings of Significant Contribution and       5/25/1999    64 FR 28250      N
             Rulemaking on Section 126 Petitions for



                                                     37
            Purposes of Reducing Interstate Ozone
            Transport

2060-AF32   Regional Haze Regulations                     7/1/1999    64 FR 35714   Y

2060-AI23   Control of Air Pollution from New Motor       2/10/2000   65 FR 6698    Y
            Vehicles: Tier 2 Motor Vehicle Emissions
            Standards and Gasoline Sulfur Control
            Requirements

2060-       Phase 2 Emission Standards for New            4/25/2000   65 FR 24268   N
AE29_00     Nonroad Spark-Ignition Handheld Engines at
            or below 19 Kilowatts and Minor
            Amendments to Emission Requirements
            Applicable to Small Spark-Ignition Engines
            and Marine Spark-Ignition Engines

2060-AI12   Control of Emissions of Air Pollution from    10/6/2000   65 FR 59896   N
            2004 and Later Model Year Heavy-Duty
            Highway Engines and Vehicles; Revision of
            Light-Duty On-Board Diagnostics
            Requirements

2060-AI34   National Emission Standards for Hazardous     1/12/2001   66 FR 3180    Y
            Air Pollutants for Chemical Recovery
            Combustion Sources at Kraft, Soda, Sulfite,
            and Stand-Alone Semichemical Pulp Mills

2060-AI69   Control of Air Pollution from New Motor       1/18/2001   66 FR 5002    Y
            Vehicles: Heavy-Duty Engine and Vehicle
            Standards and Highway Diesel Fuel Sulfur
            Control Requirements

2060-AI11   Control of Emissions from Nonroad Large       11/8/2002   67 FR 68242   Y
            Spark-Ignition Engines, and Recreational
            Engines (Marine and Land-Based)

2060-AG63   National Emission Standards for Hazardous     6/15/2004   69 FR 33474   Y
            Air Pollutants for Stationary Reciprocating
            Internal Combustion Engines

2060-AK27   Control of Emissions of Air Pollution from    6/29/2004   69 FR 38958   Y
            Nonroad Diesel Engines and Fuel

2060-AG52   National Emission Standards for Hazardous     7/30/2004   69 FR 45944   N
            Air Pollutants: Plywood and Composite
            Wood Products; Effluent Limitations
            Guidelines and Standards for the Timber
            Products Point Source Category; List of
            Hazardous Air Pollutants, Lesser Quantity
            Designations, Source Category List



                                                    38
2060-AG69   National Emission Standards for Hazardous       9/13/2004    69 FR 55218   Y
            Air Pollutants for Industrial, Commercial,
            and Institutional Boilers and Process Heaters

2060-AL76   Rule to Reduce Interstate Transport of Fine     5/12/2005    70 FR 25162   Y
            Particulate Matter and Ozone (Clean Air
            Interstate Rule); Revisions to Acid Rain
            Program; Revisions to the NOX SIP Call

2060-AJ65   Standards of Performance for New and            5/18/2005    70 FR 28606   Y
            Existing Stationary Sources: Electric Utility
            Steam Generating Units

2060-AJ31   Regional Haze Regulations and Guidelines         7/6/2005    70 FR 39104   Y
            for Best Available Retrofit Technology
            (BART) Determinations

2060-AM82   Standards of Performance for Stationary         7/11/2006    71 FR 39154   Y
            Compression Ignition Internal Combustion
            Engines

2060-AI44   National Ambient Air Quality Standards for      10/17/2006   71 FR 61144   Y
            Particulate Matter

2060-AK70   Control of Hazardous Air Pollutants from        2/26/2007    72 FR 8428    Y
            Mobile Sources

2060-AK74   Clean Air Fine Particle Implementation          4/25/2007    72 FR 20586   Y

2060-AN24   National Ambient Air Quality Standards for      3/27/2008    73 FR 16436   Y
            Ozone

2060-AN72   Standards of Performance for Petroleum          6/24/2008    73 FR 35838   Y
            Refineries

2060-AM06   Control of Emissions of Air Pollution from       5/6/2008    73 FR 25098   Y
            Locomotive Engines and Marine
            Compression-Ignition Engines Less than 30
            Liters per Cylinder

2060-AM34   Control of Emissions from Nonroad Spark-        10/8/2008    73 FR 59034   Y
            Ignition Engines and Equipment

2060-AN83   National Ambient Air Quality Standards for      11/12/2008   73 FR 66964   Y
            Lead

2060-AO79   Mandatory Reporting of Greenhouse Gases         10/30/2009   74 FR 56260   N

2060-AP36   National Emission Standards for Hazardous        3/3/2010    75 FR 9648    Y
            Air Pollutants for Reciprocating Internal
            Combustion Engines


                                                      39
2060-AO38   Control of Emissions of Air Pollution from       4/30/2010    75 FR 22896   Y
            Category 3 Marine Diesel Engines

2060-AO48   Primary National Ambient Air Quality             6/22/2010    75 FR 35520   Y
            Standard for Sulfur Dioxide

2060-       National Emission Standards for Hazardous        8/20/2010    75 FR 51570   Y
AP36_10     Air Pollutants for Reciprocating Internal
            Combustion Engines

2060-AO15   Amendments to the National Emission               9/9/2010    75 FR 54970   Y
            Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants and
            New Source Performance Standards (NSPS)
            for the Portland Cement Manufacturing
            Industry

2060-AP50   Federal Implementation Plans: Interstate          8/8/2011    76 FR 48208   Y
            Transport of Fine Particulate Matter and
            Ozone and Correction of SIP Approvals

2060-AP61   Greenhouse Gas Emissions Standards and           9/15/2011    76 FR 57106   Y
            Fuel Efficiency Standards for Medium- and
            Heavy-Duty Engines and Vehicles

2060-AP76   Oil and Natural Gas Sector: New Source           8/16/2012    77 FR 49490   N
            Performance Standards and National
            Emission Standards for Hazardous Air
            Pollutants Reviews

2060-AP52   National Emission Standards for Hazardous        2/16/2012    77 FR 9304    Y
            Air Pollutants from Coal- and Oil-Fired
            Electric Utility Steam Generating Units and
            Standards of Performance for Fossil-Fuel-
            Fired Electric Utility, Industrial-Commercial-
            Institutional, and Small Industrial-
            Commercial-Institutional Steam Generating
            Units

2060-       Standards of Performance for Petroleum           9/12/2012    77 FR 56422   Y
AN72_12     Refineries; Standards of Performance for
            Petroleum Refineries for Which
            Construction, Reconstruction, or
            Modification Commenced after May 14,
            2007

2060-AQ54   2017-2025 Light-Duty Vehicle Greenhouse          10/15/2012   77 FR 62624   Y
            Gas Emission Standards and Corporate
            Average Fuel Economy Standards

2060-AO47   National Ambient Air Quality Standards for       1/15/2013    78 FR 3086    Y
            Particulate Matter


                                                     40
  2060-AQ58       National Emission Standards for Hazardous       1/30/2013        78 FR 6674           Y
                  Air Pollutants for Reciprocating Internal
                  Combustion Engines; New Source
                  Performance Standards for Stationary
                  Internal Combustion Engines

  2060-AR13       National Emission Standards for Hazardous       1/31/2013        78 FR 7138           Y
                  Air Pollutants for Major Sources: Industrial,
                  Commercial, and Institutional Boilers and
                  Process Heaters

  2060-AQ86       Control of Air Pollution from Motor Vehicles:   4/28/2014       79 FR 23414           Y
                  Tier 3 Motor Vehicle Emission and Fuel
                  Standards

  2060-AP93       Standards of Performance for New                3/16/2015       80 FR 13672           Y
                  Residential Wood Heaters, New Residential
                  Hydronic Heaters and Forced-Air Furnaces

  2060-AR33       Carbon Pollution Emission Guidelines for        10/23/2015      80 FR 64662           Y
                  Existing Stationary Sources: Electric Utility
                  Generating Units

  2060-AP69       NESHAP for Brick and Structural Clay            10/26/2015      80 FR 65470           Y
                  Products Manufacturing; and NESHAP for
                  Clay Ceramics Manufacturing

  2060-AP38       National Ambient Air Quality Standards for      10/26/2015      80 FR 65292           Y
                  Ozone

  2060-AS30       Oil and Natural Gas Sector: Emission             6/3/2016       81 FR 35824           Y
                  Standards for New, Reconstructed, and
                  Modified Sources

  2060-AS23       Emission Guidelines and Compliance Times        8/29/2016       81 FR 59276           Y
                  for Municipal Solid Waste Landfills

  2060-AS16       Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Fuel               10/25/2016      81 FR 73478           Y
                  Efficiency Standards for Medium- and
                  Heavy-Duty Engines and Vehicles--Phase 2

  2060-AS05       Cross-State Air Pollution Rule Update for the   10/26/2016      81 FR 74504           Y
                  2008 Ozone NAAQS

  2060-AT67       Repeal of the Clean Power Plan; Emission         7/8/2019       84 FR 32520           Y
                  Guidelines for Greenhouse Gas Emissions
                  from Existing Electric Utility Generating
                  Units; Revisions to Emission Guidelines
                  Implementing Regulations

Note: RIN = regulation identifier number. Where EPA used the same RIN more than once, we have modified the second
instance by adding an extension that represents the two-digit year of rule promulgation.

                                                            41
References
Aldy, J. E. 2018. Promoting Environmental Quality through Fuels Regulations: Lessons for
    a Durable Energy and Climate Policy. In A. Carlson and D. Burtaw (eds.), Lessons
    from the Clean Air Act: Building Durability and Adaptability into US Climate and
    Energy Policy. New York: Cambridge University Press, 159-99.

Aldy, J., M. Kotchen, M. Evans, M. Fowlie, A. Levinson, and K. Palmer. 2019. Report on
    the Proposed Changes to the Federal Mercury and Air Toxics Standards. E-EEAC
    Committee Report. URL: https://www.e-eeac.org/mats-report.

------. 2020. Deep Flaws in Mercury Regulatory Analysis. Science 368: 247-48.

Blackwell, A. G. 2017. The Curb-Cut Effect. Stanford Social Innovation Review Winter: 28-
    30.

Boardman, A .E., D. H. Greenberg, A. R. Vining, and D. L. Weimer. 2018. Cost-Benefit
    Analysis: Concepts and Practice. Pearson Prentice-Hall.

Burtraw, D., A. Krupnick, K. Palmer, A. Paul, M. Toman, and C. Bloyd. 2003. Ancillary
    Benefits of Reduced Air Pollution in the US from Moderate Greenhouse Gas
    Mitigation Policies in the Electricity Sector. Journal of Environmental Economics and
    Management 45(3): 650-67.

Castle, K. M., and R. L. Revesz. 2018. Environmental Standards, Thresholds, and the Next
    Battleground of Climate Change Regulations. Minnesota Law Review 103: 1349-437.

Council of Economic Advisers (CEA). 2019. The Economic Effects of Federal Deregulation
   since January 2017: An Interim Report. Washington, DC: Executive Office of the
   President. https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/The-
   Economic-Effects-of-Federal-Deregulation-Interim-Report.pdf.

Dudley, S. 2012. Perpetuating Puffery: An Analysis of the Composition of OMB's
    Reported Benefits of Regulation. Business Economics 47(3): 165-76.

Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 1973. Regulation of Fuels and Fuel Additives, 38
    Federal Register 1254, January 10.

------. 1976. Lead National Ambient Air Quality Standard, 41 Federal Register 14921,
    April 8.

------. 1997. The Benefits and Costs of the Clean Air Act, 1970 to 1990. Report to
    Congress, EPA-410-R-97-002, October. URL:
    https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2017-09/documents/ee-0295_all.pdf.

------. 1998. Regulatory Impact Analysis for the NOx SIP Call, FIP, and Section 126
    Petitions, Volume I: Costs and Economic Impacts. EPA-452/R-98-003, September.

------. 2014. Guidelines for Preparing Economic Analyses. May 2014 Update.
    Washington, DC: EPA/National Center for Environmental Economics. URL:
    https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2017-08/documents/ee-0568-50.pdf



                                           42
------. 2015. Carbon Pollution Emission Guidelines for Existing Stationary Sources:
    Electric Utility Generating Units. 80 Federal Register 64662, October 23, RIN 2060-
    AR33. URL: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2015-10-23/pdf/2015-
    22842.pdf.

------. 2017. Repeal of Carbon Pollution Emission Guidelines for Existing Stationary
    Sources: Electric Utility Generating Units. 82 Federal Register 48035, October 16,
    RIN 2060-AT55. URL: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2017-10-
    16/pdf/2017-22349.pdf.

------. 2018a. Compliance Cost, HAP Benefits, and Ancillary Co-Pollutant Benefits for
    "National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants: Coal- and Oil-Fired
    Electric Utility Steam Generating Units--Reconsideration of Supplemental Finding
    and Residual Risk and Technology Review." Washington, DC, December 14. URL:
    https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2018-12/documents/mats-an-cost-
    benefit_memo12-2018.pdf.

------. 2018b. Increasing Consistency and Transparency in Considering Costs and
    Benefits in the Rulemaking Process. 83 Federal Register 27524, June 13, RIN 2010-
    AA12. URL: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2018-06-13/pdf/2018-
    12707.pdf.

------. 2018c. Strengthening Transparency in Regulatory Science. 83 Federal Register
    18768, April 30, RIN 2080-AA14. URL: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-
    2018-04-30/pdf/2018-09078.pdf.

------. 2019a. National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants: Coal- and Oil-
    Fired Electric Utility Steam Generating Units--Reconsideration of Supplemental
    Finding and Residual Risk and Technology Review. 84 Federal Register 26, February
    7, RIN 2060-AT99. URL: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2019-02-
    07/pdf/2019-00936.pdf.

------. 2019b. Oil and Natural Gas Sector: Emissions Standards for New, Reconstructed,
    and Modified Sources Review. 84 Federal Register 185, September 24, RIN 2060-
    AT90. URL: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2019-09-24/pdf/2019-
    19876.pdf.

------. 2019c. Repeal of the Clean Power Plan; Emission Guidelines for Greenhouse Gas
    Emissions from Existing Electric Utility Generating Units; Revisions to Emission
    Guidelines Implementing Regulations. 84 Federal Register 32520, July 8, RIN 2060-
    AT67. URL: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2019-07-08/pdf/2019-
    13507.pdf.

------. 2020a. Guidelines for Preparing Economic Analyses. Review Copy Prepared for
    EPA's Science Advisory Board's Economic Guidelines Review Panel. April 2. URL:
    https://yosemite.epa.gov/sab/sabproduct.nsf/0/30D5E59E8DC91C2285258403006
    EEE00/$File/GuidelinesReviewDraft.pdf.

------. 2020b. Increasing Consistency in Considering Benefits and Costs in the Clean Air
    Act Rulemaking Process. 85 Federal Register 35612, June 11, RIN 2060-AU51. URL:
    https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2020-06-11/pdf/2020-12535.pdf.



                                           43
------. 2020c. National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants: Coal- and Oil-
    Fired Electric Utility Steam Generating Units--Reconsideration of Supplemental
    Finding and Residual Risk and Technology Review. 85 Federal Register 31286, May
    22, RIN 2060-AT99. URL: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2020-05-
    22/pdf/2020-08607.pdf.

------. 2020d. Review of the National Ambient Air Quality Standards for Particulate
    Matter. 85 Federal Register 24094, April 30, RIN 2060-AS50. URL:
    https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2020-04-30/pdf/2020-08143.pdf.

Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and National Highway Traffic Safety
    Administration (NHTSA). 2020. The Safer Affordable Fuel-Efficient (SAFE) Vehicles
    Rule for Model Years 2021-2026 Passenger Cars and Light Trucks. 85 Federal
    Register 24174, April 30, RIN 2060-AU09. URL:
    https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2020-04-30/pdf/2020-06967.pdf.

Evans, M., K. Palmer, J. Aldy, M. Fowlie, A. Levinson, and M. Kotchen. 2020.
    Retrospective Analysis in an Era of Deregulation--Lessons from MATS. Working
    paper, June.

Executive Order 12291, Federal Regulation, 46 Federal Register 13193, February 17,
    1981.

Executive Order 12866, Regulatory Planning and Review, 58 Federal Register 51735,
    October 4, 1993.

Executive Order 13771, Reducing Regulation and Controlling Regulatory Costs, 82
    Federal Register 9339, February 3, 2017.

Fowlie, M., E. Rubin, and C. Wright. 2020. Declining Power Plant Emissions, Co-benefits,
   and Regulatory Rebound. Paper presented at ASSA [sp out] meetings, San Diego,
   [month, days?].

Friedman, L., D. Hedeker, and E. Richter. 2009. Long-Term Effects of Repealing the
    National Maximum Speed Limit in the United States. American Journal of Public
    Health 99(9): 1626-31.

Fullerton, D., and D. H. Karney. 2018. Multiple Pollutants, Co-Benefits, and Suboptimal
     Environmental Policies. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 87:
     52-71.

Goulder, L. H., and R. N. Stavins. 2011. Challenges from State-Federal Interactions in US
   Climate Change Policy. American Economic Review 101(3): 253-57.

Gray, C. B. 2015. EPA's Use of Co-Benefits. Engage 16(2): 31-33.

Hansman, C., J. Hjort, and G. León. 2018. Interlinked Firms and the Consequences of
   Piecemeal Regulation. Journal of the European Economic Association 17(3): 876-
   916.

Karlsson, M., E. Alfredsson, and N. Westling. 2020. Climate Policy Cobenefits: A Review.
     Climate Policy 20(3): 292-316.




                                           44
Kotchen, M., M. Moore, F. Lupi, and E. Rutherford. 2006. Environmental Constraints on
    Hydropower: An Ex-Post Benefit-Cost Analysis of Dam Relicensing in Michigan. Land
    Economics 82: 389-403.

Levinson, A. 2011. Belts and Suspenders: Interactions among Climate Policy Regulations.
    In D. Fullerton and C. Wolfram (eds.), The Design and Implementation of US Climate
    Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 127-40.

Linn, J. 2008. Technological Modifications in the Nitrogen Oxides Tradable Permit
    Program. Energy Journal 29(3): 153-76.

Lutter, R., and J. Shogren. 2002. Tradable Permit Tariffs: How Local Air Pollution Affects
    Carbon Emissions Permit Trading. Land Economics 78(2): 159-70.

Napolitano, S., G. Stevens, J. Schreifels, and K. Culligan. 2007. The NOx Budget Trading
   Program: A Collaborative, Innovative Approach to Solving a Regional Air Pollution
   Problem. Electricity Journal 20(9): 65-76.

Nichols, A. L. 1997. Lead in Gasoline. In R. D. Morgenstern (ed.), Economic Analyses at
    EPA: Assessing Regulatory Impact. Washington, DC: Resources for the Future Press,
    49-86.

Office of Management and Budget (OMB). 2003. Circular A-4: Regulatory Analysis.
     Washington, DC: Executive Office of the President. September 17, 2003. URL:
     https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/omb/circulars/A4/a-4.pdf.

------. 2005. Validating Regulatory Analysis: 2005 Report to Congress on the Costs and
    Benefits of Federal Regulations and Unfunded Mandates on State, Local, and Tribal
    Entities. Executive Office of the President. URL:
    https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/omb/assets/OMB/inforeg
    /2005_cb/final_2005_cb_report.pdf.

------. 2017. Memorandum M-17-21, Guidance Implementing Executive Order 13771,
    Titled "Reducing Regulation and Controlling Regulatory Costs," April 5. URL:
    https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/omb/memoranda/2017/
    M-17-21-OMB.pdf.

------. 2019. Report to Congress on the Benefits and Costs of Federal Regulations and
    Agency Compliance with the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act. URL:
    https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/2019-CATS-5885-
    REV_DOC-2017Cost_BenefitReport11_18_2019.docx.pdf.

Schmalensee, R., and R. Stavins. 2013. The SO2 Allowance Trading System: The Ironic
   History of a Grand Policy Experiment. Journal of Economic Perspectives 27(1): 103-
   22.

Sigman, H. 1996. Cross-Media Pollution: Responses to Restrictions on Chlorinated
    Solvent Releases. Land Economics 72: 298-312.

Smith, A. 2011. An Evaluation of the PM2.5 Health Benefits Estimates in Regulatory
    Impact Analyses for Recent Air Regulations. Final Report NERA Economic
    Consulting. URL:



                                            45
https://www.nera.com/content/dam/nera/publications/archive2/PUB_RIA_Critiqu
e_Final_Report_1211.pdf.




                                  46
