                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       SKILLED HUMAN CAPITAL AND HIGH-GROWTH ENTREPRENEURSHIP:
                   EVIDENCE FROM INVENTOR INFLOWS

                                        Benjamin Balsmeier
                                           Lee Fleming
                                            Matt Marx
                                        Seungryul Ryan Shin

                                        Working Paper 27605
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27605


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2020




The authors thank Guan Cheng Li for invaluable research assistance. We also thank participants in
the NBER Productivity Seminar for comments and suggestions. We gratefully acknowledge financial
support from The Coleman Fung Institute for Engineering Leadership, the National Science Foundation
(1360228), and the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Benjamin Balsmeier, Lee Fleming, Matt Marx, and Seungryul Ryan Shin. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Skilled Human Capital and High-Growth Entrepreneurship: Evidence from Inventor Inflows
Benjamin Balsmeier, Lee Fleming, Matt Marx, and Seungryul Ryan Shin
NBER Working Paper No. 27605
July 2020
JEL No. J24,J61,L26

                                          ABSTRACT

To what extent does high-growth entrepreneurship depend on skilled human capital? We estimate
the impact of the inflow of inventors into a region on the founding of high-growth firms,
instrumenting mobility with the county-level share of millions of inventor surnames in the 1940
U.S. Census. Inventor immigration increases county-level high-growth entrepreneurship;
estimates range from 29-55 immigrating inventors for each new high-growth firm, depending on
the region and model. We also find a smaller but significant negative effect of inventor arrival on
entrepreneurship in nearby counties.

Benjamin Balsmeier                                         Matt Marx
Department of Economics and Management                     Boston University
Université du Luxembourg                                   and NBER
6, rue Richard Coudenhove-Kalergi                          mattmarx@bu.edu
L-1359 Luxembourg
benjamin.balsmeier@uni.lu                                  Seungryul Ryan Shin
                                                           Seoul National University 1,
Lee Fleming                                                Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu
Coleman Fung Institute for                                 Seoul, Republic of Korea
Engineering Leadership                                     s.ryan.shin@gmail.com
University of California, Berkeley
lfleming@ieor.berkeley.edu
Introduction

  Traffic and high rents aside, policymakers worldwide have long sought to replicate Silicon Valley's
entrepreneurial success--but typically with middling results (Lerner, 2012). Accordingly, scholars have
sought to identify the determinants of regional entrepreneurship. Prior studies have suggested a role for
local culture (Hofstede, 2001; Saxenian, 1994; Florida, 2005), technological spillovers from universities
(Rosenthal and Strange, 2003; Jaffe et al, 1993), industrial diversity including "anchor" tenants (Duranton
and Puga, 2001, Agrawal & Cockburn, 2003), and the munificence of financial capital (Samila & Sorenson,
2011; Grilli & Murtinu, 2014).

  Glaeser & Kerr (2009) review these and other theories in an effort to understand the spatial distribution
of entrepreneurial activity in U.S. manufacturing. They find that factors such as demographics, culture, and
industry mix explain only a small share of the geographical variance. Much more consequential is the
availability of relevant talent, accounting for which enables them to explain 60-80% of the variance and
conclude that "the broad stability of this finding suggests that people and their human capital are probably
the crucial ingredient for most new entrepreneurs" (p. 659). They are of course not the first to suggest that
human capital is crucial to the entrepreneurial process, particularly when considering high-potential
ventures. By applying scientific principles and research experience to practical problem-solving in the
economy, technically-trained workers with backgrounds in science, technology and engineering play a
crucial role in innovation and economic growth (Arrow and Capron, 1959; Romer, 1990; Rosenberg and
Nelson, 1994; Waldinger, 2016). Jensen and Thursby (2001), for example, argue that scientific inventors
need to be fully engaged and motivated for technologies to be successfully commercialized in new firms. 1
Startup activity also appears critically dependent upon inventor knowledge from industry (Klepper 2009)
and universities (Zucker et.al 1999; Stuart and Ding 2006).

  Evidence of the role for skilled human capital in high-growth entrepreneurship comes primarily from
work illustrating correlations between the supply of technical workers levels of patenting, entrepreneurial
firm founding, and employment (e.g. Kerr, 2013; Maloney and Caicedo, 2016). However, causality might
run the other direction. It could be that the correlations established by Glaeser & Kerr (2009) reflect not
only the importance of talent to entrepreneurship but rather the flocking of skilled workers to opportunity.
Alternatively, it might be that hiring technical talent is not that important: new ventures might focus on
fundraising and outsource product development, as did Slack, Skype, Whatsapp, Alibaba, and BaseCamp.



  1
    Not all high-growth firms in the U.S. are high-tech firms, and vice-versa. However, Hathaway (2018) reports that
high-tech firms are overrepresented by a factor of four among high-growth firms (21% vs. 5% of all firms) as
defined by Inc. Magazine's annual list of the 5,000 fastest-growing privately held firms in the U.S.

                                                          2
Either way, the role of local, skilled talent in fueling high-growth entrepreneurship may not be as great as
typically thought, and correlations may reflect other, unobserved factors.

  To our knowledge, a causal link has not been established between the supply of key technical talent--
including the sort of scientists and engineers who come up with original inventions--and the founding of
high-growth ventures. 2 This is not to say that the entrepreneurial literature has not wrestled with the role of
talent, but it has done so primarily in the realm of executive leadership. For example, Kaplan et al (2009)
suggest that most successful startups remain true to their original business plan, upgrading executive as
they move towards IPO. Ewens and Marx (2017) add causal evidence that startups depend on human capital
in the executive suite, instrumenting investors' ability to replace the founder with a seasoned CEO via state-
level shifts in policies regarding employee non-compete agreements. Again, these articles focus on the
"upper echelons" of organizations, ignoring the vast majority of (potential) employees at new ventures.

  Our aim is to test whether the local supply of inventors is a critical determinant of high-growth
entrepreneurship. We establish that the arrival of inventors in a region drives the founding of startups that
grow and become successful, addressing reverse-causality concerns by instrumenting inventor inflows with
the share of inventors' surnames in that region based on the nationwide distribution of surnames from the
1940 U.S. Census. Our shift-share instrument represents an advance over prior efforts in two ways. First,
because the "shares" stem from more than three million unique surnames across a large number of counties,
it is less vulnerable to critiques that apply to such instruments with low variation or a few highly-
determinative shares (see Borusayak et al, 2019 for a fuller discussion of the issue). Second, focusing on
the U.S. lessens concerns regarding endogenous origin-destination combinations (e.g., Indian engineers
migrating to Silicon Valley) and addreses the issue of potential endogenous choice of regions and selection
of incoming inventors at the nation level (Moser, Voena, Waldinger 2014; Parey et al., 2017).

  We first establish that the local share of surnames matching a given inventor strongly predicts
immigration into a county. We then aggregate moves to create a county-wide average likelihood of arrival
for inventors with a given surname. Application of the instrument indicates that the arrival of 55 inventors
results in one new high-growth startup on average. In California and Massachusetts, only 29 inventors are
required to achieve a similar effect. A back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that incoming inventors



  2
     Related to this paper, several studies have addressed the role of local inventors in regional productivity. For example, Agrawal,
et al. (2011) show that inventor emigration decreases local knowledge flow in the source region but also drives knowledge back
into the departed region. A growing and influential literature on foreign immigration suggests positive impacts on the U.S. of an
influx of inventors from outside its borders, including greater patenting and innovation (Bernstein et. al., 2018; Hunt and Gauthier-
Loiselle 2010; Moretti et al. 2018; Burchardi et. al. 2020; Kerr and Lincoln 2010), wages (Peri, Shih, and Sparber 2015) and TFP
(Capelli, Czarnitzki, Doherr, Montobbio 2019). Our study differs from these in that we study internal migration within the U.S.


                                                                   3
may explain 24.9% of high-growth startups. Results remain robust to a variety of different models,
instruments, and measures, and even to the inclusion of inventor immigration to surrounding counties,
which has a negative effect on entrepreneurship in the focal county.



Data description

  Historic Census data

  The central challenge in determining the causal effect of inventor mobility upon regional outcomes is to
disentangle the choice to move from the reasons to move. Ideally, we would observe inventors moving for
reasons completely unrelated to career opportunities. To approximate this as best as possible, we seek to
instrument an inventor's move to a county in which they had not previously patented. We build a variety of
instruments based on 1940 Census Data (http://sites.mnhs.org/library/content/1940-census), first
establishing the plausibility of the instrument at the individual inventor level and then aggregating to
develop a county-level instrument.

  We begin with the 1940 U.S. Census records for 131,940,709 citizens in 38,382,088 households. These data
include 3,363,932 different surnames, of which 27% appear only once. (The median is 3, the mean is 39,
and the maximum is 1,359,079 for Smith.) Figures 1 and 2 illustrate the sparse geographical distributions of
"Marx" and "Fleming". After some name cleaning and standardizing procedures, described in detail in
Appendix A1, there were 42,268 Flemings, 6,232 Marxes, 153 Shins, and 9 Balsmeiers in the 1940 census
data. All analyses are robust to excluding prolific surnames as indicated by high (local) frequency or wealth.
The 1940 U.S. Census records cover 3,086 counties. 3




  3
   The 1940 U.S. Census records consist of 3097 counties and other districts based on the county system in 1940. In
order to help matching with the location information of inventors, we translate 19 counties or districts, which are old
and no longer in use, to a corresponding county in the current county system based on the location, resulting in 3086
unique counties.

                                                            4
   Figure 1: Spatial distribution of the surname "Marx" in 1940 (each red dot corresponds to 50
                                      individuals, 4,762 in total).




  Figure 2: Spatial distribution of the surname "Fleming" in 1940 (each red dot corresponds to 50
                                      individuals, 42,268 in total).




  Inventor data

  We begin with raw data from the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) from 1976-2018.
Although the USPTO lists inventors for every patent, it does not provide unique identifiers for them. For
example, even the relatively rare name of Matthew Marx is listed as inventing many patents, including
5,995,928, "Method and apparatus for continuous spelling speech recognition with early identification,

                                                     5
6,173,266, "System and method for developing interactive speech applications," and 7,271,262,
"Pyrrolopyrimidine derivatives." In this simple example, it would seem reasonable based on the titles alone
that the same inventor authored the first two but not the last patent, and that is indeed the case. Inventor
names can be disambiguated with a variety of algorithms, here we use Balsmeier et al. (2017). After applying
the name cleaning and standardizing procedures and the matching algorithm, described in detail in
Appendix A1, we match 91.1% of inventors' surname to a surname from the 1940 Census. Note that the
name cleaning exercise has no significant effect on the size of the estimated coefficients but decreases
matching errors and improves precision of the instrument.

  We used the inventor ID and location to identify inventor moves across US counties. We drop all inventors
with a single patent. Then, using patent application year as a timestamp, we count an inward move in the
first year we first observe an inventor in a county. As noted by Cheyre, Klepper, and Veloso (2015), patent
application dates do not necessarily correspond with dates of employment and in particular may lag actual
moves. Hence, the inventor may have moved into a county earlier than we detect, leading to a fuzzy lower
bound of the actual lag between our variable of interest and the actual inward moves. In 96% of cases, we
observe an incoming inventor patenting elsewhere up to 5 years earlier (mean = 2.6). Results are robust to
excluding inventor moves with longer gaps between two patenting events, or temporary stops at a third
county. If an inventor appears on two or more patents within a given year, we follow Moretti and Wilson
(2017) and take the most frequent location.



  Entrepreneurship data

  To measure high-growth entrepreneurship, we rely primarily upon business registration data from
Guzman and Stern (2019). Instead of examining selected samples such as Crunchbase or NETS, they collect
annual state registers of all businesses founded. They link newly-founded businesses from these registers
to SDC Platinum and report the number that experience a liquidity event (i.e., and Initial Public Offering
or acquisition) within six years of founding. This forms our primary dependent variable. As a robustness
check, we also use their measure of the number of local startups that are expected to experience high growth.
Finally, as an alternative measure of high-growth potential we count the number of venture-financed
startups in the region using VenturExpert.

  Table 1 shows descriptive statistics of our key variables at the county level and Figure 3 provides a
scatterplot of the relationship between incoming inventors and high-growth startups in the raw data.




                                                      6
                                              Table 1: descriptive statistics at county level

   Variable                                             N           mean         median      stdev         min            max
   Incoming Inventors                                   82,259      2.47         0.00        14.71         0.00           939.00
   Instrument                                           82,259      2.27         0.80        10.22         0.00           443.14
   Number of new high-growth startups                   82,259      0.18         0.00        1.58          0.00           90.81
 Notes: This table reports summary statistics of the key variables used in our regression analyses at the county level, covering 3130
 counties 1988-2014. The number of high growth startups is not an integer value in some cases because they are measured by
 Guzman and Stern (2020) at the zip code level and split by an algorithm in case zip code areas overlap county borders.
                              100
                              80
                         New Startups
                         40   20
                              0    60




                                        0            200         400           600         800           1000
                                                                 Incoming Inventors



                                            Figure 3 ­ Graphical representation of raw data


  Methodology and instrument construction

  Our goal is to estimate the causal impact of inventor inflows on high-growth entrepreneurship. We can
write this in an equation that we can estimate with OLS:

                                                  ,+1 = 0 +    , +  +  +                                                        (1)

where  ,+1 stands for a dependent variable observed for county d at time t+1.  , is the number of
inventors that moved to county d in t.  denotes a full set of year fixed effects to control for varying
macroeconomic conditions.  controls for time-invariant unobserved county characteristics that may
confound our identification of .  is the error term.

  The key econometric challenge with equation (1) is that unobserved factors influence both the rate of
incoming inventors and local economic conditions. Counties with a high innovation rate are attractive to


                                                                      7
inventors. Although county fixed effects will effectively control for any persistent differences in innovation
levels across counties, it is difficult to control for temporary local trends that might attract inventors. To
address this threat to identification, we construct a shift-share instrument for inventor inflows that builds
on the work of Bartik (1991) and its application to the case of international immigration to the US (Card,
2001). Prior immigration studies noted that immigrants from a certain country of origin tend to locate near
previous immigrants from the same origin country (Bartel, 1989, and Lalonde and Topel, 1991). Card (2001)
and others (see Jaeger et al. 2018 for an overview) have exploited this to predict immigrant inflows into
certain regions by interacting past shares of immigrants from an origin country in a given region with the
contemporaneous inflow of migrants from the same country at the national level.

  We leverage this idea further to create an instrument for the contemporaneous inflow of US inventors to
a certain county based on the spatial distribution of US surnames across counties in 1940. Analogous to the
prior immigration literature, we utilize the observation that people with a certain family name can be found
more frequently at places where there were other people with same name in the past (see Darlu, Brunet,
and Barbero, 2011, for the example of Savoy, France and Clark & Cummins, 2014, for England). We illustrate
below that these patterns hold for individual US inventors.

  Specifically, we define our instrument as:

                                                         1940
                                             
                                           =                                                                  (2)
                                             1940       


      1940                                                                 1940
where      is the population of people in county d with surname n in 1940,      is the number of people
with surname n in the entire US in 1940 and  is the number of inventors with surname n who move
from any county in the US to any other county in the US in year t. The expected inflow of inventors  in
county d at time t is thus the weighted sum of inventors that move across the US with surname n (the "shift")
with the historical distribution of the same family names (the "shares") serving as weights. The intuitive
appeal behind this instrument (as in prior immigration studies) is that it generates variation at the local level
by exploiting variation at the national level, which is arguably not influenced by local conditions. (That is,
the total number of inventors with the name Fleming who move from within entire US is unlikely to be
driven by the local economic conditions of one out of the more than 3,000 U.S. counties.)

  One advantage of this instrument over prior shift-share instruments generally, and settlement instruments
in particular, is the extensive amount of variation in the distribution of names (i.e., the "shares") that stem
from more than 3 million unique surnames in 1940 across varying destination and origin areas. (By contrast,
immigration studies typically analyze 192 different countries, often with particularly influential origin-
destination relationships.) Our estimation should therefore be less vulnerable to problems that arise from


                                                        8
low variation in shares or overly strong influences of a single or few shares (see critiques in the recent
literature, Borusyak et al., 2019, Goldsmith-Pinkham et al., 2020, or Adao et al. 2019).

  A second advantage of our U.S.-focused shift-share instrument is that a given surname is typically not
bound to a specific county of origin (as is more common with country-level analysis, see Moser, Voena,
Waldinger 2014; Parey et al., 2017). Thus the spatial distribution of origin of mobile inventors with a
surname varies substantially over time (and is the only variation we exploit in our IV). This makes an
endogenous origin-destination combination (such as Indian engineers coming into Silicon Valley for long
periods of time) highly unlikely to drive our results. Put differently, that mobile inventors with certain
names come from various origin counties means that it is less likely that our "shift" is correlated with
unobserved endogenous characteristics of origin areas. Our instrument thus minimizes serial correlation
between specific origin and destination regions, as criticized in studies of international migration.

  Figures 4-6 illustrate the variation over time and space with the example of all inventors that moved
across the US between 1976 to 2014 and have the last name Fleming (75 moves in total). Figure 2 shows
how the number of mobile inventors with surname Fleming varies over time yet does not exhibit a trend.
The heatmaps in Figure 3 show to which counties the Flemings moved to in the 1980s, 1990s, and 2000s,
and the heatmaps in Figure 4 show the origin counties the Flemings moved away from in the 1980s, 1990s,
and 2000s, illustrating significant variation in origin and destination counties over time.




                                                       9
Figure 4: Frequency of moving inventors within the US named Fleming over time

                     1980s                                               1990s




                                                     2000s




Figure 5: Destination counties of moving inventors within the US named Fleming




                                       10
                                   1980s                                                  1990s




                                                                       2000s




            Figure 6 - Origin counties of moving inventors within the US named Fleming


    A remaining concern could be that at least some national movements of inventors are still driven by
local economic conditions, and that these might be correlated with past shocks. It could be, for instance,
that inventors and families with the name Fleming were always interested in mechanical engineering and
thus would have settled in areas where mechanical engineering was in high demand as of 1940. If the same
area experiences a high demand in mechanical engineering today, then inventors with the name Fleming
might more likely move to that region for endogenous reasons. To reduce endogeneity concerns in this
respect, we augment our instrument by leaving out county d's own inflows from the national flow of
inventors with same surname. (Buchardi et al. 2020, Wozniak & Murray, 2012 and Hunt, 2017 use similar
strategies in the immigration literature). Our preferred instrument is thus:

                                                1940
                              
                        ,- =  1940   ,- (,)                                                            (3)
                                                


where  ,- (,) is the total number of inventors with name n who move to counties outside of d.

                                                       11
The leave-out strategy ensures that the potentially-endogenous choice of Flemings to move to county d
does not drive changes in our instrument.

  It should further be noted that both stages of our IV regression include county fixed effects. Identification
thus derives from weighted time-varying changes in the number of moving inventors with a given surname
at the national level, excluding those moving to county d, combined with representation of the same
surname in county d in 1940. Since it is highly unlikely that the Flemings who move in year t are equally
distributed across the country as the Flemings that move in year t+1 (as illustrated above), our instrument
is also unlikely to suffer from any unobserved persistent endogenous relationship between any pair of
counties (e.g. trade relationships or the oft-cited, persistent link between Indian software engineers and
immigration from India to Silicon Valley). The considerable variation in the distribution of surnames over
time also addresses the "persistence problem" with shift-share instruments in the immigration literature
(Jaeger et al., 2018). Arguably,  ,- is truly exogenous and can be used to estimate the causal
impact of inventor inflows on using equation (1), instrumenting  , with  ,- as in (3).



  First stage plausibility check - individual inventor level regressions

  Before applying our instrument at the county level, we establish its plausibility by investigating the
linkage between the historical surname distribution and geographical mobility of individual inventors.
Given widely accepted transmission rules (Piazza et al., 1987; Rossi, 2013) and diversity of surnames
(3,363,932 unique surnames appear in 1940 US census data), demographics on surnames are adopted in a
variety of studies, such as research on migration of people, social networks and mobility. Piazza et al. (1987)
tracks migration rates using surname distribution in Italy. Degioanni and Darlu (2001) infer geographical
origin of migrants in a given area using surnames. Darlu, Brunet, and Barbero (2011) show that surname
distribution can be used to estimate mobility using the example of Savoy, France. Studies also use surnames
to investigate social mobility, e.g., whether social status changes over centuries (Clark & Cummins, 2014)
and whether wealth moves over generations (Clark & Cummins, 2015). In a recent study, Grilli and Allesina
(2017) perform a surname analysis on academic professors to compare academic systems in the US, France,
and Italy. Our first stage plausibility check contributes to this literature by exploiting the complete US 1940
Census surname and location information, linking to the complete set of US patenting inventors.

  Our IV approach rests on the assumption that historic surname shares can discriminate between




                                                       12
destination counties of moving inventors with a given last name, conditional on moving. 4 We empirically
test this assumption by estimating a dyadic model that reflects the complete choice set a moving inventor
is confronted with. To this end, we construct a dataset at the inventor-origin-destination county level that
contains each potential destination county combined with the actual county a given inventor is emigrating
from. We mark the county the inventor actually moved to with a dummy and for the actual and each potential
destination county, include the share of people in the 1940 Census with the same surname. Armed with this
dyadic dataset covering 258,657 moves from 1988-2014, we estimate the following model with OLS:

                                                                                    1940
                                                                                    
              (. # . ,, , = 1| , ) = 0 +   (                                        1940   ) +  +  +  +  ,,, (4)
                                                                                    


  where (. #. ,,, = 1|  , ) is a dummy indicating the destination county (. ) a
                                                                       1940
given inventor i with name n moved to from origin county .  in year t.      is the population in county
                          1940
d with surname n in 1940;      is the population with surname n in the entire U.S. in 1940;  denotes a
full set of year fixed effects to control for varying macroeconomic conditions;  controls for time-invariant
unobserved destination county characteristics; and  controls for time-invariant unobserved origin county
characteristics that may confound our identification of , and  ,, , is the error term. We estimate four
versions of equation (4): (a) only with year fixed effects; (b) year and destination-county fixed effects; (c)
year and origin-county fixed effects; (d) year and destination-origin county combination fixed effects.
Variant (d) absorbs time-invariant county-pair relationship characteristics including, for instance, the
geographic distance between two counties. Table 2 presents the results.




  4
    Adding to the plausibility of our instrument, we also find that the historical share of the same surname in a given location is
negatively associated with the inventor's emigration from the location. This supports the argument that inventors are not only more
likely to move to regions with a higher historic share of the same surname but also more likely to stay in a region in which more
of their families and relatives have resided. Several additional analyses verify the robustness of the results and suggest conditions
in which the historical surname effect is moderated. The surname effect is amplified as the average value of houses owned by
individuals with the same surname in the county increases, as the foreign-born ratio of individuals with the same surname in the
county decreases, or when the inventor resides in a state that enforces non-compete agreements. We find no evidence that the
surname effect is susceptible to invention-related inventor characteristics, such as invention productivity, quality, or years of
experience as an inventor.

                                                                  13
                                       Table 2 ­ Destination county choice

                                                                origin-destination county move
                                                 a                b              c             d
            Destination county                   0.044***         0.021***       0.044***      0.013***
            Historic surname fraction            (0.006)          (0.002)        (0.006)       (0.001)
            N                                    524,583,139        524,583,139    524,583,139      523,553,217
            Year FEs                             Yes                Yes            Yes              Yes
            Destination county FEs               No                 Yes            No               No
            Origin county FEs                    No                 No             Yes              No
            Origin-destination county FEs        No                 No             No               Yes
            R2                                   0.000              0.008          0.000            0.061
           Notes: This table presents OLS regressions of a dummy indicating a origin-destination county move of
           an inventor within the period 1980 to 2015 on destination counties' historic surname shares in 1940. Unit
           of observation is the origin-destination county dyad. Standard errors clustered at the destination county
           appear in parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate a significance level of 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.



  Although we cannot interpret our LPM specification as a probability model, all specifications consistently
  show that an increase in the historic surname share in a potential destination county leads to a significantly
  higher probability of observing a given inventor moving to that specific destination county as compared
  to all other potential destination choices. The results in Table 2 support the plausibility of our instrument.
  (Since the dependent variable vector is sparse a low R2 is to be expected.) The increase in explained
  variation when destination and destination-origin county fixed effects are included reinforces that
  unobserved time invariant factors explain mobility decisions.



The impact of incoming inventors on regional entrepreneurship

  We now move to our IV regression analysis to the county level, where the dependent variable is a (logged)
measure of the number of high-growth startups founded in county d during year t. "High-growth" is
determined retrospectively as the number of firms founded in year t+1 that achieved an IPO or successful
acquisition within 6 years after founding. Results are in Table 3. Model (a) estimates equation (1) via OLS
and without the instrument. Model (b) re-estimates model (a) using the instrument from (3). Models (c) and
(d) and state-year and then county fixed effects. Finally, in model (e) we re-estimate (d) but exclude
California and Massachusetts.




                                                               14
           Table 3 ­ Impact of incoming inventors on local high growth startup foundation

                                                            High-growth startups founded
                                    a               b            c             d                  e
                                    OLS             IV           IV            IV                 IV (w/o CA, MA)
       Incoming Inventorst-1        0.188***        0.377***     0.380***      0.248***           0.232***
                                    (0.015)         (0.027)      (0.027)       (0.043)            (0.043)
       N                            82,259          82,259       82,259        82,259             80,330
       First Stage F                                400.2        387.8         115.5              107.2
       Year FE                      Yes             Yes          No            No                 No
       State FE                     Yes             Yes          No            No                 No
       State-Year FE                No              No           Yes           Yes                Yes
       County FE                    No              No           No            Yes                Yes
       R2                           0.341
      Notes: This table presents OLS regression of log(number of high growth startup foundation + 1), where high growth
      startups are defined following Guzman and Stern (2020) as newly registered companies that complete either an IPO
      or successful acquisition within 6 years. Incoming inventors as well as the instrument are log-transformed.
      Specifications (b)-(e) show results of our IV regression as described above, where incoming inventors are
      instrumented with ,- in the first stage. First stage F is the Kleibergen-Paap Wald F statistic of the first
      stage regression. Model e excludes all counties of California and Massachusetts. Standard errors clustered at the
      county level appear in parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate a significance level of 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.



  We begin in model (a) of Table 3 by correlating of the number of incoming inventors in a county with the
count of high-growth startups founded the following year. Consistent with Glaeser & Kerr (2009), we
observe a strong relationship between the supply of relevant talent and entrepreneurial activity, as shown
by the positive and statistically significant estimated coefficient on Incoming Inventors. The remaining
models (b-e) employ our IV approach, all showing a significant positive impact of incoming inventors in a
given county on the local rate of high growth startup formations. The strength of the instrument and the
coefficient size drops after the inclusion of county fixed effects, however, the first stage F value is still far
above conventional levels, suggesting that our IV regression does not suffer from weak instrument biases.

  Under the assumption that a log specification can be interpreted as an elasticity, model (d) suggests that
a 10% increase in the rate of incoming inventors increases the rate of high growth startup foundations by
2.48% against the mean. Translating the relative increases into absolute numbers suggests that 10 more
inventors lead to 0.181 more startups. Put differently, a county can expect one additional high growth startup
per 55 incoming inventors. It should be noted though that the distribution of incoming inventors, as well as
the number of high-growth startups founded in a county, is highly skewed. Hence, mean values are not
representative. The log transformation addresses skewness, but caution is warranted when calculating
elasticities in absolute terms. Taking, for instance, the higher averages of incoming inventors (27.79) and
growth events (2.96) of California and Massachusetts counties as the benchmark, we approach an elasticity
of 1 additional high growth startup per 29 incoming inventors. The figure is even higher if we restrict the
sample to California and Massachusetts (see Appendix Table A1), as we find not only a higher mean value

                                                              15
but also a higher estimated coefficient (=0.325).

  Taking our full sample estimates and summary statistics as a baseline, a back-of-the-envelope calculation
suggests that incoming inventors may explain 24.9% of all high growth startups. We took all observed high
growth startups in the sample (14,783) and the total number of incoming inventor events (202,911). Given
the 55:1 elasticity we would expect a total of 202,911/55 = 3,689 new startups from all incoming inventors,
which represents 24.9% of high-growth startups in the sample.



Robustness checks

  Alternative instrument constructions

         Although the validity of shift-share instruments does not require exogeneity of the shares, and
although concerns should be lessened by the inclusion of county fixed effects, we nonetheless estimate
robustness checks that should further alleviate concerns of potentially-endogenous share characteristics. To
this end, we re-estimate model (d) of Table 3, replacing the instrument with alternative calculations of the
historic name shares (while still applying our leave out strategy).

         For the first alternative instrument, we consider only people in US 1940 Census that lived in a given
county before 1935. We thus effectively enlarge the gap between the shares and the actual moves of inventors
and reduce potential correlation between historic and current inventor migration shocks. Second, we
exclude the 50 surnames that appear most frequently in the historic data, which should reduce concerns that
correlated shares of two counties may lead to an over-rejection problem (as shown by Adao et al., 2019). In
our third construction, we exclude wealthy families of each county as inventors may benefit even
generations later from their ancestors' wealth. Using the historic house value in the 1940 Census, we
excluded families holding more than 1% of the total house value of a given county.

         Our fourth construction departs from the shift-share approach, instead calculating the inventor's
separation from his or her surname's historic geographic centroid. We use the inverse squared geographic
distance between each county centroid and the geographic centroid for an inventor's surname as weights
when constructing the instrument. The distance between a county's centroid and a surname's historic
geographic centroid has the advantage of a very low correlation with any future county or inventor specific
characteristics. 5 Table 4 shows the results for these alternative instruments.



  5
      A limitation of this fourth instrument construction is that some surname are clustered in multiple geographic


                                                          16
                                         Table 4 ­ Alternative instruments

                                                              High-growth startups founded
                                                a               b            c             d
                                                IV              IV           IV            IV
                  Incoming Inventorst-1         0.255***        0.248***     0.253***      0.261**
                                                (0.047)         (0.043)      (0.044)       (0.113)
                  N                             82,259          82,259       82,259        82,259
                  First Stage F                 101.1           115.5        116.7         25.56
                  State-Year FE                 Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes
                  County FE                     Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes
                  Notes: This table presents OLS regression of log (number of high-growth startups founded
                  + 1), where high-growth startups are defined following Guzman and Stern (2020) as newly
                  registered companies that complete either an IPO or successful acquisition within 6 years.
                  Incoming inventors as well as the instrument are log-transformed. Model (a) restricts the
                  instrument to those who settled in the county of the 1940 Census by 1935; (b) excludes
                  excludes the 50 most frequent surnames; (c) excludes the wealthiest 1% of surnames per
                  1940 Census house value; (d) replaces the shift-share approach with the inverse squared
                  geographic distance between the county and the centroid for the inventor's surname. First
                  stage F is the Kleibergen-Paap Wald F statistic of the first stage regression. Standard errors
                  clustered at the county level appear in parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate a significance
                  level of 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.



  The coefficient sizes remain robust across different specifications, although the strength of the instrument
declines in models (a) and (d) compared to our original instrument. Especially with respect to our centroid-
distance instrument, this is not surprising. That the instrument strength and coefficient size does not decline
greatly when excluding particularly influential families supports the assumption that either 1) there is no
direct link between the historic name shares and the second stage regression, or 2) the county fixed effects
effectively absorb such potentially worrying relationships.



  Alternative dependent variables

  We further verify the robustness of our results by testing two alternative dependent variables. First, we
replicate the results of Table 4 by replacing the count of startups that achieved a liquidity even with Guzman
& Stern's (2020) projection of the number of startups in a county that are expected to do so (whether or not
they actually did). Their Regional Entrepreneurship Cohort Potential Index is an aggregation of several
startup characteristics including high tech industry classification (Biotech, IT, E-Commerce, Medical and



regions. Thus, even if there is one largest centroid, we will calculate distance from it even if a somewhat smaller but
much-closer aggregation exists. The share-of-surnames instrument does not suffer from this limitation.

                                                                17
Semiconductors), trademark registration, incorporation in Delaware, having applied for a patent, and
eponymy (Belenzon et al., 2017). The RECPI has the advantage of more broadly reflecting a county's startup
quality. It will thus not only capture startups that actually achieve high growth within 6 years but also those
that did not achieve a liquidity event, or that took longer to do so. 6 Table 5 shows similar findings when
using this dependent variable.


             Table 5 ­ Impact of incoming inventors on regional entrepreneurship potential

                                                  Regional Entrepreneurship Cohort Potential Index
                                   a               b             c            d               e
                                   OLS             IV            IV           IV              IV (w/o CA, MA)
       Incoming Inventorst-1       0.203***        0.410***      0.412***     0.475***        0.435***
                                   (0.013)         (0.027)       (0.027)      (0.039)         (0.042)
       N                           82,259          82,259            82,259         82,259           80,330
       First stage F                               400.2             387.8          115.5            107.2
       Year FE                     Yes             Yes               No             No               No
       State FE                    Yes             Yes               No             No               No
       State-Year FE               No              No                Yes            Yes              Yes
       County FE                   No              No                No             Yes              Yes
       R2                          0.517
        Notes: This table presents OLS regression of log(RECPI + 1), where RECPI is the Regional Entrepreneurship
        Cohort Potential Index as defined and calculated by Guzman and Stern (2020). Incoming inventors as well as the
        instrument are log-transformed. Specifications b to e represent results of our IV regression as described above,
        where Incoming Inventors are instrumented with ,- in the first stage. First stage F is the Kleibergen-Paap
        Wald F statistic of the first stage regression. Model e excludes all counties of California and Massachusetts.
        Standard errors clustered at the county level appear in parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate a significance level of
        1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.



  One concern with using RECPI in this context is that one of the variables used in its construction is
whether the startup had a patent upon being incorporated. This might be problematic, as we use patent data
to observe mobility. Thus as a second robustness check we re-estimate our baseline models using the count
of startups in county d during year t that eventually received venture capital financing. This variable is
calculated using VenturExpert, a dataset of venture-backed companies, covering 1980 -2010. The results of
Table 6 are consistent with Tables 3-5.




  6
    Guzman and Stern (2020) and Andrews et al. (2019) show that the RECPI accurately reflects a region's startup
potential and that it is not dependent on modelling choice (results below are based on their so called `academic'
approach which takes twelve startup characteristics into account and are robust to using their less sophisticated but
easier to calculate `policy' approach). The correlation of the log transformed variables is r=0.839.

                                                                18
                Table 6 ­ Impact of incoming inventors on local venture backed startups

                                                        Venture-backed companies founded
                                    a              b             c          d                     e
                                    OLS            IV            IV         IV                    IV (No CA, MA)
       Incoming Inventorst-1        0.299***       0.592***      0.607***   0.154***              0.123***
                                    (0.020)        (0.036)       (0.037)    (0.034)               (0.031)
       N                            97,247         97,247        97,247     97,247                95,015
       First stage F                               388.9         366.4      240.9                 221.1
       Year FE                      Yes            Yes           No         No                    No
       State FE                     Yes            Yes           No         No                    No
       State-Year FE                No             No            Yes        Yes                   Yes
       County FE                    No             No            No         Yes                   Yes
       R2                           0.341
      Notes: This table presents OLS regression of log (number of venture-backed startups + 1) from VentureExpert.
      Incoming inventors as well as the instrument are log-transformed. Specifications (b)-(e) show results of our IV
      regression as described above, where incoming inventors are instrumented with ,- in the first stage. First
      stage F is the Kleibergen-Paap Wald F statistic of the first stage regression. Model e excludes all counties of
      California and Massachusetts. Standard errors clustered at the county level appear in parentheses. ***, ** and *
      indicate a significance level of 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.




Spillover vs. displacement effects

  Locally increased entrepreneurial activity spurred by incoming inventors might imply a positive impact
of inventor mobility on aggregated entrepreneurship for the country as a whole. Our regressions, however,
do not account for potential spillovers to neighboring counties, and internal migration is a zero-sum game.
Regional spillovers could be positive if incoming inventors' entrepreneurial activities are not bound to
county borders--i.e., at least some inventors are involved with new ventures in counties other than where
they live. Alternatively, incoming inventors may displace entrepreneurial activity in nearby counties if
startups in proximate counties compete for resources. Given that venture capitalists prefer to invest locally
(Stuart & Sorenson, 2003; Bernstein, Giroud, & Townsend, 2016), a surge of high-growth new ventures
following an influx of inventors may crowd out funding possibilities for companies in neighboring counties.

  We address the possibility of negative spillovers by adding the spatially surrounding counties' incoming
inventors to our baseline regressions. Motivated by Moretti and Wilson (2014) and Agrawal et al., (2017)
we weigh the number of incoming inventors in surrounding counties by the inverse distance between the
focal county's i geographic centroid and each surrounding county's j geographic centroid:



                                                             19
                      
                  , =    ,-  ,                                                                             (5)


  where         represents   the   inverse   distance    between    each    county   pair   i   and   j   and
,-  , is the number of incoming inventors into county j excluding
those that come from i.

  We generate three spatial lags--incoming inventors from counties within a distance of 50 miles, 70 miles
and 100 miles of the focal county--and add this variable to our baseline model estimated above. We
construct the corresponding instrument for equation (5) using the same weights  combined with our
instrument defined in (2). To avoid the confounding influences of inventors moving from the surrounding
regions, we deviate from our baseline model by excluding inventors moving in from surrounding counties
j when measuring the number of incoming inventors into i (within 50, 70, and 100 miles respectively). Our
spillover regressions thus also address the question to which degree our baseline estimates reflect effects of
short distance moves within broader regions.

  All models of Table 7 indicate that inventors moving into surrounding counties lead to a displacement
effect, (i.e. fewer high-growth startups in the focal county), as shown by the negative and statistically-
significant estimated coefficients for the SpatialInventors covariates at various distances. Accounting for
spatial correlations and disentangling the mechanisms of this effect is beyond the scope of this paper but
unsurprising given localized knowledge spillovers (Jaffe, Tratenberg, & Henderson, 1993, Singh & Marx,
2013; Balsmeier et al. 2020). Also consistent with localized knowledge flows and agglomerative forces, we
find that the displacement effect is decreasing in the distance between the focal and neighboring counties.

  It is important to note that accounting for the displacement effect of inventors arriving in neighboring
counties does little to disturb the main findings of Tables 3-6. Excluding inventors coming in from
surrounding counties still leads to declining effect sizes with increasing distance, though the effects remain
economically and statistically significant, suggesting that the main impact comes from inventors moving in
from counties farther away than 100 miles. The results also cannot be explained by short distance moves
within broader regions. Although it is impossible to derive an estimate of the impact of inventor mobility
on an aggregated and national level entrepreneurship without a structural model, our regressions suggest
that displacement effects may play a crucial role in such calculations.




                                                        20
 Table 7 ­ Impact of local and spatially proximate incoming inventors on local high growth startup
                                             foundation

                                                                     High-growth startups founded
                                                          a                 b               c
                                                          IV                IV              IV
                   Incoming Inventorst-1, ex 50 miles     0.330***
                                                          (0.076)
                   SpatialInventorst-1, 50 miles          -0.162**
                                                          (0.069)
                   Incoming Inventorst-1, ex 70 miles                       0.312***
                                                                            (0.066)
                   SpatialInventorst-1, 70 miles                            -0.118**
                                                                            (0.048)
                   Incoming Inventorst-1, ex 100 miles                                      0.297***
                                                                                            (0.062)
                   SpatialInventorst-1, 100 miles                                           -0.088**
                                                                                            (0.038)
                   N                                      82,259            82,259          82,259
                   First Stage F
                                                          52.22             61.31           66.60
                     Incoming Inventorst-1, ex X miles
                   First Stage F
                                                          51.80             63.39            72.30
                     SpatialInventorst-1, X miles
                   State-Year FE                          Yes               Yes             Yes
                   County FE                              Yes               Yes             Yes
                   Notes: This table presents OLS regression of log(number of high growth startup
                   foundation + 1), where high growth startups are defined following Guzman and Stern
                   (2020) as newly registered companies that complete either an IPO or successful
                   acquisition within 6 years. Incoming Inventors, Spatial Inventors as well as the
                   corresponding instruments are log-transformed. First stage Fs are Sanderson-
                   Windmeijer multivariate F test statistics of the first stage regressions where the linear
                   projection of the other endogenous regressor is partialled out. Standard errors
                   clustered at the county level appear in parentheses. ***, ** and * indicate a
                   significance level of 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.




Discussion

  The importance of scientists and inventors to positive economic and societal outcomes has been
recognized since at least Vannevar Bush in 1945. We explicitly linked one mechanism for that positive
relationship, tying scientists and inventors to entrepreneurship, which in turn has been shown to lead to
other desirable outcomes, such as future employment growth (Glaeser, Kerr, and Kerr 2015). Bringing
evidence to the argument, this work estimates the benefits of inventors to high-growth regional
entrepreneurship. Geography in this respect is just an instrument to get at that estimate, however, it allowed
us to back out an estimate that the arrival of 55 inventors to a county increased entrepreneurship in that
county by one firm, on average.

                                                                21
  While the work remains preliminary and premature for policy recommendations, it would seem that
regions should seek to bolster their STEM workforces. Given that many children demonstrate the capability
to become inventors at an early age, and yet many do not, would appear to offer a straightforward (though
certainly not inexpensive) path to increasing entrepreneurship, through early STEM education (Bell et. al.
2019). While this work used immigration to back out the value of an inventor, it would seem reasonable that
a home grown inventor might be just as useful to local entrepreneurship. Indeed, if a home grown inventor
had easier access to existing networks of friends, family, investors, and fellow entrepreneurs, they might be
even more effective at starting high tech firms. It would also be interesting to understand if immigration
crowds out ­ or complements -- locally grown inventors.

  Taking our full sample estimates and summary statistics as the baseline for a back-of-the-envelope
calculation of the relative importance of inventors suggests that incoming inventors can explain 24.9% of
all high growth startups. This estimate is preliminary and does not include home grown inventor
contributions, scientists who do not patent, or the negative effects on surrounding counties. If this estimate
holds, however, it would indicate that inventors and technical professionals create a very substantial part of
high growth entrepreneurship.

  Caveats notwithstanding, we connect the current results with prior work on research on competition
covenants. Strengthening of non-compete policies has been shown to precede inventor emigration (Marx,
Singh, and Fleming, 2015). While policy makers might hope to encourage regional investment in research
with stronger non-competes, because such policies make it more difficult for an engineer to leave for a local
competitor, such policies might also dampen local entrepreneurship (startups are also typically covered by
non-competes). Emigration to entrepreneurial opportunities might be one cause of the historically observed
shift of inventors, especially the most highly cited and most collaborative, from states which enforce non-
competes to those that do not (Marx and Fleming 2012).

  There are some obviously immediate directions for the current work. While this paper established a
baseline for all inventors, it would be straightforward to investigate the impact of a variety of characteristics
on entrepreneurship, such as highly cited or collaborative inventors, inventors in different fields, inventors
who rely upon or publish in the scientific literature, those whose professional history is in large firms, small
firms, startups, or academia, or those who have been supported by Federal research. Individual level
analyses could also be productive, for example, if one can instrument away the technology motivation for
moving towards or away from similar inventors, then what is the productivity and career impact of moving
towards or away from the center of technology in an inventor's field? Furthermore, what is the impact of
more diverse inventors on a region's innovation and productivity? Does the region become more creative
with increasing diversity, or does it become less productive? Are there time lags as inventors learn new

                                                        22
fields and develop new collaborative relationships? The methods here might also be applied to scientists,
though the lack of widely available and robust disambiguation of the science bibliometric databases
presents a sobering barrier to easy progress. Inventors and scientists may also have other positive impacts
on a regional economy, for example, by increasing productivity and decreasing unemployment.



Conclusion
  Has Silicon Valley become the world's hub of entrepreneurship due in part to its supply of inventive
human capital, or has the region simply acted as a "magnet" to attract scientists and inventors to its former
orchards? Should would-be entrepreneurs locate in a region with a vibrant supply of creatives and inventors
(Florida, 1995), or should founders focus on finding sufficient financial capital to outsource and/or in-
license innovative resources? Ought policymakers--especially those in areas without a strong record of
entrepreneurship--prioritize science parks and accelerators, or might their efforts be productively
redirected toward attracting and retaining skilled human capital locally?

  Our results suggest that the local availability of skilled human capital is a critical determinant of high-
growth entrepreneurship. Our shift-share instrument, based on the county-level distribution of surnames in
the 1940 census, overcomes limitations of prior approaches, enabling us to provide estimates of the impact
of a marginal inventor on entrepreneurial activity. We find that in some regions, an increase of only 29
inventors predicts one additional high-growth startup in a county. We also find that immigration of inventors
to surrounding counties has a negative and significant effect on entrepreneurship in the focal county.

  The mobility instrument developed here might also provide purchase into other questions on regional
success, for example, how important is the agglomeration of inventors ­ is Silicon Valley exciting because
it draws inventors, or because inventors moved there? We know that scientists and engineers tend to be in
areas where there is more going on, but is that demand or supply? Surely they flock to opportunities, so it
is hard to know which way the arrows point, or assuming they point in both directions, their net effect. The
work underscores prior findings regarding the importance of labor mobility for entrepreneurship, for
example by limiting the ability of firms to use employee non-compete agreements (Samila & Sorenson,
2011). In short, both stocks and flows matter.




                                                      23
References

  Acemoglu, D., Akcigit, U., Alp, H., Bloom, N., Kerr, W. (2018). Innovation, Reallocation and
Growth. American Economic Review 108(11), 3450-91
  Ackerberg, D. A., Caves, K., & Frazer, G. (2015). Identification properties of recent production
function estimators. Econometrica, 83(6), 2411-2451.
  Adao, R., Kolesár, M. and Morales, E., 2019. Shift-share designs: Theory and inference. The
Quarterly Journal of Ec onomics, 134(4), pp.1949-2010.
  Agrawal, A. and Cockburn, I., 2003. The anchor tenant hypothesis: exploring the role of large,
local, R&D-intensive firms in regional innovation systems. International journal of industrial
organization, 21(9), pp.1227-1253.
  Agrawal, A., Galassso, A. and A. Oettl (2017). Roads to Innovation. Review of Economics and
Statistics 99 (3), 417-434.
  Agrawal, A., Kapur, D., McHale, J. and Oettl, A., 2011. Brain drain or brain bank? The impact of
skilled emigration on poor-country innovation. Journal of Urban Economics, 69(1), pp.43-55.
  Arrow, K.J. and Capron, W.M., 1959. Dynamic shortages and price rises: the engineer -scientist
case. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 73(2), pp.292-308.
  Balsmeier, B., Fierro, G., Li, G., Johnson, K., Kaulagi, A., O'Reagan, D., Yeh, W., Lueck, S., and
L. Fleming (2017). Machine learning and natural language processing applied to the patent corpus.
Forthcoming, Journal of Economics and Management Strategy.
  Bartel, A.P., 1989. Where do the new US immigrants live? Journal of Labor Economics, 7(4),
pp.371-391.
  Bartik, T.J., 1991. Who benefits from state and local economic development policies?
  Bell, A. and R. Chetty, X. Jaravel, N. Petkova, J. Van Reenen 2019. "Who Becomes an Inventor in
America? The Importance of Exposure to Innovation." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Volume
134, Issue 2, May 2019, Pages 647­713.
  Bernstein, S. and R. Diamond, T. McQuade, B. Pousada (2018). "The Contribution of High-Skilled
Immigrants to Innovation in the United States, " Working paper, Stanford University.
  Bernstein, S., Giroud, X., & Townsend, R. R. (2016). The impact of venture capital monitoring.
The Journal of Finance, 71(4), 1591- 1622.
  Borusyak, K., Hull, P. and Jaravel, X., 2018. Quasi-experimental shift-share research designs (No.
w24997). National Bureau of Economic Research.
  Burchardi, K.B., Chaney, T., Hassan, T.A., Tarquinio, L. and Terry, S.J., 2020. Immigration,
Innovation, and Growth (No. w27075). National Bureau of Economic Research.
  Cappelli, R., Czarnitzki, D., Doherr, T. and Montobbio, F., 2019. Inventor mobility and
productivity in Italian regions. Regional Studies, 53(1), pp.43-54.
  Card, D., 2001. Immigrant inflows, native outflows, and the local labor market impacts of higher
immigration. Journa l of Labor Economics, 19(1), pp.22-64.
  Clark, G. and Cummins, N., 2015. Intergenerational wealth mobility in England, 1858­2012:
surnames and social mobility. The Economic Journal, 125(582), pp.61-85.
  Cheyre, C., Klepper, S., & Veloso, F. (2015). Spinoffs and the mobility of US merchant
semiconductor inventors. Management Science, 61(3), 487-506.
  Darlu, P., Brunet, G. and Barbero, D., 2011. Spatial and temporal analyses of surname distributions
to estimate mobility and changes in historical demography: the example of Savoy (France) from the
eighteenth to the twentieth century. In Navigating time and space in population studies (pp. 99-113).
Springer, Dordrecht.
  Duranton, G. and Puga, D., 2001. Nursery cities: Urban diversity, process innovation, and the life

                                                  24
cycle of products. American Economic Review, 91(5), pp.1454-1477.
   Ewens, M. and Marx, M., 2018. Founder replacement and startup performance. The Review of
Financial Studies, 31(4), pp.1532-1565.
   Florida, R., 2005. Cities and the creative class. Routledge.
   Glaeser, E.L. and Kerr, W.R., 2009. Local industrial conditions and entrepreneurship: how much
of the spatial distribution can we explain?. Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 18(3),
pp.623-663.
   Glaeser, E.L. and Kerr, S., Kerr, W. 2015. Entrepreneurship and Urban Growth: An Empirical
Assessment with Historical Mines. Review of Economics and Statistics. 97:2: 498-520.
   Grilli, L. and Murtinu, S., 2014. Government, venture capital and the growth of European high-
tech entrepreneurial firms. Research Policy, 43(9), pp.1523-1543.
   Guzman, J. and S. Stern, (2019). "The State of American Entrepreneurship: New Estimates of the
Quality and Quantity Of Entrepreneurship for 32 US States, 1988-2014," NBER Working paper
22095.
   Hathaway, I. (2018). "High-growth firms and cities in the US: an Analysis of the Inc. 5000."
Brookings Institution report.
   Hofstede, G., 2001. Culture's consequences: Comparing values, behaviors, institutions and
organizations across nations. Sage publications.
   Hunt, J., 2017. The impact of immigration on the educational attainment of natives. Journal of
Human Resources, 52(4), pp.1060-1118.
   Hunt, J. and Gauthier-Loiselle, M., 2010. How much does immigration boost innovation?.
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(2), pp.31-56.
   Jaffe, A.B., Trajtenberg, M. and Henderson, R., 1993. Geographic localization of knowledge
spillovers as evidenced by patent citations. the Quarterly journal of Economics, 108(3), pp.577-598.
   Jaeger, D.A., Ruist, J. and Stuhler, J., 2018. Shift-share instruments and the impact of immigration
(No. w24285). National Bureau of Economic Research.
   Jensen, Richard, and Marie Thursby. 2001. "Proofs and Prototypes for Sale: The Licensing of
University Inventions." American Economic Review, 91 (1): 240-259.
   Kerr, W.R., 2013. US high-skilled immigration, innovation, and entrepreneurship: Empirical
approaches and evidence (No. w19377). National Bureau of Economic Research.
   Kerr, W.R. and Lincoln, W.F., 2010. The supply side of innovation: H-1B visa reforms and US
et hnic invention. Journal of Labor Economics, 28(3), pp.473-508.
   King, G., and Nielsen, R. (2017). Why Propensity Scores Should Not Be Used for Matching.
Harvard Working Paper.
   Klepper, S., 2009. Spinoffs: A review and synthesis. European Management Review, 6(3), pp.159-
171.
   Kogan L., D. Papanikolaou, A. Seru and N. Stoffman (2017). Technological Innovation, Resource
Allocation and Growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(2), 665­712.
   LaLonde, R.J. and Topel, R.H., 1991. Labor market adjustments to increased immigration. In
Immigration, trade, and the labor market (pp. 167-199). University of Chicago Press.
   Lerner, J., 2012. Boulevard of broken dreams: why public efforts to boost entrepreneurship and
venture capital have failed--and what to do about it. Princeton University Press.
   Lerner, J. and Seru, A., (2017). The Use and Misuse of Patent Data: Issues for Corporate Finance
and Beyond, NBER Working Paper No. 24053.
   Maloney, W.F. and Valencia Caicedo, F., 2016. The persistence of (subnational) fortune. The
Economic Journal, 126(598), pp.2363-2401.


                                                   25
  M. Marx and J. Singh, L. Fleming, "Regional Disadvantage? Employee Non-compete Agreements
and Brain Drain." Research Policy 44 (2015) 941-955.
  Marx, M., and L. Fleming, 2012. "Noncompetes: Barriers to Exit and Entry?" National Bureau of
Economic Research Innovation Policy and the Economy, eds. Stern and Lerner, 12: 39-64.
University of Chicago Press.
  Marx, M. and Hsu, D.H., 2019. The Entrepreneurial Commercialization of Science: Evidence
From 'Twin' Discoveries. Boston University Questrom School of Business Research Paper.
  Moretti, E. (2012). The New Geography of Jobs. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, N. Y., N.Y.
  Moretti, E., Steinwender, C., and Van Reenen, J. (2016). The Intellectual Spoils of War? Defense
R&D, Productivity and International Technology Spillovers, Working Paper.
  Moretti, E. and D. J. Wilson (2014). State incentives for innovation, star scientists and jobs:
  Evidence from biotech. Journal of Urban Economics 79, 20-38.
  Moser, P., A. Voena, and F. Wa ldinger. 2014. "German Jewish Émigrés and US Invention."
American Economic Review, 104 (10): 3222-55.
  Parey, M., Ruhose, J., Netz, N., and F. Waldinger 2017. The selection of high-skilled emigrants.
The Review of Economics and Statistics 99(5), pp. 776-792 .
  Peri, G., Shih, K. and Sparber, C., 2015. STEM workers, H-1B visas, and productivity in US cities.
Journal of Labor Economics, 33(S1), pp.S225-S255.
  Romer, P.M., 1990. Endogenous technological change. Journal of political Economy, 98(5, Part 2),
pp.S71-S 102.
  Rosenberg, N. and Nelson, R.R., 1994. American universities and technical advance in industry.
Research policy, 23(3), pp.323-348.
  Rosenthal, S.S. and Strange, W.C., 2004. Evidence on the nature and sources of agglomeration
economies. In Handbook of r egional and urban economics (Vol. 4, pp. 2119-2171). Elsevier.
  Samila, S. and Sorenson, O., 2011. Venture capital, entrepreneurship, and economic growth. The
Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(1), pp.338-349.
  Saxenian, A., 1996. Regional advantage. Harvard University Press.
  J. Singh and M. Marx. " Geographic Constraints on Knowledge Diffusion: Political Borders vs.
Spatial Proximity." Management Science 59(9):2056 -2078 (2013).
  Stuart, T.E. and Ding, W.W., 2006. When do scientists become entrepreneurs? The social
structural antecedents of commercial activity in the academic life sciences. American journal of
sociology, 112(1), pp.97-144.
  Stuart, T., & Sorenson, O. (2003). The geography of opportunity: spatial heterogeneity in founding
rates and the performance of biotechnology firms. Research policy, 32(2), 229-253.
  Toivanen, O., and Väänänen, L. (2016). Education and Invention. Review of Economics and
Statistics, 98(2), 382 - 396.
  Waldinger, F. 2016. Bombs, Brains, and Science: The Role of Human and Physical Capital for the
Production of Scientific Knowledge. The Review of Economics and Statistics 98(5), pp. 811-831.
  Wozniak, A. and Murray, T.J., 2012. Timing is everything: Short-run population impacts of
immigration in US cities. Journal of Urban Economics, 72(1), pp.60-78.
  Zucker, L.G., Darby, M.R. and Brewer, M.B., 1994. Intellectual capital and the birth of US
biotechnology enterprises (No. w4653). National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                                 26
Appendix A1: Matching between surnames in patent and Census data

  Matching surnames between Census and patent data required several steps. First, we cleaned the
surnames in the inventor data and matched them with surnames in the census data. We converted all
surnames to lower cases and deleted unnecessary punctuations and other noise in the surnames of the
inventor data (e.g., ' "_ @ / & ; ? ` () # =, which were particularly important when they were the first or last
character). We also removed suffixes and other extra words after commas (e.g., `Foster', `Sr.', `deceased').
This process enabled 43,592 additional matches for raw inventor surnames. Then, for surnames containing
a dash or apostrophe, e.g., "O'Brien", "Villa-Real", we replaced the punctuation with choices of having a
space or without a space, and collected matching candidates of each surname from the census data. If there
existed both surname cases with a space and without a space, we set the algorithm to select the one with a
higher frequency. There were a total of 396 surnames matched in this process (221 for surnames with a dash,
175 for surnames with an apostrophe), for example: inventor surname "O'Brien" matched with census
surname "Obrien"; inventor surname "Ben-Bassat" matched with census surname "Benbassat".
  We tokenized the remaining surnames, i.e., split surnames with multiple words by spaces, and matched
them with census surnames that contained all the tokens. To be conservative, we set the algorithm to collect
surname candidates from the census data for only those surnames that contained all tokens as well as
surnames with a string length shorter than the length of original inventor surname. After collecting matching
candidates, we compared the text to the original inventor surname and selected the one with the highest
similarity. For the similarity measurement, we used both Jaro Winkler and Damerau/Levenshtein similarity
measurements. The value of a Damerau/Levenshtein similarity of 0.75 was used as a threshold to be
considered as a matching candidate. Conditional on satisfying this threshold, the algorithm compared the
census surname candidates using the Jaro Winkler similarity. If multiple candidates have the same Jaro
Winkler similarity value, the algorithm compared Damerau/Levenshtein similarity values. If multiple
candidates with the same similarity value still existed, our algorithm was set to choose one with a higher
frequency in the census data. There were a total of 724 surnames matched in this procedure, for example,
the surname "de la Merced" matches with census surname "Delamerced" (Jaro Winkler similarity: 0.96 /
Damerau/Levenshtein: 0.83), and inventor surname "van de Vaart" matches with census surname "Vande
vaart" (Jaro Winkler similarity: 0.96 / Damerau/Levenshtein: 0.92). In this case, there was also another
census surname candidate "Vandervaart", but it was not selected as it has a lower Jaro Winkler similarity
value compared to "Vande vaart". Inventor surname `van der Loo' matched with census surname
`Vanderloo' (Jaro Winkler similarity: 0.96 / Damerau/Levenshtein: 0.81). There was another census surname
candidate `Vander loo', but it was not selected as it had a lower Jaro Winkler similarity than `Vanderloo'.
The `Vanderloof', `Vanderlool', `Vanderloon', `Vanderloop', `Vanderloot' surnames were not considered as
candidates as their Damerau/Levenshtein similarity values failed to exceed the threshold of 0.75.
Finally, we matched multi-word census surnames to inventor surnames that failed to match in the prior
procedures. After splitting the surnames by spaces, we set the algorithm to find inventor surname candidates
that contained every tokenized word of the census surname. Then, applying the same similarity indexes and
processes described above, the algorithm found a final match between a census surname and an inventor
surname. There were a total of 716 inventor surnames matched through this step, including, for example,
"Von Doenhoff" matched with inventor surname "Vondoenhoff" (Jaro Winkler similarity: 0.98 / Damerau
levenshtein: 0.92), and census surname "Mc Ellistrem" matched with inventor surname "Mcellistrem" (Jaro
Winkler similarity: 0.98 / Damerau levenshtein: 0.92). As a result of the entire matching processes described
above, a total of 275,849 out of 374,988 unique surnames of inventors (73.6%) found a match in the census
surname. Compared to the matching without these whole processes, which found 230,421 census surname
matches out of 374,988 unique inventor surname raw strings (61.4%), our algorithm added 12.2% of
matches. In our data sample specifically, out of 769,625 unique inventors that applied for at least one patent
in US, 701,215 inventors (91.1%) matched their surname to the 1940 Census data.



                                                       27
Table A1 ­ Impact of incoming inventors on local high growth startup foundation in California and
                                         Massachusetts

                                                         High-growth startups founded
                                            a              b            c             d
                                            OLS            IV           IV            IV
              Incoming Inventorst-1         0.493***       0.569***     0.569***      0.325**
                                            (0.045)        (0.059)      (0.059)       (0.136)
              N                             1,929          1,929        1,929         1,929
              First Stage F                                117.3        115.6         16.24
              Year FE                       Yes            Yes          No            No
              State FE                      Yes            Yes          No            No
              State-Year FE                 No             No           Yes           Yes
              County FE                     No             No           No            Yes
              R2                            0.677
              Notes: This table presents OLS regression of log(number of high growth startup foundation
              + 1), where high growth startups are defined following Guzman and Stern (2020) as newly
              registered companies that complete either an IPO or successful acquisition within 6 years.
              Incoming inventors as well as the instrument are log-transformed. Specifications (b)-(d)
              show results of our IV regression as described above, where incoming inventors are
              instrumented with ,- in the first stage. First stage F is the Kleibergen-Paap Wald
              F statistic of the first stage regression. Model e excludes all counties of California and
              Massachusetts. Standard errors clustered at the county level appear in parentheses. ***, **
              and * indicate a significance level of 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively.




                                                          28
