                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        CHALLENGES OF CHANGE:
                   AN EXPERIMENT PROMOTING WOMEN
         TO MANAGERIAL ROLES IN THE BANGLADESHI GARMENT SECTOR

                                      Rocco Macchiavello
                                       Andreas Menzel
                                        Atonu Rabbani
                                     Christopher Woodruff

                                      Working Paper 27606
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27606


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2020

Corresponding author: christopher.woodruff@qeh.oc.ac.uk. The project has benefited from
comments from seminars and conferences at UC San Diego, the University of Washington, Notre
Dame, Duke, Leuven, Ecole Polytechnique, MIT / Harvard, LSE, PUC-Chile, the CEPR-IMO
and CEPR-IZA workshops, AEA-ASSA 2015, BREAD/CEPR/STICERD/TCD Conference
London 2018, and DIW/CRC TRR 190 Workshop Berlin 2019. Remaining failings are the
responsibility of the authors. We are grateful for the cooperation and financial support of
Deutsche Gesellschaft fuer Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), who developed the training
program that we implement in the project. We are also grateful for financial and logistical support
from the International Growth Centre, and financial support from the IPA SME initiative, the
ERSC ­ DFID Growth Research Programme and IFC-Bangladesh, and for the cooperation of the
large number of participating workers and factories in Bangladesh. Woodruff and Macchiavello
recognize support from the ERC Advanced Grant RMGPP. The project received human subjects
approval under the University of Warwick IRB (Approvals 01/11-12 and 86/13-14). The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Rocco Macchiavello, Andreas Menzel, Atonu Rabbani, and Christopher Woodruff.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Challenges of Change: An Experiment Promoting Women to Managerial Roles in the Bangladeshi
Garment Sector
Rocco Macchiavello, Andreas Menzel, Atonu Rabbani, and Christopher Woodruff
NBER Working Paper No. 27606
July 2020
JEL No. J16,J71,M51,M54,O14,O15

                                            ABSTRACT

Women remain disadvantaged in access to management positions around the world. We conduct a
field experiment with 24 large garment factories in Bangladesh to test for inefficient representation
of women among line supervisors. We identify the marginal female and male candidates for
supervisory positions and randomly assign them to manage production lines. Three sets of results
emerge: (i) extensive diagnostic testing at baseline reveal few skill differences between marginal
female and male supervisor candidates; (ii) initially, marginal female candidates have lower
productivity and evaluations from sub-ordinate workers, though after four to six months, these
gaps disappear; and (iii) the share of the female candidates retained as line supervisor after the trial
is significantly higher than the share of female supervisors in the factories at baseline. This
suggests that factories previously promoted fewer women than would have been optimal.
Additional surveys and a lab-in-the-field experiment suggest that the initially worse performance
stems from negative beliefs of workers about the abilities of female supervisors.


Rocco Macchiavello                                 Atonu Rabbani
Management Department                              University of Dhaka
London School of Economics                         Department of Economics
London                                             Dhaka
United Kingdom                                     Bnagladesh
and CEPR                                           atonu.rabbani@du.ac.bd
R.Macchiavello@lse.ac.uk
                                                   Christopher Woodruff
Andreas Menzel                                     Queen Elizabeth House
CERGE-EI                                           University of Oxford
Politickych Veznu 7                                OX1 3TB
11121 Prague                                       UK
Czech Republic                                     and NBER
Andreas.Menzel@cerge-ei.cz                         christopher.woodruff@qeh.ox.ac.uk
1     Introduction
         Women remain disadvantaged around the world, notably so in access to manage-
ment positions (Blau and Khan (2017); Bertrand (2017); Olivetti and Petrongolo (2016);
Goldin (2014)). There is ample evidence that women are rewarded less for the same
performance on the job, and that they are less likely to be promoted.1 The underlying
source of women's disadvantage in managerial promotions, however, is not well under-
stood. One possibility is taste-based discrimination (Becker (1957)): those in control of
a promotion decision may have a preference for promoting males even when they know
that the marginal female candidate will be a better manager than the marginal male
candidate. Alternatively, suboptimal promotion may result from statistical discrimina-
tion originating from inaccurate beliefs that decision-makers may have about the future
performance of candidates for managerial positions (Bohren et al. (2019)).2
         Causal evidence of the effects of promoting women to management positions on
productivity and worker beliefs is key to understanding the nature of bias in promotion
decisions. The scarcity of evidence on this question owes to three distinct challenges.
First, research on female managers is largely observational (e.g., Flabbi et al. (2019))
and thus struggles to causally attribute differences in performance to managers' gender.
Second, measuring the efficiency cost of bias from any source requires a comparison of
the marginal female and male managers, and marginal candidates are especially difficult
to identify in observational data. And third, a manager's performance depends not just
on her intrinsic skills, but also on typically unobservable beliefs held by her subordinates,
peers, and superiors about her skills.
         We address these challenges with a field experiment conducted with 24 large
garment factories in Bangladesh. The garment sector is of interest both for its role in
drawing women into full-time wage work and because it is a key driver of export-led
industrialization globally (Gereffi (1999)). The Bangladeshi garment sector also offers
advantages to overcome the three challenges. Production in the typical garment factory
in Bangladesh is organized in a large number of independent, separate production lines,
each of which is managed by one or more line supervisors. Although supervisors are
    1
      See, e.g., Sarsons (2019) Mengel et al. (2018), Hengel (2018), Egan et al. (2017),, MacNell et al.
(2015), Bowles et al. (2007), Goldin and Rouse (2000).
    2
      Beliefs may be based on performance in nonmanagerial positions and thus be inaccurate about
performance in managerial positions (Benson et al. (2019)).



                                                   1
almost always promoted from the pool of production workers, more than 90 percent of
supervisors are male, while around 80 percent of sewing floor workers are female. For
our experiment, participating factories identified 73 female and 72 male candidates for
supervisory positions (trainees henceforth). This addresses the challenge of identifying
the marginal candidates considered for promotion. After participating in a short training
program, trainees were randomly allocated to an equal number of production lines to work
as assistant supervisors for a period of two months. The randomization of supervisors
to workers allows us to make causal inferences about the effect of supervisor gender
on productivity.3 We use a combination of surveys with subordinate workers and co-
supervisors, and lab-in-the-field experiments, to directly measure beliefs and attitudes
toward female supervisors before, during, and after the trial to address the challenge of
measuring skills, beliefs, and outcomes.
         The literature distinguishes tastes and beliefs by their malleability. Tastes are
"stable over time" (Stigler and Becker (1977), p. 76), while beliefs calibrate rapidly to new
information, especially when there are objective measures of performance (Bohren et al.
(2019)). However, initial bias may lead to under-experimentation. As a result, beliefs may
not be self-correcting even when objective measures are available (Beaman et al. (2009)).
Learning is particularly challenging in the context of leadership in firms, where leadership
depends on a willingness by subordinates to be led. Even if firms decide to increase
experimentation with the goal of learning, if subordinate workers doubt the wisdom of
their supervisors, they will not pay attention to their advice.4 This suggests that even
objective output measures will not be sufficient to calibrate beliefs to reality. Indeed, if
teams underperform because subordinates believe female leaders are less effective, beliefs
will be reinforced. We write down a simple framework that translates these insights into
three potential forms of misallocation of supervisor talent along gender lines, with differing
implications for firm productivity. We use the framework to guide the experimental design
and the interpretation of the results.
   3
      Mixed results surface from analysis of policy changes in Norway and Italy that mandate minimal
representation of women among board members of publicly listed companies (see Bertrand et al. (2019),
Matsa and Miller (2013), Ahern and Dittmar (2012) for Norway, and Maida and Weber (2019) for Italy).
By contrast, our work focuses on lower-level, direct supervisors whose effectiveness may be determined
by different factors, such as the (informal) authority invested in them by their sub-ordinates.
    4
      Recent lab experiments show that workers pay less attention to advice provided by supervisors who
are framed as being female, resulting in lower output (Ayalew et al. (2018); Grossman et al. (2016)).
Similarly, Abel (2019) shows that workers lose more motivation on, and satisfaction with, a job after
negative feedback from supervisors who are framed as female.


                                                  2
         We present three core results. First, we show that beliefs about female supervisor
skills are misaligned at baseline. We conducted extensive skills tests of the trainees
before the start of the training and before their promotion to assistant supervisors on the
randomly assigned lines. We find few differences between the female and male trainees.
They are the same in terms of their age, level of schooling, experience in the garment
sector, and tenure at the current factory.5 However, employees at all levels of the factory
hierarchy believe that males are better prepared to be supervisors. Most strikingly,
employees are particularly likely to say that males have more technical skills, though
the female and male candidates perform no differently on an 86-question technical skills
diagnostic.
         Second, the new female trainees had, on average, seven percent lower productiv-
ity during the first two months during which they were assigned to work in supervisory
roles on random lines (henceforth the trial period). Female trainees also received lower
evaluations from the workers on those lines at the end of this trial period, though co-
supervisors rated the female and male trainees as equally effective. A lab-in-the-field
exercise conducted with a comparable set of trainees from a different set of factories sug-
gests that male workers, in particular, respond negatively to female leadership. However,
workers randomly exposed to female supervisors during our trial soften their preference
for male supervisors, and after the end of the trial they report being more indifferent to
the sex of their supervisor. This effect is again mostly driven by male workers.
         Finally, we find that, when factories were free to move trainees to other lines or
demote them at the end of the two-month trial, the share of females among the trainees
that the factories retained as supervisors (44 percent) was significantly higher than the
share of women working as supervisors in the sector (7 percent), or the share of women
among recently promoted supervisors (16 percent), before the trial. We also find evidence
that the retained female trainees no longer underperform their male counterparts, mea-
sured either by production data or surveys of subordinate workers. Taken together, these
results suggest that factories in our sample were under-promoting women to managerial
positions before our intervention, with the evidence suggesting that the under-promotion
of women was due to inaccurate beliefs about their managerial skills.
   5
     Among the few differences we find, the most notable is lower self-reported confidence in own super-
visor abilities of female trainees. The gap in self-reported self-confidence largely disappears by the end
of the short training, before candidates are trialed as supervisors.



                                                    3
          Our trial contributes to a number of different literatures on the causes and con-
sequences of gender gaps in leadership positions. Chattopadhyay and Duflo (2004) and
Beaman et al. (2009) analyze a policy experiment generating random exposure to fe-
male political leaders in Indian municipalities. Like our setting, theirs is characterized
by strong negative baseline beliefs about (political) leadership abilities of women. They
show that female village heads provide more public goods and take fewer bribes. Still,
evaluations of female politicians by their constituents are initially more negative, and only
catch up after repeated election cycles with female reservations, though beliefs about the
general abilities of women as leaders adjust more rapidly. We extend this analysis into
the realm of large, export-oriented firms, a setting in which one might have expected that
competitive forces would have eliminated the bias.6 Our results are in line with observed
productivity differences across firms (Syverson (2011)) being at least in part driven by
differences in beliefs and attitudes of mid-managers' subordinates, peers, and bosses in
the organizational hierarchy (Gibbons and Henderson (2012)).
          Our results also connect to Atkin et al. (2017), who show that misaligned incen-
tives between employees on different firm hierarchy levels can hamper the adoption of
new technologies. We argue that poorly aligned beliefs can similarly hamper the adop-
tion of better HR practices such as promoting from a wider pool of talent. More broadly,
we contribute to an emerging literature on firm upgrading in developing countries (see
Verhoogen (2020) for an up-to-date review) focusing on an export-oriented industry of
great socioeconomic relevance (Atkin (2016)).
          Finally, we contribute to the literature on discrimination and stereotypes. A
recent literature has shown that group stereotypes may induce discrimination by another
route: negative beliefs may directly alter group members' performance. For example,
Glover et al. (2017) show that managers' racial bias negatively affects minority cashier's
job performance in a French grocery store chain, and Carlana (2019) finds that a teacher's
bias affects gender gaps in math performance. We complement this literature by empha-
sizing the importance of subordinate beliefs about gender roles in affecting performance
of female managers on the job.7
   6
       Cajal (2016) and Cajal et al. (2019) study competitive pressures, sourcing arrangements and ex-
porters' performance in the Bangladeshi garment sector.
     7
       We also contribute to the broader literature on the effects of exposure to members from discriminated
against groups on beliefs. Dahl et al. (2018), show that Norwegian soldiers with randomly allocated female
fellow squad members significantly improve their beliefs about women's abilities as soldiers and beyond.


                                                     4
         This paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 provides background on the Bangladeshi
garment sector. Section 3 presents a simple conceptual framework. Section 4 summarizes
our experimental design and data. Section 5 presents baseline beliefs about the abilities of
male and female supervisors, comparing them to the supervisor skills we measure among
our trainees at baseline, and Section 6 presents the main experimental outcomes on the
lines supervised by the male and female trainees. Section 7 provides further evidence on
mechanisms. Section 8 concludes.



2     Background

2.1     Context

         Bangladesh is the second largest exporter of garments worldwide, after China.
From a handful of factories in the early 1980s, the sector has grown to more than 4,000
factories employing around 4 million workers. Garments account for about 80 percent
of Bangladesh's exports and an estimated 12 percent of Bangladesh's GDP (McKinsey
(2011))8 . The factories are very large by developing countries' standards. While data
spanning the whole sector are hard to come by, membership data from Alliance and
Accord, two organizations with the goal to improve factory safety in around 2,000 member
factories, show that these factories employ on average almost 1,600 workers, with a median
of 1,140.9 While the Accord/Alliance members are clearly selected from among the larger
and more modern factories, they are representative for the type of factories that we
recruited for this project. International clothing brands (henceforth "buyers") design
the garments and contract with factories in Bangladesh for their mass production. The
factories are mostly locally owned and managed, and the majority are located in and
around the two largest cities of the country, Dhaka and Chittagong. For logistical reasons,
Similar results have been shown for exposure to racial minorities (Carrell et al. (ming); Corno et al.
(2019); Boisjoly et al. (2006)), immigrants (Finseraas and Kotsadam (2017)), or members from other
castes (Lowe (2019)). Ben-Yishay et al. (2019) exogenously vary the gender of agricultural extension
workers in Malawi. They and find that female and male extension agents perform equally well on
knowledge tests and that farmers learn equally from female and male extension agents. Yet, farmers
believe that female extension workers are less effective than males in that role.
    8
      The Bangladesh garment sector has been widely studied, see, e.g., Heath and Mobarak (2015) on the
effects of the sector on gender norms and gender inequality in the country; Boudreau (2019) for a RCT
aimed at improving work safety, Heath (2018) on hiring practices in garment factories, and Boudreau
et al. (2020) on worker migration patterns between factories.
    9
      Own calculations, based on the membership records.



                                                  5
all factories participating in the project are located around Dhaka.


2.2    Production Lines

        A general challenge to identifying the relative productivity of female and male
supervisors is the availability of accurate and consistent productivity data spanning the
workers managed by female and male supervisors. This makes the Bangladeshi garment
an excellent setting for our study. Most factories have at least a cutting, sewing, and
finishing department, with the sewing departments employing the majority of the workers.
The sewing departments of most factories are organized into autonomous production lines,
with between a dozen and 100 lines in the factories where we work, and 20 to 60 workers
per line. Within factories, production lines are typically homogeneous in size, human
and physical capital employed, and rarely specialize by types of garment. Furthermore,
factories collect consistent daily line-wise productivity data based on physical output and
employ a common labor-intensive technology, facilitating the comparison of performance.


2.3    Line Supervisors

        Sewing line supervisors are promoted into their positions from among the ordi-
nary sewing workers in the sections. Supervisors maintain worker discipline and function
as first point of contact if any worker on their line encounters a problem during work.
They also teach workers new sewing operations when lines switch garment styles, which
they do on average around every two weeks. Lines can have one to four supervisors, de-
pending on their size, and a supervisor typically manages 5-20 workers. When lines have
more than one supervisor, there is often a line chief directly above them. Alternatively,
the most senior line supervisor on a line may be designated as line chief.
        Traditionally, while the large majority of non-supervisory workers in the sewing
departments are women, supervisors are almost exclusively recruited from among the male
sewing workers. Menzel and Woodruff (2019) study administrative staff records from 70
large garment factories in Bangladesh, and find that women account for 80 percent of non-
supervisory sewing workers, but only seven percent of line supervisors, and one percent
of line chiefs or higher-level supervisors. Put differently, in sewing sections more than
17 percent of male workers, but only 0.3 percent of female workers, are in supervisory



                                            6
positions. Almost all female workers leave the sector by the age of 35, while men in
supervisor positions often have much longer careers in the sector.
        A shortage of qualified supervisors is perceived to be an important barrier to
better performance of the factories (e.g., McKinsey (2011)). As the economy and the
sector continue to grow at more than five and ten percent annually, respectively, the
sector appears less and less able to attract the most qualified men. As shown in Figure 1,
the level of education of female and male operators entering in the sector has converged
over time across successive cohorts, with a notable decline in the average education of male
operators even during a period in which education levels in Bangladesh more generally
were increasing. Accessing the vast pool of female workers for supervisor talent is thus
an increasingly important need for the sector.



3    Conceptual Framework
        This section provides a framework to guide the experimental design and deter-
mine the conditions under which promotion practices are efficient. We begin with a
standard scenario in which the output of a production line depends on the talent of its
supervisor and characteristics of the production line. In this case comparing the output
of marginal male and female supervisors on any set of production lines is sufficient to
identify misallocation. We discuss how practical details of the experimental implementa-
tion potentially bias the test against female supervisors and propose an alternative test
that accounts for this bias.
        We then extend the framework to consider the case in which output also depends
on the gender of the supervisor (e.g., because of biases among co-workers and subordi-
nates). In this case, the set of production lines on which the experiment is run matters
and comparing performance no longer identifies misallocation. This highlights a gen-
eral issue in experiments in which those implementing the experiment have unobservable
knowledge about optimal allocation decisions. We sum up the discussion introducing
three distinct notions of misallocation and how they relate to our evidence.




                                             7
3.1     Experimental Design in a Standard Production Framework

         Consider a standard framework in which the output of a worker depends on
his or her talent for the job and other characteristics of the job s/he is assigned to.
Specifically, the factory employs a mass of female workers and a mass of male workers
on a continuum of production lines indexed by j  [0, 1]. Each worker in the factory is
endowed with a potential level of supervisor talent µ, which is distributed among female
and male workers according to continuous cumulative distribution functions F F (µ) and
F M (µ), respectively. We allow these two distributions to differ, for example because of
gender-specific endowments of managerial talent or differential selection into the sector.
Output yij of a production line j depends on a set of line characteristics (such as the skills
of workers on the line) aggregated into a scalar score xj and on the managerial talent µi
                                                   dY
of its supervisor i, or yij = Y (µi , xj ), with   dµi
                                                         > 0.
         Assume factories need to fill a mass B of supervisor positions. In line with Becker
(1957), we consider a scenario in which the factory might have a preference over the
number of appointed male and female supervisors but, conditional on those preferences,
appoints the best available male and female candidates first. Denote with µg
                                                                           B the talent of

the marginal supervisor of gender g = {F, M }, that is, the supervisor with the lowest level
of talent among those of gender g . We have B = M 1 - F M (µM            F  F
                                                            B ) + F 1 - F (µB ) .

         Let RB = F 1 - F F (µF
                              B)          / M 1 - F M (µM
                                                        B)      denote the ratio of female to
male supervisors. This ratio is around seven percent in the Bangladeshi garment sector
at the time of the baseline of our trial. Since factories employ many more female then
male workers (F > M ) it must be that F M (µM      F  F
                                            B ) < F (µB ). The low baseline ratio can

thus arise if either the upper tail of the distribution for males is thicker than for females
and/or if the threshold µ is lower for males than for females, µM    F
                                                                B < µB . Figure 2 is drawn

illustratively to depict these possibilities. In the absence of preferences over the gender
composition of supervisors, the factory maximizes output by equating the talent of the
marginal male and female supervisors, µM    F
                                       B = µB . If, instead, the factory is biased against

female supervisors, the marginal female supervisor will be better than the marginal male,
i.e., µM    F
       B < µB . In the simple standard framework, this would result in a production loss

for the factories.
         To test for misallocation in the basic scenario we therefore need to compare the
performance of the lines managed by the marginal female and male supervisors. The first


                                                   8
step in the experimental design asks factories to identify male and female operators for
a training plus trial program that yields a pool from which to select the next internally
promoted supervisors in the factory. Under the assumption that the factory selects for
the program the next best available male and female candidates, the selection procedure
identifies the marginal male and female supervisors with talent µM      F
                                                                 B and µB . In the

second step, the experimental design compares the performance of these candidates by
randomly allocating them to manage production lines during the trial period. This test
for misallocation compares output Y (µi , xj ) on a set of experimental lines   to which the
newly promoted marginal male and female supervisors have been randomly assigned, i.e.,


                         =                Y (µF              M
                                              B , xe ) - Y (µB , xe ) de
                                e [0,1]


Note that, since Y (µ, .) is increasing in µ on all lines, in this baseline scenario (i) we do
not need to measure underlying managerial talent µ for the trainees, and (ii) the test is
valid regardless of which production lines the experiment is conducted upon. In practice,
we asked factories to identify lines where they expected to need supervisors in the near
future to maximize compliance with the experimental protocol.


3.2    Experimental Design in Practice: Selecting Trainees

        Although straightforward from a conceptual point of view, the implementation
of the experiment presents certain practical difficulties. To increase the statistical power
of the experiment we asked factories to select several female and male candidates, in line
with their projected need for new supervisors over the half year following the baseline,
and to select male and female trainees in equal proportion. Suppose, for example, the
factory wanted to promote 10 workers to supervisory positions. We ask them to select five
women and five men. In the absence of the intervention, however, the factory would have
likely selected a pool of 10 workers with a very different gender composition. For example,
if we use the prevailing ratio at baseline, the relevant counterfactual is one in which the
factory would select nine males and a single female. Relative to this counterfactual, our
experiment will overstate the talent of the marginal male supervisor (who would have a
µ lower than any male in our experiment pool) and understate the talent of the marginal
female supervisor (who would have the highest µ in the experimental pool). Comparing


                                               9
the average male and female trainee in our sample is thus a more stringent test than if
factories had promoted only a single female trainee. We note that this bias is not likely to
be large given that our trainees represent a tiny fraction of the female and male workers
in the factories.10


3.3     Experimental Design Under Gender-Dependent Production

         So far we have considered a standard scenario in which production only depends
on supervisor talent and line characteristics. We now extend the model to allow the output
of female and male supervisors on the same line to differ either because of differences in
supervisory talent µ, or as a result of other factors related to the gender of the supervisor.
For example, the level of authority bestowed by workers on their supervisor could vary
with the gender of the supervisor: (some) workers might be more inclined to follow the
orders of a male supervisor than of a female supervisor of equal talent. Alternatively, line
operators might have less confidence in female supervisors' ability to help them sort out
problems with machines, and so request less help. Formally, we capture this by extending
the production function to yij = Y (µi , xj , j ), where j = {M   F
                                                              j , j } depends on the sex

of the line's supervisor. We refer to this mechanism as the "authority" channel as a
short-hand, where we allow the amenability to female leadership to vary across lines.
         Comparing output differences across lines randomly assigned to male and female
trainees no longer identifies misallocation. Moreover, the set of experimental lines, , and
the process through which the factory selects those lines, now matters. It is useful to
define, for all lines supervised by males, the gap in productivity when the line is instead
supervised by the marginal female supervisor, j = Y (µF        F         M        M
                                                      B , xj , j ) - Y (µj , xj , j ), with

µM
 j the skill level of the current male supervisor of the line.
                                                              11
                                                                 Assuming the factory knows
the bias on each line and allocates existing supervisors such that output is maximised,
we can assume the factory would assign the marginal female supervisor to the line that
maximizes j . We refer to this line as the marginal line. A necessary and sufficient
  10
      Note that the source of bias described in this subsection is in addition to another potential source
of bias against the female candidates. Factories have a lot of experience promoting male candidates and
can thus be expected to be able to correctly identify the marginal male candidate. Factories have a lot
less experience identifying female candidates for promotion, and might thus make mistakes (Uckat and
Woodruff (2020)). Indeed, line chiefs involved in the selection of trainees report to be less confident in
their assessment of the female trainees relative to the male trainees (see section 8 for more details).
   11
      Given that more than 90 percent of lines are managed by males, we assume that the variation in j
is driven by variance in amenability to female leadership F j .




                                                   10
condition for misallocation in favor of men is a positive j > 0 on the marginal line.
        Based on an extensive pilot phase (see Appendix D), we asked factories to identify
lines where they expected to need supervisors in the near future to maximize compliance
with the experimental protocol. We then randomly allocated the female and male trainees
for work during the trial period to one of the lines selected by the factory. This choice,
inconsequential in the standard framework, potentially biases the test in the scenario
with gender-dependent production against detecting misallocation in favor of men if the
factories chose experimental lines with j smaller than the marginal line.
        Two considerations suggest that, possibly because factories have limited infor-
mation on j (and/or might have based their selection of experimental lines on factors
only weekly correlated with j ), the experimental set of lines is likely to be more rep-
resentative of the whole set of lines in the factory, and less of the marginal lines. First,
on observable characteristics, experimental lines    do not look different from other lines
in the factory (see Appendix A.1). Second, if it was indeed the case that trainees were
allocated on lines particularly favorable to women relative to other lines in the factory,
we should observe that factories disproportionately re-allocate male trainees away from
the experimental set of lines after the trial. We don't see such differential reallocation,
consistent with the experimental lines being fairly representative.
        Due to the presence of bias , the estimated productivity differences between
female and male trainees no longer identify differences in managerial talent among the
marginal candidates. We address this challenge in four ways. First, we proxy for man-
agerial talent through an extensive set of diagnostic tests on the trainees before the
beginning of the program. Second, we complement the diagnostic with a set of lab-
in-the-field-experiments in which we simulate managerial exercises with a comparable
sample of trainees. Third, we use evaluations by peers, a popular tool in businesses
around the world to measure staff skills (Sol (2016); Edwards and Ewen (1996); Bohl
(1996)). Fourth, we rely on factories' revealed preferences on which of the trainees they
keep as supervisors after the initial trial.


3.4    Experimental Design and Experiment Effects

        A final challenge is the possibility that the experiment itself differentially changes
the performance of the marginal male and female supervisor. In the framework above, this


                                               11
could arise either from a differential increase in managerial talent µ, or from a reduction
in the bias against female supervisors, . To account for such possibility, we would
need to extend the model to a dynamic framework. We interpret our short trial period
(two months) as a relatively minor cost to find out whether there are suitable female
supervisors. To rationalize the low rate of female supervisors at baseline with the high
retention rate following the trial, it must be that management has a very high discount
factor, and hence is unwilling to pay even the modest cost implied by the trial period,
and/or that initial beliefs about µ and/or post-trial  were widely inaccurate at baseline.
         We will provide evidence that the training itself is unlikely to have (differentially)
changed skills µ. At baseline, beliefs could be biased about both µ and (post-trial) .
We will document widely held beliefs biased against the efficacy of female supervisors at
baseline, i.e., incorrect beliefs about µ. The experimental design thus identifies misallo-
cation at baseline relative to (easily attainable) production possibilities after the short
trial period.


3.5    Summing Up: Three Forms of Misallocation

         The framework allows us to define three types of misallocation of managerial
talent along gender lines. Recalling that j represents the productivity gap of a line j
when managed by the current male or marginal female supervisor, we denote:

   1. Weak Misallocation : µM    F
                            B < µB


   2. Strong Misallocation : S =     j [0,1]
                                               Y (µF        F         M        M
                                                   B , xj , j ) - Y (µB , xj , j ) dj


   3. Misallocation at the Margin : max(j ) > 0               (among lines j supervised by men)

While weak misallocation denotes a form of discrimination against women that can be
consistent with profit maximization, strong misallocation and misallocation at the margin
are invariably costly to the firm. The absence of strong misallocation doesn't imply the
absence of misallocation at the margin and is thus also not sufficient for establishing
maximizing behavior by firms. The combination of our experimental design and data
collection strategy allow us to examine these forms of misallocation. Data from the
extensive baseline diagnostic exercise allow us to potentially identify weak misallocation.
         The experimental assignment to lines identifies strong misallocation under the
additional assumption that the experimental lines are representative of the whole set

                                                 12
of lines in the factories, and misallocation at the margin under the assumption that the
factories choose the lines with the highest j . As it was practically not possible to run the
experiment on a random set of lines, and we are unable to precisely measure j , we cannot
be sure which the experiment identifies. However, note that strong misallocation implies
misallocation at the margin, and hence the experiment will identify a sufficient condition
for misallocation that is costly to factories. Because managers may have information
about j (or j ) that is unobservable to the researchers, their decisions with regard to
retention of trainees after the trial may be informative above and beyond measures of
productivity on the lines managed by the trainees. We therefore also test for misallocation
at the margin using the retention decisions of the factories after the initial two-month
trial. If the gender ratio among the trainees that the factories retained as supervisors is
larger than the gender ratio of supervisors in the factories at baseline, this suggests that
the share of lines better served by female supervisors is larger than the baseline share of
women among supervisors. We discuss further assumptions underlying this test when we
implement it in section 6.



4         Design and Data
              This section describes the implementation of the experiment and the data we
collected. We highlight the three design challenges identified in the previous section
- identification of the marginal male and female supervisors, allocation of trainees to
experimental lines and measurement of performance.


4.1         Experimental Design

              For the main trial of the project we worked with 24 factories that are suppliers
of a large UK-based buyer.12 To identify the marginal candidates for promotion to line
supervisors, we asked participating factories to select an equal number of male and female
sewing workers to be sent to a six-week classroom-based supervisor training program,
developed by the German Development Corporation GIZ. The researchers paid the direct
cost of training, though factories continued to pay worker salaries.
              The training program was offered for free mainly as an incentive for factories to
    12
         As is typical for factories in Bangladesh, these factories also produce for other buyers.


                                                        13
participate in the experiment and identify the marginal candidate supervisor. As shown
and discussed in more detail in Appendix B, we do not find many effects of training on
measured skills. Given that our analysis is based on comparisons of female and male
trainees, both of whom participated equally in the training, the internal validity of the
analysis should not be affected. The training might, however, affect the external validity
of our results to situations in which firms consider promoting more women without a
prior training course. With this in mind, we measured a rich set of trainee skills both
before and after the training course, to understand the effects of the training.
          The selected trainees were all current non-supervisory workers. To determine the
total number of workers nominated for the program, we asked each factory to consider the
expected demand for new supervisors in the factory in the six months following training.
Given that much of the training material was written, we asked that nominated workers
have at least basic literacy skills. We scheduled four training rounds starting between
March and May 2014, with half the nominees from each factory randomly allocated to
one of two training rounds, either rounds 1 and 3 or rounds 2 and 4. Within factories,
trainees were randomly assigned to early or late training rounds, stratified at the gender
level, to stagger their return to the factories.
          The factories initially selected 121 female and 100 male candidates. Twenty-one
female candidates declined to start the training course, either because they decided they
did not want to be supervisors or because of resistance from their families. Given the use
of written material, we screened on a test of basic literacy. Eleven female and 18 male
candidates did not pass the literacy test we conducted at the start of the training. After
the initial assessment, 13 female and four male candidates dropped out of the program,
and three further female and six male candidates were excluded for other reasons. The
final remaining sample, all of whom completed the training course, consisted of 73 female
and 72 male trainees.13
          We then agreed with the factory management that the trainees would work for
the first two months after the training as co-supervisors on a line randomly selected from
a set of lines nominated by the factories. After the trial, factories were then free to return
trainees to non-supervisory positions, keep them as supervisors on the trial line, or move
   13
      Five of the factories sent operators to the first training session but stopped sending the agreed upon
trainees in the second round. However, given the within-factory randomization of trainees into training
rounds, stratified for male and female trainees, this does not bias the estimates from the sample of firms
finalizing the trial.


                                                    14
them to other lines as a supervisor.


4.2    Data

        We collected three types of data: (i) surveys of the trainees, other workers, and
other supervisors before and after the training, and after the trial period (ii) productivity
data for a period of 12 months covering the whole trial from all lines in a subset of factories
that provided data of sufficient quality, and (iii) a managerial lab-in-the field experiment
at 48 separate factories that participated in a pilot run of the project a year before the
main trial. We describe the survey data here in more detail, and the productivity and
managerial experiment data later when we bring them into the analysis.
        We carried out surveys of trainees, other workers and current supervisors on four
separate occasions. A prime focus of all surveys was to collect information on beliefs about
and preferences for female supervisors held by the respondents from various different
positions in the factories. The first survey collected detailed information from trainees
themselves on the first day at the training center, including attitudes, assessments on
knowledge of machine and production processes, communication, teaching and leadership
skills, and numeracy, literacy and non-verbal reasoning skills. In the second survey, a few
days before the arrival of the trainees on their designated lines, we surveyed both the
trainees at the training center and workers in the factory. In the factory, we surveyed
all of the supervisors and line chiefs and three randomly chosen workers, stratified by
gender, from each of the lines nominated by the factory for the trial. We also surveyed
line chiefs from the lines where trainees worked as operators before the training. Finally,
we surveyed the floor managers and the factory-level production- and HR managers.
        The third survey was conducted in the factory just after the two-month trial
ended. We again surveyed three randomly selected operators and the co-supervisors and
line chiefs from the lines that were nominated for the trial, and on all lines where any
trainee worked even if it was not his or her randomly assigned line.
        Finally, we conducted a second follow-up survey with trainees, randomly selected
operators, and supervisors about four and a half months after the trial ended for those
trained in the early rounds, and ten weeks after the end of the trial for those trained in the
late rounds. Because each factory participated in two training rounds, the first follow-
up survey was conducted on two separate days, roughly two months apart. However,


                                              15
in an effort to minimize disruption of work at the factory, the second follow-up survey
was conducted on a single day for trainees and lines from both of the training rounds in
which the given factory participated. This meant that we were unable to survey both the
originally assigned lines and the lines where trainees actually worked. But as factories
were free to move workers after the two-month trial period, results on the original trial
lines would be difficult to interpret. We therefore chose to survey supervisors and random
workers from the lines where trainees were actually working as supervisor at the time of
the second follow-up. We surveyed trainees who had left the factories by that time by
phone, and we continued to conduct bi-monthly telephone follow-up surveys with trainees
for around half a year after this fourth survey round in the factories. Finally, trainees
kept a daily diary during the two months of the trial period, noting the line they worked
on each day, and if, and how many, workers they were supervising on these lines on that
day. We use these data to identify where the trainees actually worked during the trial.



5     Comparison of Trainees and Beliefs at Baseline
        This Section describes evidence at baseline. We focus on three aspects: we
document beliefs about the relative supervisory skills of females and males, proxies for
µ; we compare actual measures of skills of the female and male trainees selected by the
factories; and we compare the trainees against representative sets of line operators and
supervisors. We show that the beliefs are inconsistent with the evidence from the basic
comparison of female and male trainees. As we argued in the conceptual framework, this
gap between beliefs and measured skills could translate into lower performance of female
supervisors on the line ­ an issue we investigate in Section 6.


5.1    Attitudes Towards Female Leadership

        We begin by documenting negative beliefs about the suitability of females as
supervisors. We examine attitudes towards female leadership in the 24 participating fac-
tories using baseline surveys with workers, supervisors and managers. In pilots, managers
and supervisors reported eight different skills as being important for supervisory roles (see
Figure 3). At baseline, we asked respondents whether they believe that men are more
able, women are more able, or men and women are equally able in each of these eight


                                             16
skills. We code the answers as -1 if the respondent thinks that men are more able, 0 if
they think women and men are equally able, and 1 if they think women are more able.
        The upper part of Figure 3 shows the results on the eight skills and the average
response across the eight skills. The responses are shown separately for sewing workers,
supervisors, line chiefs, HR managers, and Production managers. Sewing workers have the
most negative beliefs about women as supervisors, reporting that they are less able than
men on each of the eight skills. The gender gaps are largest for "hard" skills, particularly
"understanding machines", and "organizing resources". Fully 77 and 92 percent of female
and male workers, respectively, think that men understand machines better, while nine
and zero percent, respectively, say that women understand machines better. The gaps are
smallest for "soft skills" such as "motivating workers", "corresponding with managers",
and "teaching new techniques".
        Line supervisors report beliefs that are indistinguishable from operators, except
for "teaching new techniques" where they see no gender difference. As we move up the
organizational hierarchy, the beliefs favor women more, particularly for the "soft skills".
Production and HR managers believe that there are no gender differences in "correcting
mistakes", "motivating workers", "corresponding with management", and "teaching new
techniques". However, on the "hard" skills of "understanding machines" and "organizing
resources", the beliefs of higher-level managers are no different of those of workers and
supervisors, with 82 percent of factory level production and HR managers stating that
men understand machines better.
        The lower part of Figure 3 disaggregates the evaluations from sewing workers by
the gender of the respondent. Both female and male workers rate women lower on each of
the eight skills, though the gaps are larger for male respondents on all eight skills. We also
asked the female and male trainees themselves to rate the supervisory skills of females
and males, with the results shown in the same figure. The responses of male trainees lie
between those of male and female workers, while female trainees report lower gender gaps
than female workers on six out of eight dimensions. But even the female trainees rate
men better in five of the eight skills, while reporting no gender gap on the three "soft
skills" of "motivating workers", "corresponding with management", and "teaching new
techniques".
        Table 1, Columns 1-2 shows that the differences in the beliefs held by female and


                                             17
male sewing workers, aggregated over all eight skills, are highly statistically significant
even when controlling for a large number of demographic and socio-economic respondent
controls. These beliefs translate into both female and male workers saying they prefer to
work under male supervisors. We asked each worker surveyed at baseline whether s/he
prefers to work under a male supervisor, a female supervisor, or is indifferent between
the two. Among respondents, 70 percent of males and 50 percent of females say they
prefer to work for men, while 7 and 27 percent, respectively, report they prefer to work
for female supervisors. The remaining 23 percent of both male and female production
workers report being indifferent. Columns 3 and 4 of Table 1 show that the preference for
male supervisors is significantly stronger among men, though even for women there is a
statistically significant preference for male supervisors. These gaps remain when adding
respondent controls and factory fixed effects. Meanwhile, the 34 percent of the respon-
dents reporting that they had previously worked under female supervisors do not report
different beliefs about skills (Column 2 of Table 1), but do report stronger preferences
for female supervisors (Column 4). The effect of exposure to female leadership does not
differ significantly between male and female respondents (results not shown).
        While the survey questions underlying Figure 3 and Table 1 do not target the
marginal supervisor directly, we also asked the line chiefs and production managers to
rate the trainees they were involved in selecting for training. We asked the line chiefs to
compare the female and male trainees on all eight skills; because of time constraints, we
asked production managers only for one aggregate ranking. The relative skill patterns
are similar to the general comparisons of men and women as supervisors shown in Figures
3, though these beliefs are measured less precisely due to the much smaller number of re-
spondents. We show in the next subsection that these widely held beliefs are, prima facie,
inconsistent with the results of the extensive diagnostic conducted before the training in
which we found little difference in skills of female and male trainees.


5.2    Comparing the Female and Male Trainees

        Using the data collected during the first day at the training center we see few
differences in characteristics between the female and male trainees in our final sample
(Table 2). Note that the design was not intended to yield a set of female and male trainees
that are balanced on observable characteristics, but rather to identify the marginal female


                                            18
and male supervisors, the workers that the factories would chose to promote if they
would need to find additional (female and male) supervisors. Among the diverse set of
characteristics that we measure, only two differ significantly; female trainees scored on
average lower on the numeracy test (but not on the literacy nor on the Raven test),
and they expressed lower confidence into their ability as supervisors. However, when we
repeated the confidence questions on the last day of training, when the female and male
trainees knew they would soon be trialed as supervisors, the gender gap in confidence
levels had notably shrunk, as shown in the bottom two rows of Table 2. The majority of
the measures are similar for female and male trainees. From a demographic perspective,
they are of equal age (25 years), educational attainment (8 years of schooling), seniority
in the factory (around 3 years) or the garment sector (around 6 years).14
          We also measured more direct proxies for managerial talent. During the baseline
diagnostic, we measured proxies for each of the eight skills for which we elicited beliefs as
described above. Male and female trainees showed no significant difference in group game
exercises designed to test communication and leadership skills.15 Crucially, they scored no
differently on a battery of 86 technical questions on the garment production process (see
Appendix E for a copy of the test). This last dimension is of particular importance for
two reasons. First, technical knowledge was ranked as the most important trait of a good
line supervisor by ordinary workers.16 Second, as we have documented, employees at all
levels expressed a belief at baseline that women are particularly weak in this dimension.
          The comparison of means is arguably not the relevant comparison. Figure 4 shows
the full distribution of technical knowledge scores for female and male trainees. Females
were only 16 percent of promotions in the period prior to the baseline. As we elaborate
in more detail further below, a conservative measure indicates that the factories retained
86 of the 145 trainees as supervisors after the trial period. If factories had followed their
   14
      We note that female trainees are slightly more likely to be married, in line with female workers in the
sector overall (Menzel and Woodruff 2019). This could indicate that female trainees have more household
responsibilities besides their work at the factories. We control for these features in our analysis.
   15
      For the communications game, the trainee had to explain a number of abstract figures verbally while
other trainees attempted to draw them. We use the number of figures the other trainees could draw as a
measure of communication skills. We also conducted a production game in mixed groups of female and
male trainees, in which the trainees had to produce different "products" using Legos. Two enumerators
per group scored how often and actively each trainee participated in the group discussions, assigning a
leadership "soft score", and we do not see a difference on this score either.
   16
      Ordinary workers found technical knowledge of machines as the most important skill for a line
supervisor, while current supervisors and higher up managers considered "teaching new techniques" and
"motivating operators" as most important.



                                                     19
baseline promotion ratio of 16 percent women, they would have promoted 14 women and
72 men. The relevant comparison is thus the 14th best female and the 72nd best male.
Given that there were only 72 male trainees in our sample, this would be the worst male
trainee. So we instead conservatively highlight in the upper part of Figure 4 the male
trainee at the 20th percentile of the knowledge test score distribution. As the vertical lines
indicate, the score of the 14th best female trainee far exceeds that of the 20th percentile
male, indicating that baseline promotion practices did not equate technical knowledge at
the margin, as measured in our knowledge diagnostic.


5.3    Trainees as Marginal Candidates: Comparison to Other
       Workers and Supervisors

        It is useful to compare trainees selected by the factory with average sewing work-
ers and line supervisors in the factory. If the factory selected marginal candidates, we
expect the trainees to be relatively more similar to existing supervisors rather than to
sewing workers. Table 3 provides supporting evidence. First, we compare the trainees
with random workers of the same sex we surveyed from the lines the factories nominated
for the trial. Both female and male trainees have significantly higher educational attain-
ment than the operators. On the other hand, we see no difference in age. Compared
with the average male worker, male trainees have longer tenure in the factory but not
the sector; there are no differences between female trainees and workers in either factory
or sector tenure.
        Second, we compare trainees to existing supervisors. Compared to current male
supervisors from the nominated lines, male trainees are younger, have spent less time in
the sector, and worked at fewer garment factories, which is not surprising given that they
are just about to be promoted to supervisor. Indeed, the average age of the male trainees
is almost exactly the same as the age of promotion reported by the average existing
supervisor. The trainees also have somewhat lower years of schooling. The patterns are
similar when we compare female trainees to the small number (10) of female supervisors
we surveyed, except that the female trainees are younger than the age at which the
existing female supervisors reported to having been promoted.
        In sum, the diagnostic exercise and baseline surveys provide evidence consistent
with a bias in beliefs widely held inside the factory: women are rated to be worse su-

                                             20
pervisors in general, and particularly so on knowledge of machines ­ a dimension we can
accurately measure and on which we saw no meaningful difference between male and
female trainees. The bias in beliefs against women is widely shared across layers of the
hierarchy and particularly pronounced among potential male subordinate workers.



6     Female vs Male Trainees: Experimental Results
        This section first shows that, when randomly allocated to supervise production
lines, female trainees initially have lower productivity on their lines than male trainees,
and receive worse reviews from subordinates. We then show that this gap is short-lived:
a few months after the end of the trial, female trainees have caught up with men in
both dimensions. Furthermore, after the end of the trial, when factories were free to
demote trainees again to non-supervisory positions, they retained a significantly higher
share of female trainees as supervisors than what could have been expected given baseline
levels. This indicates that factories were under-promoting female workers to supervisors
before our intervention. The section concludes relating the evidence to the notions of
misallocation introduced in the conceptual framework in Section 3.


6.1    Randomization Balance and Compliance

        Before presenting the experimental results, we describe randomization balance
and compliance with the experimental protocol. In Appendix A, Table A.2, we test
whether the randomization of the nominated lines to receiving male and female trainees
is balanced on three types of observables: average operator characteristics (from the ran-
domly selected operators surveyed before the trainees return from the training), average
line supervisor observables from the same surveys, and different variables in the produc-
tion data (e.g. productivity, daily work time, number of workers on line, etc.). Among
39 variables, we detect imbalances at the 10 percent statistical significance level for 4
variables, in line with expectations. F-tests indicate joint imbalance of worker charac-
teristics at the five percent level, and for production data at ten percent. We show that
our results are robust to controlling for these variables (individually or jointly in a PDS
Lasso framework).
        Table 4 shows that compliance with the agreement that trainees would work


                                            21
as assistant supervisors was fairly high: 88 percent of the 145 trainees started their trial
after completion of the training program. This compliance rate did not differ significantly
by gender (column 1). However, compliance with the random allocation of workers to
specific production lines was lower. Among the 88 percent of trainees who began their
trial, 64 percent did so on their assigned line (Panel 3, column 2). This implies that
56 percent of all trainees started their trial on the randomly allocated line. Again,
there is no significant gender difference in this compliance measure (Panel 1, column 2).
Factory managers reported that non-compliance often resulted from a lack of internal
communication of line assignments to floor-level managers. Consistent with this, we see
that much of the line-level non-compliance involved the switching of two female, or two
male, trainees. With this in mind, we can define a third measure of compliance by asking
what share of trainees worked on a line randomly assigned to a trainee of the same sex.
The compliance rate is higher by this measure, with 69 and 63 percent of female and
male trainees working on a line assigned to their gender (Panel 1, column 3), or 78 and
71 percent, respectively, conditional on starting the trial (Panel 3, column 3).17 We
address this non-compliance by reporting ITT specifications.


6.2     Line-level productivity during the trial

          We first compare lines allocated female and male trainees using daily line-wise
production data, which we collected for all production lines in the 14 factories, where
available.18 The production data cover a period of twelve months starting from around
3 to 5 months prior to the start of the trial (depending on the training round of the
trainee). We measure line productivity with a standard engineering measure used in the
sector. Daily piecewise output of a production line of a given garment is multiplied by
the garment's "Standard Minute Value" (henceforth SMV). The SMV is calculated by
industrial engineers by breaking down the sewing process of a garment into its individual
stitches and assigning a time value to each stitch under ideal production conditions.
The time value of each stitch in the garment is then summed up.19 The SMV typically
   17
      Note that 86 percent of male and 89 percent of female trainees were trialed on any line nominated
by the factory, conditional on doing the trial. This implies that half of both the male and female trainees
that did the trial on a line not allocated to a trainee of their sex did the trial on lines outside the set of
lines nominated by the factory.
   18
      These 14 factories nominated 112 of the 145 trainees, 58 females and 54 males.
   19
      The SMV is sometimes referred to as the SAM (Standard Allowed Minutes).



                                                     22
depends on the machinery the factory uses, and engineers sometimes allow for extra time
for moving or folding the garment, or cutting thread. Thus, while the SMVs are consistent
within factories, they are not necessarily consistent across factories. Therefore, we include
factory fixed effects for all of our analysis, yielding within-factory comparisons of lines
with male and female trainees. Once standardized by multiplication with the SMV, daily
output is divided by the number of minutes of labor available on that day and line, the
number of workers on the line times the minutes of operation on the day.
        At the end of each production line there is a quality control table where quality
inspectors check each piece. Defective pieces are not counted in the daily output used for
productivity until the defects have been corrected. Instead, the ratio of defective pieces
over the total output yields the defect rate, our second outcome variable, available from
17 factories. Finally, most factories track the daily number of absent workers, with 13
factories in our sample having this information available at the individual line level. We
collected this data as our third outcome variable.
        Table 5 shows that lines randomly allocated female trainees had significantly
lower productivity during the two-month trial period when the trainees worked as assis-
tant supervisors on these lines. The first two columns show ITT effects, comparing aver-
age productivity between lines randomly allocated female and male trainees, regardless
of whether the allocated trainee worked on the line. Column 1 shows the ITT comparison
for the period prior to the start of the trial. As predicted by random allocation of the
trainees, there is no statistically significant or economically meaningful difference. How-
ever, during the trial period, lines allocated female trainees have on average more than
four percentage points lower productivity, controlling for baseline productivity of the line
(column 2). This amounts to an around seven percent lower productivity compared with
lines allocated male trainees.
        Given that non-compliance with the randomization protocol was not trivial, in
columns 3 to 5 of Table 5 we compare the productivity of lines on which the female
and male trainees actually worked, using data from the worker diaries. In column 3, we
compare baseline productivity levels on those lines, finding no significant difference prior
to the start of the trial between the lines on which female and male trainees actually
did their trial. Controlling for baseline productivity, we find that lines actually receiving
female trainees have more than six percentage points lower productivity (column 4),


                                             23
broadly in line with the fact that only around two thirds of the lines received a trainee of
the randomly allocated sex. Given the selected placement of trainees, and the fact that
female and male trainees differed, on average, in confidence and numeracy skills, column
5 repeats column 4, but adds a battery of observable line and trainee characteristics
controls. These include the average SMV of the garments produced, the average order
size, the number of workers on the line, or the average daily runtime of the line. On the
trainee side we control for age, schooling, and the measures of numeracy or confidence
in own abilities. We apply PDS Lasso to select the relevant controls from those listed
above, including squares of, and indicator variables for missing values in, each control
(Duflo (2018); Belloni et al. (2016)). These controls have only a very small effect on the
results.
           While we see clear patterns in the effect of female and male trainees on line
productivity, there are no similar patterns for defect rates or worker absenteeism during
the trial period. As shown in Columns 1 to 5 of Table A.3 in Appendix A, the only effect
that we find is a significant increase in defect rates during the trial period on lines on
which female supervisors actually worked. This effect is significant only when we add line
and trainee controls selected by PDS Lasso, and never in the ITT specification. Thus,
while the defect rate results are in line with lower performance of lines receiving female
trainees during the trial, the effect is not robust.


6.3        Performance during the trial: subordinate and co-worker
           evaluations

           We next look at evaluations of the trainees by co-supervisors and subordinate
workers. At the end of the two-month trial period, we surveyed two co-supervisors and
three randomly selected workers on each line that was allocated a female or male trainee.
We asked them to evaluate on a scale from zero to 10 both a "typical supervisor" and the
trainee supervisor on their line along the eight dimensions shown in Figure 3. Columns 6
to 8 in Table 5 report the results of regressions with each respondent's average evaluation
across the eight dimensions as the dependent variable. We find no statistically significant
difference in the average evaluation of female and male trainees by co-supervisors on the
same lines, either without (Panel 1, column 6) or with (Panel 1, column 7) demographic
controls. Columns 6 and 7 are labelled "ITT", but note that co-supervisor had no way to

                                             24
evaluate trainees that never worked on their line, and hence data are missing for this form
of non-compliance.20 Meanwhile, column 8 compares evaluations from any lines on which
female and male trainees actually worked, similar to the specifications using production
data in columns 3 to 5 of Table 5. The estimated difference is slightly larger but far from
significant at conventional levels. All of the regressions in columns 6 through 8 control
for the respondent's average ranking of a typical supervisor. The additional controls in
columns 7 and 8 are selected again using PDS Lasso, from among respondent and trainee
controls, similar to column 5.
          Panel 2 of Table 5 replicates the analysis of survey responses with those from
subordinate workers. Given the larger number of female respondents among workers,
the differences between evaluations of female and male trainees are shown separately for
female and male worker respondents. Controlling only for the respondent's rating of a
typical supervisor (column 6), female workers evaluate female trainees on average around
0.6 points lower than male trainees on the 10-point scale, while male workers around
1.2 points lower. Both gaps are statistically significant at the five and one percent level,
respectively. While the difference between male and female respondents is large, it is not
statistically significant at conventional levels. On the other hand, the gap estimated from
the combined responses by male and female workers is significantly different from both
zero and from the (small and insignificant) gap elicited from co-supervisors. Controlling
for respondent and trainee characteristics selected by PDS Lasso (column 7) does not
affect these results in a meaningful way, nor does expanding the sample to all lines on
which male of female trainees actually worked, regardless of their random allocation
status (column 8).
          The more negative evaluation of female supervisors by their sub-ordinate workers
after their first two months on this position mirrors the more negative evaluation of
female village heads in close-by West Bengal (India) at the end of the first election
cycle in which the village head position was reserved for women (Beaman et al. (2009)).
However, in contrast to our results, the female village politicians outperformed their male
   20
      We managed to survey workers from 131 of the 145 lines nominated for the trial in the first follow-
up survey, resulting in an attrition rate of 9.7 percent. Out of the 14 trainees that attrited, 13 are
due to whole factories attriting from the trial. Given that randomization was stratified at the factory
level, potential bias from this attrition should be limited. A trainee was trialed on 101 of the 131 lines,
resulting in an available rating of the trainee. Evaluations are also available for 20 further trainees that
were not trialed on a line originally nominated by the factories for the trial.



                                                    25
counterparts on some objective metric (public good provision, corruption). This should
caution us, however, to necessarily interpret the lower evaluation of female supervisors
as being caused by the lower productivity on their lines. We return to this discussion in
section 7.


6.4     Post-Trial Outcomes

          Columns 4-6 of Table 4 describe outcomes for trainees after the trial, when our
agreement with the factories on the random allocation of trainees had ended. We find
that 53 percent of female and 67 percent of male trainees continued to work as supervisors
on some line, with a p-value of this gender difference of 0.07 (column 4). Those continuing
to work as supervisors represent 62 and 75 percent, respectively, of those who started the
trial (Panel 3, column 4). However, the majority of those continuing as supervisors were
moved to another line. Only 36 percent of male, and 34 percent of female, trainees that
did their trial worked for at least another three months on the same line as during the
trial, and only 21 and 15 percent, respectively on their originally allocated line (Panel 3,
column 5).21 Finally, 22 percent of the trainees had left the factory within half a year of
the trial's end, with no significant gender difference (Panel 1, column 7).22
          Table 6 explores the productivity differences between the lines of the female and
male trainees who continued to work as supervisors after the end of the trial, on the lines
where they actually worked. Given that the majority of trainees were relocated after
the trial, we do not report ITT effects. As shown in column 1, retained female trainees
worked after the trial on lines that were insignificantly less productive before the start
of the trial. Controlling for this baseline productivity, we find only a very small and
highly insignificant gender gap in line productivity in the post-trial period of around 1
percentage point (column 2). Adding again a rich set of respondent and trainee controls
selected through PDS Lasso does not change the result (column 3).
    21
       Note that generally line supervisors work on fixed assigned lines and are reallocated only rarely.
Existing supervisors at baseline in our sample factories report to have worked on average 1.9 years on
their current line as supervisors (median: 1.3 years). Thus, we interpret the observed line-moves of
retained trainees after the trial as one-off movements from the lines we randomly allocated them to
initially, to those lines which the factory deemed as optimal fit for them.
    22
       Among men, 50 percent of those not trialed and 17 percent of those trialed had left, while for women
the numbers are 55 and 19 percent, respectively. In further phone surveys we conducted after the second
follow-up survey in the factories, two male trainees and one female trainee reported they were working
as supervisors at other factories, while four more trainees reported they were non-supervisor workers in
other factories.


                                                    26
        If we replicate the basic comparison of female and male trainees during the trial
with the sample limited to those trainees who continued to work as supervisors post-trial,
the gap during the trial period remains very similar to that in the overall sample during
the trial, and highly significant (Table 6, column 4). This suggests that the observed
closure of the productivity gap of female trainees between the trial and post-trial period
is not due to factories retaining as supervisors only those female trainees with the highest
productivity during the trial. Furthermore, even looking at the small sample of 30 trainees
whose modal line in the post-trial period coincides with the line on which they did their
trial, we see a similar, though insignificant, productivity gap during the trial (column 5).
This suggests that the closure of the gap is not driven by reallocation of female trainees
post-trial to lines with, for example, a lower bias j .
        As with the trial period, we also elicited evaluations of supervisor performance
from co-supervisors and subordinate workers of the retained trainees at the second follow-
up survey, two to five months after the end of the trial period. For co-supervisors, there
is again no gender gap in the evaluation of the trainees (Table 6, Panel 1, column 6).
The initial gap in the evaluations by workers, however, disappeared. Two to four months
later, neither male nor female workers evaluate the retained female trainees lower than
male trainees (Panel 2, column 6). Again, we can ask whether the closure of this gap
relative to the trial period is due to those (female) trainees with the lowest evaluations
after the trial not continuing as supervisor. As with the production data, the results
suggest that this is not the case. Using data from the trial period for those who are later
retained as a supervisor, we find the gap in evaluations remains almost unchanged and
is still highly significant for male workers, though it is somewhat smaller than in the full
sample for female workers (column 7). Thus, it does not appear that the closure of the
evaluations gap from trial to post-trial period is driven by factories retaining only those
(female) trainees that had the highest evaluations by workers.
        Finally, given that at baseline, supervisors and workers expressed beliefs that
women have lower supervisory abilities, we might ask whether the strength of these
beliefs measured on a given line is associated with the lower productivity or evaluations
of female trainees assigned to those lines. We do this in Appendix A.4, finding that
controlling for the best measures we have of baseline beliefs about relative female/male
supervisory skills do not meaningfully change the estimates. However, as we discuss in


                                             27
the appendix, the available measures are based on responses of a small percentage of the
operators on each line, and so are likely to be noisy.


6.5     Female Share among Retained Supervisors: Misallocation
        at the Margin

         As discussed in the conceptual framework section, comparing the average per-
formance of male and female trainees likely biases the comparison against the marginal
female supervisor for several reasons. Assuming the managers understand something
about the bias in beliefs of subordinate workers, an assumption supported by the co-
supervisor performance ratings, they will take this into account when they make deci-
sions about which trainees to retain as supervisors. Given this, a more informative test of
misallocation at the margin compares the ratio of women among the trainees retained by
the factories as supervisors after the end of the trial against the share of women among
supervisors in the factories at baseline.
         Out of the pool of 143 trainees, 86 still work as supervisors by the time of the
second follow-up survey.23 Of those, 38 were women, representing a 44 percent share.
Data from Menzel and Woodruff (2019) reveal that of 101 promotions to supervisors in
36 garment factories in Bangladesh around the time of the trial the share of women among
promotions to supervisors is around 16 percent (see Appendix C for more details).24 A
t-test that takes into account the different sample sizes from which the shares of 44 and 16
percent were estimated reveals that the 44 percent ratio in the experiment is statistically
different from the 16 percent counterfactual marginal ratio (p-value < 0.001).
         Factories may retain a larger share of female trainees than they find optimal due
to perceived experimenter demand, or perceived costs of demoting trainees. In fact, many
trainees were demoted, so these do not appear to be particularly strong assumptions.
Furthermore, based on our framework, another way to check for the efficiency of the share
of women among the retained supervisors is to test again whether it equalizes trainee skills
  23
      We define promoted here as working as a supervisor at the time of the second follow-up survey.
Alternative definitions of working as a supervisor for at least 30 days or at least 60 days after the end
of the two-month trial produce higher promotion rates of both female and male trainees, but the gender
ratio remains unchanged (increases minimally in favour of female trainees).
   24
      The 16 percent female promotion percentage is higher than the seven percent female supervisor
rate that we estimate among the stock of supervisors, suggesting either that promotions of women are
increasing over time or that women remain in supervisory positions for a shorter amount of time.



                                                   28
at the margin. For that, in the lower part of Figure 4, we repeat the exercise from the
upper part of the same Figure, but now comparing the technical knowledge scores of the
38th best female trainees against that of the 48th male trainee, given the numbers of
retained female and male trainees. We find that these two have precisely the same test
score in our data, suggesting that factories moved much closer to an efficient gender ratio
in promotion decisions. Overall our findings indicate that a larger share of lines in the
factories, including the marginal lines from our conceptual framework, were better served
by female supervisors than the share that had female supervisors at baseline, pointing
towards the presence of misallocation at the margin in these factories.



7     Mechanisms
        Do lines managed by the female trainees initially underperform because the fe-
male trainees are less skilled than the male trainees (lower µ), or because workers bestow
less "authority" on the female supervisors, as captured by  in our framework (Abel
(2019); Ayalew et al. (2018); Grossman et al. (2016))? The combination of few objec-
tive skill differences and strong negative baseline beliefs about the supervisory skills of
women provides prima facie evidence that beliefs are misaligned. The few differences we
do find, such as the significant differences in confidence into own supervisor skills, could
in principle drive the initial productivity differences. Note, however, that controlling for
trainee's confidence levels did not affect our results. However, the misaligned beliefs may
be a reason why workers bestow less "authority" on female supervisors, for example pay-
ing less attention to their instructions. In this section, we present two additional results
that are consistent with an explanation based on misaligned beliefs, but more difficult to
reconcile with a pure skill-based explanation.


7.1    Management Simulation

        The first additional piece of evidence favoring the "authority" hypothesis comes
from a lab-in-the-field management simulation exercise conducted with 169 trainees at a
set of 48 similar factories that participated in an extensive pilot of this project around a
year before the implementation of the main trial. These trainees were similarly selected
by the factories and went to the same training program as the trainees from the main trial.


                                            29
The simulation was conducted around two months after the trainees in this pilot returned
from the training, with most of them having worked as supervisors in the meantime,
as per our agreement with the factories. The trainees are thus similarly skilled and
experienced as the trainees from the main experiment after the completion of their two-
month trial. However, as opposed to the main experiment, the pilot factories could
freely select the lines on which they put the trainee supervisors during the trial period.
We thus implemented the management simulation to measure the trainee's productivity
as supervisors when matched with randomly selected workers. Due to the logistical
complexity of implementing the management simulation in the factories, we did not
conduct them during the main experiment, where we could exploit the random allocation
of trainees to lines during the first two months after the training.
         The simulation allows us to study, for example, whether the effectiveness of
female trainees differs when they supervise female or male workers. On the lines in the
factories, this share fluctuates and factories typically do not keep day-to-day records
of which workers work on which lines.25 Moreover, line productivity will be affected
by bottlenecks on specific processes, and factories do not record the gender of workers
on these key processes. We provide more detail on the trial phase in Appendix D. In
particular, Table D.3 compares demographic characteristics of male and female trainees
in both samples, finding few significant differences.
         We find that these female trainees performed better than their male counterparts
in these simulations, in which each trainee was matched with a team of two randomly
selected workers from their factory. The trainees were tasked with explaining to the two
workers one of two types of stylized production exercises, either sorting buttons according
to their color and size, or building figures with Lego pieces. The first exercise was designed
to be familiar to people working in the factories, while the second exercise to test the
ability to supervise unfamiliar tasks. The trainees received cash pay-offs proportional to
the output of their team.26 Each simulation consisted of four rounds, with the pay-off of
the trainee determined in slightly different ways in each round (twice based on the total
  25
      We were able to collect administrative data from eight factories on the share of men on production
lines, but did not find that variation in this share affected our results based on productivity data.
However, this administrative data offered only monthly snapshots of allocation of workers to lines, but
not daily changes.
   26
      The simulations were done during the work-time of the workers, and so the workers in the teams
received their standard pay for the time participating in the simulations, but no bonus for performance
in the game.


                                                  30
output of team, and once each on output of the team-member with the largest or smallest
output, respectively). We analyze the results of the simulation in Table 7, which regresses
the payoffs on the trainee-game round level on gender of trainee and fixed effects for the
two types of games.
         Female trainees generate almost 0.3 standard deviations higher payoffs, a differ-
ence that is statistically significant. The difference persists controlling for trainee char-
acteristics (Table 7, column 2), for fixed effects for the team of two operators (column 3),
and for dummies indicating whether the trainee was actually tried out, or retained as line
supervisor (columns 4 and 5, respectively). Column 6 allows the results to be heteroge-
neous according to the composition of the production team. We see that female trainees
outperformed male trainees only when they supervised a team of two women. When at
least one of the two workers was male, productivity was significantly lower. This result
is consistent with men having more negative baseline beliefs about female supervisors,
and with attitudes based on such beliefs affecting female supervisors, instead of some
unobserved skill differences.27


7.2     Preference Update for Male and Female Supervisors

         The second piece of evidence more in line with the "authority" mechanisms
stems from a positive update of preferences for female supervisors that we observe among
workers randomly allocated a female trainee supervisor, as shown in Table 8. We elicit
preferences for male versus female supervisors from workers at the end of the two-month
trial in the same way as we did at baseline, coding a preference for male supervisors
as -1, for female supervisors as 1, and indifference as 0. Under the assumption that
workers prefer to work under supervisors they believe to be more skilled, this result
indicates that the random exposure corrected initial beliefs about female supervisors
that were too negative. This conclusion is furthermore supported by the positive effect of
exposure on preference being driven by male workers, which held particularly negative,
and therefore potentially misaligned, beliefs at baseline. While a simultaneously lower
evaluation of female trainees and positive updating on preferences may appear puzzling,
  27
     Female trainees may have outperformed males by providing more effort in the management simu-
lations to "prove" that they are equal to their male counterparts. However, it is not clear why female
trainees would not similarly provide more effort as supervisors on their lines. Furthermore, even if that
was the case, note that this additional effort would have lower returns when managing teams with male
workers.


                                                   31
it is in line with beliefs having been excessively negative at baseline, especially among
men. It is also consistent with Beaman et al. (2009), who find that male constituents
initially evaluated female village politicians lower, while they positively updated their
perceptions of female leader's abilities at the same time. They also argue that due to
behavioral biases, evaluations could still reflect earlier negative beliefs (Mullainathan and
Washington (2009)), and be therefore biased themselves.
        Finally, the results on updated preferences also speak to the question whether
the lower authority bestowed on female supervisors would arise from taste-based discrim-
ination against female supervisors or negative beliefs. A long theoretical and empirical
literature has argued that while beliefs can be quickly updated, tastes are typically as-
sumed to be stable over time and much less sensitive to new information (Bohren et al.
(2019); Beaman et al. (2009); Bisin and Verdier (2001); Stigler and Becker (1977)). The
rapid update in preferences to female supervisors suggests that excessively negative be-
liefs rather than more deeply rooted tastes cause the lower authority exhibited towards
female supervisors.



8    Discussion and Conclusion
        We show results from a factory initiative to promote more female workers to su-
pervisor positions. Female supervisors initially have lower productivity on their assigned
lines, but results suggest that they catch up with other lines after four to six months.
These and other results are best rationalized by a model in which otherwise identical
workers bestow different levels of authority on female and male supervisors, affecting the
way their supervisory skills translate into team output.
        We do not find clear evidence for weak misallocation, in that the marginal female
trainees are not clearly more qualified than the marginal male trainees based on measured
baseline skill levels. But efficiency depends on misallocation at the margin, and the results
do suggest there was such misallocation. The significantly higher share of female trainees
among the retained supervisors, compared to the baseline share in the sector, suggests
that the baseline share of female supervisors was lower than the share of lines that had
supervisor openings and would have fared better with a female supervisor at the time of
the RCT. This suggests that indeed, at baseline, some female candidates for promotion


                                             32
to supervisors were overlooked in favor of less suitable male candidates.
         The experiment illustrates the difficulty of isolating misallocation at the relevant
margin in real-world settings. It is not clear either how well managers understood the
amenability of lines to female leadership or the attributes to take into account when
selecting the marginal female supervisors. On the first, our framework assumes that the
amenability of lines to female leadership (j ) varies across lines, but is fixed across time.
The results suggest that the beliefs of subordinate workers adjusted rapidly, increasing the
amenability of lines exposed to female leadership. Moreover, there is anecdotal evidence
of learning by factory management with regard to j . Two of the participating factories
established all-female production lines after our final survey, but before we shared any
information about the experimental results. That they did this well after they were free
to move the trainees to other lines indicates that they learned that amenability matters,
and that it can be manipulated.
         Evidence from baseline surveys indicates that managers found it more difficult to
select the marginal female supervisor. Line chiefs, who are typically involved in promotion
decisions from workers to supervisors, reported lower confidence into their ability to
identify the marginal female supervisors, compared to the marginal male supervisors. We
asked 94 line chiefs to evaluate the trainees from their lines, and to state how confident
they were in their evaluations, on scale from zero to 100 percent. While they reported
an average confidence level of 84 percent for male trainees, their confidence in selecting
female trainees was almost 10 percentage points lower on average, with a p-value for the
difference of less than 0.015.28
         Learning in this regard is hampered by excessively negative beliefs about women
as supervisors. Because subordinates' beliefs affect the performance of the female super-
visors who are promoted, these beliefs may be self-reinforcing. Factories had promoted
some women to supervisory roles before. However, if it is more difficult for the factory
management to identify the "true" marginal female trainee, a lower learning rate from
experimentation may result (Uckat and Woodruff (2020)). Risk aversion and negative
tastes towards female supervisors may further reduce the rate of experimentation (Bea-
man et al. (2009)). Due to their much higher ex-ante promotion likelihood, men may also
  28
     Variations in these confidence differences across factories or line chiefs do not, however, explain
the gender gaps in productivity or evaluations we found in the paper. However, the variation in these
confidence measures across factories may be noisy, and our sample may be too underpowered to detect
such effects. Results available on request.

                                                  33
more actively signal to factory managements their skills for, and interest in promotions.
        Our results, particularly those on updates to preferences for the gender of su-
pervisors, mirror the findings from Beaman et al. (2009) and Chattopadhyay and Duflo
(2004) that exposure to women in political leadership positions positively affects beliefs
about their skills and abilities. Our paper shows that these results also hold for leader-
ship positions in firms. This is an environment in which the effectiveness of leaders likely
even more depends on the attitudes displayed towards them by subordinates, peers, and
superiors. It is also one in which competitive pressures should attenuate bias. In terms of
policy implications, given the positive spillovers into households, families and the broader
society that have been shown to come with increased power and income of women (Uckat
(2020); Duflo (2012)), our results suggests that targeted subsidies for employers to over-
come initial, temporary frictions from promoting more women in the workplace can be
promising tools for policy makers.




References
Abel, M. (2019). Do Workers Discriminate against Female Bosses?            Working Paper,
 Middlesbury College.

Ahern, K. R. and A. K. Dittmar (2012). The Changing of the Boards: The Impact
 on Firm Valuation of mandated Female Board Representation. Quarterly Journal of
 Economics 127 (1), 137­197.

Atkin, D. (2016). Endogenous Skill Acquisition and Export Manufacturing in Mexico.
  American Economic Review 106 (8), 2046­85.

Atkin, D., A. Chaudhry, S. Chaudry, A. Khandelwal, and E. Verhoogen (2017). Orga-
  nizational Barriers to Technology Adoption: Evidence from Soccer-Ball Producers in
  Pakistan. Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (3), 1101­1164.

Ayalew, S., S. Manian, and K. Sheth (2018). Discrimination from below: Experimental
  evidence on female leadership in Ethiopia. WPS 079, Center for Effective Global
  Action.

Beaman, L., R. Chattopadhyay, E. Duflo, R. Pande, and P. Topalova (2009). Powerful
  Women: Does Exposure Reduce Bias? Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (4), 1497­
  1540.

Becker, G. S. (1957). The Economics of Discrimination. University of Chicago Press:
  Economic Research Studies.



                                            34
Belloni, A., V. Chernozhukov, and Y. Wei (2016). Post-Selection Inference for Generalized
  Linear Models with Many Controls. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 34 (4),
  606­619.

Ben-Yishay, A., M. Jones, F. Kondylis, and A. M. Mobarak (2019). Gender gaps in
  technology diffusion. Journal of Development Economics 143.
Benson, A., D. Li, and K. Shue (2019). Promotions and the Peter Principle. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 134 (4), 2085­2134.

Bertrand, M. (2017). The Glass Ceiling. Becker Friedman Institute for Research in
  Economics Working Paper No. 2018-38.

Bertrand, M., S. E. Black, S. Jensen, and A. Lleras-Muney (2019). Breaking the Glass
  Ceiling? The Effect of Board Quotas on Female Labour Market Outcomes in Norway.
  Review of Economic Studies 86 (1), 191­239.

Bisin, A. and T. Verdier (2001). The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the Dy-
  namics of Preferences. Journal of Economic Theory 97 (2), 298­319.

Blau, F. and L. Khan (2017). The Gender Wage Gap: Extent, Trends, and Explanations.
  Journal of Economic Literature 55 (3), 789­865.

Bohl, D. L. (1996). Minisurvey: 360-Degree Appraisals Yield Superior Results, Survey
  Shows. Compensation and Benefits Review 28, 16­19.

Bohren, J. A., A. Imas, and M. Rosenberg (2019). The Dynamics of Discrimination:
  Theory and Evidence. American Economic Review 109 (10), 3395­3436.

Boisjoly, J., G. Duncan, M. Kremer, D. Levy, and J. Eccles (2006). Empathy or An-
  tipathy? The Consequences of Racially and Socially Diverse Peers on Attitudes and
  Behaviors. American Economic Review 96.

Boudreau, L. (2019). Multinational Enforcement of Labor Law: Experimental Evidence
  from Bangladeshs apparel sector. Working Paper, Columbia University.
Boudreau, L., R. Heath, and T. McCormick (2020). Migrants, Information, and Working
  Conditions in Bangladeshi Garment Factories. Working Paper, Columbia University.

Bowles, H. R., L. Babcock, and L. Lai (2007). Social Incentives for Sex Differences in the
  Propensity to Initiate Negotiation: Sometimes It Does Hurt to Ask. Organizational
  Behavior and Human Decision Processes 103 (1), 84­103.

Cajal, J. (2016). Searching for Trade Partners in Developing Countries: Testing Firms
  in the Fast Fashion Industry. Working Paper, Graduate Institute (IHEID), Geneva.

Cajal, J., R. Macchiavello, and G. Noguera (2019). International Buyers Sourcing and
  Suppliers Markups in Bangladeshi Garments. CEPR Discussion Paper 13482.

Carlana, M. (2019). Implicit Stereotypes: Evidence from Teachers Gender Bias. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 134 (3), 1163­1224.

Carrell, S., M. Hoekstra, and J. E. West (Forthcoming). The Impact of College Diversity
  on Behavior toward Minorities. AEJ: Economic Policy .

                                           35
Chattopadhyay, R. and E. Duflo (2004). Women as Policy Makers: Evidence from a
 Randomized Policy Experiment in India. Econometrica 72 (5), 1409­1443.

Corno, L., E. L. Ferrara, and J. Burns (2019). Interaction, stereotypes and performance.
  Evidence from South Africa. IFS Working PapersW19/03.

Dahl, G. B., A. Kotsadam, and D.-O. Rooth (2018). Does Integration Change Gender
 Attitudes? The Effect of Randomly Assigning Women to Traditionally Male Teams.
 NBER Working Paper 24351.

Duflo, E. (2012). Women Empowerment and Economics Development. Journal of Eco-
 nomic Literature 50 (4), 1051­1079.

Duflo, E. (2018). Machinistas meet Randomistas: Some useful ML tools for RCT Re-
 searchers. NBER Summer Institute 2018, Master Lecture in Development.

Edwards, M. R. and A. J. Ewen (1996). How to Manage Performance and Pay with
  360Degree Feedback. Compensation and Benefits Review 28, 41­46.

Egan, M. L., G. Matvos, and A. Seru (2017). When Harry Fired Sally: The Double
  Standard in Punishing Misconduct. NBER Working Paper 23242.

Finseraas, H. and A. Kotsadam (2017). Does Personal Contact with Ethnic Minorities af-
  fect anti-immigrant sentiments? Evidence from a Field Experiment. European Journal
  of Political Research 56 (3), 703­722.

Flabbi, L., M. Macis, A. Moro, and F. Schivardi (2019). Do Female Executives Make a
  Difference? The Impact of Female Leadership on Firm Performance and Gender Gaps.
  Economic Journal 129 (622), 2390­2423.

Gereffi, G. (1999). International Trade and Industrial Upgrading in the Apparel Com-
 modity Chain. Journal of International Economics 48 (1), 37­70.

Gibbons, R. and R. Henderson (2012). Relational Contracts and Organizational Capa-
  bilities. Organization Science 23 (5), 1350­1364.

Glover, D., A. Pallais, and W. Pariente (2017). Discrimination as a Self-Fulfilling
  Prophecy: Evidence from French Grocery Stores. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 132 (3), 1219­1260.

Goldin, C. (2014). A Grand Gender Convergence: Its Last Chapter. American Economic
 Review 104 (4), 1091­1119.

Goldin, C. and C. Rouse (2000). Orchestrating Impartiality: The Impact of "Blind"
 Auditions on Female Musicians. American Economic Review 90 (4), 715­741.

Grossman, P. J., C. Eckel, M. Komai, and W. Zhan (2016). It pays to be a man: Rewards
  for leaders in a coordination game. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organizations 161,
  197­215.

Heath, R. (2018). Why do Firms Hire using Referrals? Evidence from Bangladeshi
  Garment Factories. Journal of Political Economy 126 (4), 1691­1746.


                                          36
Heath, R. and M. Mobarak (2015). Manufacturing growth and the lives of Bangladeshi
  women. Journal of Development Economics 115, 1­15.
Hengel, E. (2018). Publishing while Female. Working Paper, University of Liverpool.
Hsieh, C.-T. and B. A. Olken (2014). The Missing "Missing Middle". Journal of Economic
  Perspectives 28 (3), 89­108.
Lowe, M. (2019). Types of Contact: A Field Experiment on Collaborative and Adversarial
  Caste Integration. Working Paper, University of British Columbia.
MacNell, L., A. Driscoll, and A. N. Hunt (2015). Whats in a Name: Exposing Gender
 Bias in Student Ratings of Teaching. Innovative Higher Education 40.
Maida, A. and A. Weber (2019). Female Leadership and Gender Gap within Firms:
 Evidence from an Italian Board Reform. IZA Discussion Paper No. 12099.
Matsa, D. A. and A. R. Miller (2013). A Female Style in Corporate Leadership? Evidence
 from Quotas. AEJ: Applied Economics 5 (3), 136­69.
McKinsey (2011). Bangladesh's ready made garments landscape: The challenge of
 growth. McKinsey&Company, Apparel, Fashion & Luxury Practice.
Mengel, F., J. Sauermann, and U. Zlitz (2018). Gender Bias in Teaching Evaluations.
 Journal of the European Economic Association 17 (2), 535­566.
Menzel, A. and C. Woodruff (2019). Gender Wage Gaps and Worker Mobility: Evidence
 from the Garment Sector in Bangladesh. NBER Working Paper 25982.
Mullainathan, S. and E. Washington (2009). Sticking with Your Vote: Cognitive Disso-
 nance and Political Attitudes. AEJ: Applied Economics 1 (1), 86­111.
Olivetti, C. and B. Petrongolo (2016). The Evolution of Gender Gaps in Industrialized
  Countries. Annual Review of Economics 8, 405­434.
Sarsons, H. (2019). Interpreting Signals in the Labor Market: Evidence from Medical
  Referrals. Working Paper, University of Toronto.
Sol, J. (2016). Peer Evaluations: Incentives and Coworker Relations. Journal of Eco-
  nomics and Management Strategy 25 (1), 56­76.
Stigler, G. and G. Becker (1977). De Gustibus Non Est Disputandum. American Eco-
  nomic Review 67 (2), 76­90.
Syverson, C. (2011). What Determines Productivity?       Journal of Economic Litera-
  ture 49 (2), 326­365.
Uckat, H. (2020). Womens Promotion and Intra-Household Bargaining: Evidence from
  Bangladesh. Working paper, Oxford University.
Uckat, H. and C. Woodruff (2020). Learning What to Look For: Hard Measures on Soft
  Skills in Promotion. Working paper, Oxford University.
Verhoogen, E. (2020). Firm-Level Upgrading in Developing Countries. CDEP-CGEG
  Working Paper No. 83.

                                         37
Figures:




   Figure 1: Education levels of Entering Sewing Workers over Time. Calculations
   by authors using survey data from 1,435 female and 1,049 male sewing workers (line
   operators) in 30 factories. The surveys were carried out between 2012 and 2017. The
   data show the reported years of schooling for males and females who turned 18 in the
   year shown, roughly the age in which workers enter the sector.




   Figure 2: Hypothetical Allocation of Male and Female Supervisors. Figure
   illustrates a hypothetical scenario that rationalizes the low share of female supervisors.
   It plots a hypothetical right tail of the distributions of managerial talent among male
   (blue) and female (red) workers. The blue (red) vertical bar denotes the talent of a
   hypothetical marginal male (female) supervisor. The ratio of the red area to the blue
   area is the ratio of female supervisors. A low share of female supervisors can, in principle,
   arise from either a larger mass in the right tail of the male distribution relative to the
   female distribution, and/or from µM         F
                                        B < µB , i.e., a bias against female supervisors.




                                                38
Figure 3: Baseline Beliefs on Female Supervisor Abilities. Figures show mean
responses from workers in the garment factories of the types shown in the legend to the
following question: "Do you think that male or female workers are better at following
task/have more of the following skill?" Responses coded as -1 for "Men are better", 0
for "No differences", and 1 for "Women are better". "Overall" represents averages over
all eight skills/tasks. "LO w/prev.fem.SV" stands for workers who already worked under
female line supervisors. Capped bars represent 95 percent confidence intervals.



                                          39
Figure 4: Distribution of Technical Knowledge. Figures show the distribution
of scores in the 86-item technical knowledge diagnostic conducted at baseline with the
female and male trainees. In the upper figure, the 20th percentile in the distribution
of male trainee's test scores, and the score of the 14th best female trainee is marked
illustratively: had the factories recruited the 86 trainees it retained as supervisors after
the trial according to the baseline ratio of women among supervisors (16%), then only 14
female and all of the male trainees would have been promoted. The percentiles indicate
down to which trainee in the score distribution the factories would have chosen trainees,
had they strictly promoted following the test scores (we indicate conservatively the male
at the 20th percentile instead of the one at the very bottom of the distribution). The
lower figure shows the quantiles of the 38th best female and 48th best male trainees, due
to the factories retaining after the trial 38 female and 48 male trainees as supervisors.
Dashed lines indicate 95 percent confidence intervals of estimated percentiles. Note that
in lower figure, the shown percentiles of male and female trainees coincide.


                                            40
Tables:

Table 1: Beliefs and Preferences on Female Supervisor, Male vs. Female Workers
                                           (1)                   (2)                  (3)              (4)

                                   Overall evaluation                     Female SV Preference

        Male Respondent                 -0.245***         -0.266***                -0.359***         -0.355***
                                         (0.039)           (0.043)                  (0.088)           (0.095)
        Previous Female SV                                    0.007                                  0.274***
                                                             (0.038)                                  (0.083)

        Mean Female Respond.              -0.411                                    -0.253

        Observations                      430                 418                    427               416
        Factory FE                        YES                 YES                    YES              YES
        Demogr.Controls                   NO                  YES                    NO               YES
       Notes: Columns 1-2 shows results from regressing the average relative comparisons across eight
       supervisor skills of male and female supervisors (see Figure 3) by male and female workers at base-
       line, on a dummy that respondent is male. Columns 3-4 show equivalent regressions with prefer-
       ence for male/female supervisors, coded as 1 "Prefer female SV", 0 "Indifference" and -1 "Prefer
       Male Trainee". "Previous Female SV" is an indicator for respondent having worked under female
       supervisors before. *** denotes stat. significance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%



                  Table 2: Comparison of Male and Female Trainees
                                                    Mean Males          Female        SE       N
                     Age                                24.73            -1.010      (0.70)    145
                     Married                            0.611            0.142*      (0.08)    145
                     Years Educ.                        8.486            -0.429      (0.29)    143
                     Years in Garment Sec.              6.441            -0.240      (0.55)    145
                     Years in Factory                   3.655            -0.449      (0.45)    145
                     Nbr Factories                      2.069            -0.069      (0.33)    145
                     Literacy                           8.842            -0.993      (0.86)    143
                     Numeracy                           4.757          -1.370***     (0.39)    143
                     Non-verbal Reason.                 3.114            -0.100      (0.37)    143
                     Technical Knowledge                55.82            -1.590      (1.21)    143
                     Drawing                            0.375           -0.114*      (0.07)    126
                     Drawing - Soft                     -0.561           1.096*      (0.64)    127
                     Communic. - Soft                   0.136            -0.266      (0.88)    127
                     Leadersh. - Soft                   0.334            -0.668      (0.66)    124
                     Confidence, Baseline               -0.142         -0.816***     (0.29)    143
                     Belief Best, Baseline              0.653          -0.228***     (0.08)    145
                     Confidence, after Training         0.197            -0.251      (0.28)    144
                     Belief Best, after Training        0.792           -0.134*      (0.07)    145
                     Confidence, after Trial            0.238           -0.238       (0.24)    127
                   Notes: Table compares the 72 Male and 73 Female Trainees on measured
                   ability and other observed characteristics before start of the training. See
                   Section 5 for definition of variables. *** denotes statistical significance at
                   1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%.




                                                        41
           Table 3: Comparison of Trainees to other Workers and Supervisors
                        Op.Male     Op.Fem      Tr Male     Tr Fem    SV Male      SV Fem      Tr vs.Op        Tr vs.Op   Tr.vs. SV   Tr.vs.SV
 N                        115        313           72         73        223          10        (Male)          (Female)   (Male)      (Female)
 Age                      24.33       23.96      24.73       23.72      29.26       27.79      0.40            -0.24      -4.53***    -4.07**
 Married                  0.655       0.809      0.611       0.753      0.875       0.800      -0.04           -0.06      -0.26***    -0.05
 Years Educ.              6.094       5.697      8.486       8.056      9.238       9.399      2.39***         2.36***    -0.75***    -1.34**
 Years in Garm.Sec.       6.632       5.906      6.441       6.200      8.939       11.72      -0.19           0.29       -2.49***    -5.52***
 Years in Factory         2.380       2.924      3.655       3.205      3.484       6.250      1.27***         0.28       0.17        -3.04***
 Nbr. Factories           2.413       1.652      2.069       2.000       2.92        1.20      -0.34           0.35       -0.85***    0.80
 Age Promoted SV                                 24.73       23.72      24.85       21.09                                 -0.12       2.63*
Notes: Table shows comparisons of baseline survey observables of Trainees (Tr), randomly selected workers (Operators ­ Op) and line super-
visors (SV) from lines nominated by factories for trial, including tests for statistical differences between male and female trainees, operators
and supervisors of the same sex. *** denotes statistical significance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%




                                       Table 4: Individual Outcomes
                                     (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)        (7)

                                    Trial Period:                    Post-Trial Period:
                                     Any      Correct     Correct     Any       Correct     Correct      Left
                                     Line      Line       Gender      Line       Line       Gender

                 Panel 1: Without Controls

                 Female Trainee     -0.004    -0.004      0.061      -0.134*    -0.047      0.024      -0.007
                                    (0.04)    (0.07)      (0.07)      (0.07)    (0.06)      (0.07)    (0.06)

                 Mean Males         0.875      0.556       0.625     0.667       0.181       0.222       0.222

                 N                   145       145         145        145        145         145         145

                 Panel 2: With Trainee Controls

                 Female Trainee     -0.030    0.133       0.081      -0.095     0.041       0.024      0.037
                                    (0.05)    (0.10)      (0.10)     (0.11)     (0.09)      (0.10)    (0.09)

                 Mean Males         0.875      0.556       0.625     0.667       0.181       0.222       0.222

                 N                   141       141         141        141        141         141         141

                 Panel 3: Cond. on doing Trial, no contr.

                 Female Trainee               -0.016      0.062      -0.129     -0.054      0.028      -0.004
                                              (0.08)      (0.07)     (0.08)     (0.06)      (0.08)    (0.07)

                 Mean Males                    0.635       0.714     0.746       0.206       0.254       0.159

                 N                             127         127        127        127         127         127

                 Factory FE          Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
               Notes: Regressions of individual trainee outcomes (e.g. whether trainee was trialed on as-
               signed line, on any line, was being promoted to supervisor, left factory,...) on dummy for
               being a female trainee, without (Panel 1) and with worker-level controls from baseline sur-
               veys (age, confidence, technical knowledge, months in factory, months in industry, number
               of factories previously worked ­ Panel 2). Panel 3 restricts sample to trainees that did trial
               (without controls). *** denotes statistical significance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%




                                                             42
                                 Table 5: Main Outcomes during Trial
                                 (1)         (2)            (3)             (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)

                              Administrative Productivity Data                                    Survey Based Evaluations

 Period of Comparison:        Pre-Trial     Trial        Pre-Trial         Trial        Trial        Trial        Trial        Trial

 Specification:                 ITT         ITT        Lines With
                                           Ancova     Trainee d.Trial     Ancova       Ancova

                                                                                                  Panel 1: Co-SV Evaluations

 Female Trainee                 1.362     -4.402**         0.905         -6.404***   -6.919***       -0.002       -0.163      -0.278
                               (1.261)     (1.835)        (1.400)         (1.960)     (2.118)       (0.282)      (0.274)     (0.230)

 Baseline value, same line                 0.492**                       0.461***     0.468***
                                           (0.195)                        (0.169)      (0.165)

 Observations                    93          93             87              87           87           146          146         167
 Mean Males                     61.79       60.51          61.86           62.86        62.86        6.275        6.275       6.561

                                                                                                  Panel 2: Worker Evaluations

 Fem. Tr.ee x Fem. Resp.                                                                           -0.597**      -0.543*    -0.785***
                                                                                                    (0.284)      (0.288)     (0.248)

 Fem. Tr.ee x Male Resp.                                                                          -1.251***    -1.316***     -1.182***
                                                                                                   (0.473)      (0.488)       (0.409)

 Female Respondent                                                                                   -0.058       -0.403      -0.220
                                                                                                    (0.479)      (0.457)     (0.356)

 Observations                                                                                         266          266         324
 Mean Males                                                                                          6.960        6.960       7.315

 p. Men-Women                                                                                       0.276         0.175        0.412
 p SVs-OPs                                                                                          0.0273        0.115       0.0507

 Factory FE                      Yes         Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
 Controls                                                                                Yes                      Yes          Yes
Notes: Columns 1-5 show differences in average productivity of lines, and columns 6-8 in survey-based evaluations, between female and
male trainees, before and during the trial. For survey-based evaluations, Panel 1 shows differences in evaluations from co-supervisors
from lines of trainees, and Panel 2 from sub-ordinate workers working on the lines of the trainee supervisors. Productivity data col-
lapsed on the line-level. Controls selected by PDS Lasso from line and trainee controls, plus squares of all controls and indicator
variables for missing values of each control. Columns 1-2 and 6-7 show comparisons between lines randomized into receiving male and
female trainees, while columns 3-5 and 8 compare lines on which trainees actually worked during the trial. Column 1 shows compari-
son during pre-trial period between those lines randomly allocated female and male trainees, while column 3 between lines on which
male and female trainees actually work as trainee during trial. Columns 6-8 control for evaluation by respondent of the "average" su-
pervisor in the factory. Robust standard errors, clustered at line level for columns 6-8: *** denotes statistical significance at 1%, **
at 5%, and * at 10%




                                                            43
                           Table 6: Main Outcomes in Post-Trial Period
                                    (1)            (2)         (3)            (4)              (5)             (6)              (7)

                               Administrative Productivity Data                                            Survey Based Evaluations

 Period of Comparison:           Pre-Trial       Post-Tr.   Post-Tr.         Trial            Trial        Post-Trial          Trial

 Sample restriction:            Lines With                                Lines Of        Lines Of Tr.                      Lines Of
                               Train.Post-Tr.                           Train.Post-Tr.    P-Tr.,Same L.                   Train.Post-Tr.
 Specification:                                  Ancova      Ancova

                                                                                                           Panel 1: Co-SV Evaluations

 Female Trainee                    -0.619         -1.073      -1.021      -7.928***           -6.039          -0.037           0.035
                                  (1.614)        (1.647)     (1.752)       (2.477)           (4.903)         (0.348)          (0.382)

 Baseline value, same Line                       0.251*       0.169        0.484***           0.460
                                                 (0.134)     (0.148)        (0.151)          (0.442)

 Observations                       81             81          81            78                34               87              105
 Mean Males                        63.48          60.32       60.32         60.32             60.32           7.283            6.561

                                                                                                           Panel 2: Worker Evaluations

 Fem. Tr.ee x Fem. Resp.                                                                                      -0.381           -0.396
                                                                                                             (0.274)          (0.294)

 Fem. Tr.ee x Male Resp.                                                                                      0.117          -1.222**
                                                                                                             (0.505)          (0.614)

 Female Respondent                                                                                            0.193            -0.344
                                                                                                             (0.312)          (0.472)

 Observations                                                                                                  250              221
 Mean Males                                                                                                   7.951            7.315

 p. Men-Women                                                                                                 0.324            0.208
 p SVs-OPs                                                                                                    0.957            0.174

 Factory FE                         Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes               Yes             Yes              Yes
 Controls                                                      Yes           Yes               Yes             Yes              Yes
Notes: Columns 1-5 show differences in the post-trial period in average productivity, and columns 6-7 in survey-based evaluations, between
female and male trainees who worked at least for 30 days as supervisors after the end of the trial period. For survey-based evaluations,
Panel 1 shows differences in evaluations from co-supervisors from same lines, and Panel 2 from subordinate workers working on the lines
of the trainee supervisors. Column 1 shows comparison during pre-trial period of those lines on which male and female trainees will work
as supervisor in post-trial period. Columns 4 and 7 show comparisons during trial period between female and male trainees that will con-
tinue to work as supervisors after end of trial period, while column 5 shows the comparison between those that will continue to work as
supervisors on the same line as during the trial (for at least 60 days). Productivity data collapsed on the line-level. Controls selected by
PDS Lasso from line and trainee controls, plus squares of all controls and indicator variables for missing values of each control. Columns
6-7 control for evaluation by respondent of the "average" supervisor in the factory. Robust standard errors, clustered at line level for
columns 6-7: *** denotes statistical significance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%




                                                            44
                              Table 7: Management Simulation
                                               (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)        (6)

 Dep. Variable:                                                   Pay-off in Games (Standardized)

 Female Team Leader                          0.290***         0.259**     0.466***        0.305**       0.332***      0.412***
                                              (0.109)         (0.122)      (0.156)        (0.131)        (0.124)       (0.152)
 Tried as Line Supervisor                                                                  0.329
                                                                                          (0.212)
 Promoted to Line Supervisor                                                                             0.508**
                                                                                                         (0.206)
 Mixed Gender / Male Team                                                                                               -0.092
                                                                                                                       (0.725)
 Mixed Gender / Male T. x Fem. TL                                                                                      -0.433*
                                                                                                                       (0.240)

 Observations                                  676             612              612            612         608          612

 Factory FE                                    Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes
 Trainee Controls                                              Yes              Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes
 Team FE                                                                        Yes
 Game Type FE                                  Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes
Notes: Table compares pay-out of male and female trainees in a lab-in-the-field management simulation dur-
ing pilot of the project, in which the trainees had to explain tasks to a team of two randomly selected workers
from the factory, and supervise them doing the task, being paid-out according to the output the two workers
produced. Each trainee played four rounds of the game with slightly different incentive structures (see text
for more details). Unit of observation is on the trainee-game round level. Standard errors clustered at trainee
level. *** denotes significance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%




     Table 8: Trainee Exposure and Preference for Female SVs Update
                                       (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)           (6)

                                      ITT              ITT

                                      Trial           Trial             Trial          Trial         Post-Trial     Post-Trial

   Fem. Tr.ee x Fem. Operator         -0.007          0.000            0.076           0.078         0.294***       0.201*
                                     (0.105)         (0.103)          (0.093)         (0.092)         (0.104)       (0.115)

   Fem. Tr.ee x Male Operator       0.434***         0.429***         0.318***        0.305***         0.316         0.314*
                                     (0.113)          (0.130)          (0.114)         (0.111)        (0.193)       (0.175)

   Female Respondent                0.497***         0.512***         0.352***        0.344***        0.309**       0.399***
                                     (0.096)          (0.126)          (0.094)         (0.092)        (0.135)       (0.147)

   Mean Male Workers                 -0.424           -0.424           -0.420          -0.420          -0.431        -0.431

   Observations                       396              343              448             448             239           239
   Nbr Male Tr.s                      46                46              60              60              49            49
   Nbr Female Tr.s                    55               55               61              61              38            38
   Factory FE                         Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes
   Controls                                            Yes                              Yes                           Yes
   BL Preference, same line                            Yes
  Notes: Table compares preference for female supervisor between operators working on lines with male and
  female trainee supervisors, surveyed right after the end of the trial period (Columns 1-4) or 2-4 month
  after the end (columns 5-6). Preference for female supervisor coded as 1 "Prefer Female SV", 0 "Indif-
  ferent", and -1 "Prefer Male SV". Controls in columns 2, 4, and 6 selected by PDS Lasso from among
  respondent and trainee controls. *** denotes statistical significance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%




                                                          45
Appendix A: Further Results

                  Table A.1: Nominated vs Other Lines
                               Non-Nominated      Nominated Lines        SE       N
          Style Complexity          12.11                0.286         (0.376)   314
          Order Quantity            72322               -3267          (6394)    320
          Running Days              7.865               -0.203         (0.449)   477
          Hourly Target             148.1               -1.610         (3.890)   439
          Daily Target              1424                -18.10         (34.80)   459
          Daily Hours               9.517                0.060         (0.048)   477
          Nbr. Operators            34.56                0.319         (0.801)   464
          Nbr. Helpers              13.20               -0.036         (0.521)   458
          Buyer Size                0.181               0.018 *        (0.009)   399
          Style Size                0.293                0.001         (0.009)   528
         Notes: Table compares lines nominated by the factories for the trial against
         all other lines in the factories, based on baseline observables from the ad-
         ministrative production data. With factory fixed effects. *** denotes signif-
         icance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%




                                             46
Table A.2: Balance, Lines allocated Male vs Female Trainees
                                Female          SE     Mean Males      N

         Line Operators:
          Gender               -0.019      (0.043)       0.732        142
          Age                  -0.264      (0.399)       24.05        142
          Married               0.026      (0.044)       0.761        142
          Years Education      -0.375      (0.262)       5.967        142
          Months Factory        4.344      (3.183)       30.91        142
          Months Industry       2.932      (4.031)       71.27        142
          Months Design         1.397      (3.762)       57.95        142
          Months Line           0.081      (2.354)       16.37        142
          Nbr Factories        -0.120      (0.152)       1.880        142
          Prev Fem SV          -0.009      (0.055)       0.441        142
          Pref Fem SV           0.147 *    (0.075)       -0.417       142
          AcceptProm           -0.084      (0.053)       0.500        139
         F-Test:                               0.024

         Line Supervisors:
          Gender                0.025      (0.026)       0.022        136
          Age                   0.595      (0.761)       28.72        136
          Married               0.050      (0.050)       0.843        136
          Years Education       0.196      (0.279)       9.276        135
          Months Factory        5.655      (4.958)       40.48        136
          Months Industry       5.725      (6.167)       102.4        136
          Months Design         2.640      (4.761)       51.02        136
          Months Line           2.383      (3.314)       21.21        136
          Nbr Factories         0.340      (0.330)       2.701        136
          Prev Fem SV          -0.100      (0.066)       0.327        136
          Pref Fem SV           0.045      (0.087)       -0.722       136
          Spouse Works          0.097      (0.077)       0.328        128
         F-Test:                               0.105

         Production Data:
         SMV                    0.430      (0.696)        12.18        75
         Order Quantity        18896 *      (9779)        34070        76
         Running Days           1.187 *    (0.642)        5.468       111
         Hourly Target         -6.480      ( 8.098)       161.1        98
         Total Target          -10.10      ( 71.77)        1491       104
         Daily Hours            0.053      (0.081)        9.709       107
         Nbr Operators          0.501      (1.470)        34.37       109
         Nbr Helpers            0.544      (0.959)        14.87       109
         Efficiency             0.020      (0.017)        0.566        98
         Absenteeism            0.000      (0.005)        0.047        76
         Defects Rate           0.002      (0.006)        0.061       118
         Spot Rate             0.0185      (0.013)        0.017        75
         Reject Rate            0.000      (0.000)        0.003        90
         Buyer Size             0.030 *    (0.017)        0.182        99
         Style Size             0.002      (0.003)        0.018       111
         F-Test:                               0.085
        Notes: Table compares lines that were randomized into receiving
        male vs. female trainees on a) average baseline observables from
        three randomly selected operators per line (upper panel), b) av-
        erage baseline observables from two supervisors per line (middle
        panel), and c) on variables from the administrative production
        data (lower panel). Tests control for factory fixed effects. *** de-
        notes statistical significance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%. "F-
        Test" show p-values for joint significance of all variables in each
        of the three panels when regressing indicator variable of receiving
        female trainee on them, with factory fixed effects. For production
        data, this regression also controls for indicator variables for each
        these variables indicating missing values in them (with missing
        value set to 0 in the main variables).




                                          47
Table A.3: Main Effects on Other Administrative Outcome Variables, Trial and
Post-Trial
                                (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)           (6)            (7)        (8)
                             Pre-Trial     Trial     Pre-Trial     Trial       Trial       Pre-Trial      Post-Tr.    Post-Tr.
                                ITT        ITT                                            Lines With
                                          Ancova                  Ancova     Ancova      Train.Post-Tr.   Ancova      Ancova

 Panel 1: Defects Rates

 Female Trainee                0.636       0.181       0.065       0.611     1.274**         1.187          0.286      0.551
                              (0.646)     (0.570)     (0.930)     (0.566)    (0.622)        (0.852)        (0.427)    (0.478)
 Baseline Value, same line               0.839***                0.427***    0.424***                     0.591***   0.618***
                                          (0.182)                 (0.134)     (0.120)                      (0.118)   (0.106)

 Mean Males                    6.113       6.220       6.734       5.997      5.997          6.696         6.741       6.741

 Observations                   105         105         98          98          98            86             86         86
 Panel 2: Absenteeism Rate

 Female Trainee                -0.452      -0.410      -0.190      -0.653      -0.568        -0.759         -0.790     -0.865
                              (0.449)     (0.673)     (0.508)     (0.500)     (0.516)       (0.556)        (0.699)    (0.691)
 Baseline Value, same line                 0.302                   0.319       0.327                        0.387      0.311
                                          (0.327)                 (0.215)     (0.202)                      (0.240)    (0.284)

 Mean Males                    5.727       6.331       5.619       6.363      6.363          6.030         7.438       7.438

 Observations                    81         81          74          74          74            65             65         65

 Factory FE                     Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes            Yes           Yes        Yes
 Controls                                                                      Yes                                     Yes
Notes: Columns 1-5 replicate columns 1-5 of Table 5, while columns 6-8 replicate columns 1-3 of Table 6, for the two other out-
come variables based on administrative production data: Defect rates among produced output (Panel 1), and Absenteeism rates
of workers on lines (Panel 2). *** denotes statistical significance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%




                                                          48
   Table A.4: Co-Supervisor and Subordinate Beliefs & Outcomes during Trial

Given that at baseline, supervisors and workers expressed beliefs that women have lower su-
pervisory abilities, the strength of these beliefs measured on a given line could be associated
with the lower productivity or evaluations of female trainees on those lines. As shown in Table
A.4, controlling for average baseline beliefs about relative female/ male supervisory skills by
the supervisors or randomly sampled workers on the lines does not cause meaningful changes
in the estimates. However, the worker belief measures on the line level in particular are likely
very noisy, as we only surveyed three workers on lines which typically have 20-60 workers. Fur-
thermore, especially for workers, turn-over between the baseline survey and the end of the trial
period may have been high. Worker turnover in comparable factories is around 6 percent per
month (Menzel and Woodruff (2019)), and workers may also be assigned to other lines by the
factory management between the surveys.
                                                       (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)
                Dep. Variable:                       Productivity            Survey Evaluations
                                                                             by Workers
                Basel. beliefs by:                    Co-SV      Worker       Co-SV        Worker
                Specification:                       Ancova      Ancova

                Female Trainee                       -4.307**    -3.976**
                                                      (1.808)     (1.811)
                Fem. Tr.ee x Fem. Respondent                                 -0.587*     -0.598**
                                                                             (0.324)      (0.283)
                Fem. Tr.ee x Male Respondent                                 -1.192**     -1.201**
                                                                              (0.501)     (0.463)
                Female Respondent                                             -0.008       -0.027
                                                                             (0.498)      (0.479)
                Baseline Beliefs                     -6.321*     12.565*      -0.100       -0.663
                                                     (3.502)     (7.159)     (0.612)      (0.902)
                Baseline Beliefs x Fem. Trainee      10.793*      -6.646      -0.249       -0.911
                                                     (5.442)     (8.749)     (0.677)      (1.094)

                Observations                           93          93          266          266
                Factory FE                             Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
               Notes: Column 1 replicates column 2 from Table 5, using productivity data, but
               controlling for average baseline beliefs about female vs male supervisor skills across
               the eight skill dimensions shown in Figure 3, as expressed by the supervisors on
               the lines. The average belief is interacted with whether the supervisors are from
               lines assigned female trainees, allowing it to affect male and female trainees differ-
               entially. Column 2 repeats the regression but controlling in the same way for the
               baseline beliefs of the surveyed sub-ordinate workers from the lines. Columns 3 and
               4 repeat this analysis, but with evaluations of the trainees by sub-ordinate workers
               as outcome. Column 3 thus replicates column 6 of Panel 2, Table 5, controlling for
               co-supervisor baseline attitudes, while column 4 controls for worker baseline atti-
               tudes. *** denotes statistical significance at 1%, ** at 5%, and * at 10%




                                                        49
Appendix B: Training, and its Effects

        This appendix describes the training that the trainees attended before the start
of the trial in more detail, and shows how some skill measures changed from before
to after the training. The training program was designed by the German bilateral aid
agency (GIZ) with the aim to provide sewing machine operators the necessary skills to
be sewing line supervisors. GIZ's goal in developing the program was to increase the
number of women working as supervisors in the sector. The training was viewed by GIZ
as important to build skills of female operators, and to encourage factories to experiment
to learn whether women were equipped to be supervisors. The training was implemented
through a number of private training centres contracted by GIZ with many years of
experience in training staff at different levels from Bangladeshi garment factories. All
trainees from this project were trained by the same training centre. The training lasts six
weeks, with eight-hour sessions held at the classrooms at the training provider's offices
on six days per week. The curriculum was divided more or less equally into modules on
production planning and technical knowledge, quality control, and leadership and social
compliance, and included both class-room sessions as well as instructions directly with
sewing machines available in the training centres. The trainees received an allowance to
travel daily to the training centre by bus or other public transport, with the distance
between the different participating factories and the training centre varying between less
than 1 and around 20km.
        To understand to which extent the training affected the skills of the trainees,
Table B.1 below shows a simple pre-post comparison on a number of supervisor skills of
the trainees, for which we already show baseline gender comparisons in Table 2]. Given
that we neither have a randomly selected, nor any other type of control group to which
we could compare time trends for the skills, and given the relative short time-period
of the training of six weeks, we show simple pre-post comparisons in these skills. We
see the strongest pre-post differences for confidence in own ability: after the training
participants rate their own skills higher (column 1), and are more likely to state that they
consider themselves the best candidate from the workers from their line for promotion


                                            50
to supervisors (column 2). In both cases the pre-post difference is considerably larger
for female trainees, which was already reflected by the smaller post-training differences
in confidence shown in Table 2, but the difference to the effect for male trainees is only
statistically significant for the first of the two confidence measures. We also see some
effects on our measure of communication skills, the number of drawings that trainees can
explain within a limited time period to other trainees such that they can successfully draw
them (column 3). The effect is again larger for women, eliminating the small baseline
difference that could be observed for this measure, though the difference to the effect
on male trainees is again not statistically significant. On the other four skill measures,
notably the technical knowledge test with 86 questions, we do not find any effects. A
tentative conclusion is that the training may have provided a lot of information to the
trainees that allowed them to update their beliefs about their supervisor skills relative
to existing supervisors, but otherwise did not provide additional skills to the trainees.
Even the positive effect on the drawing exercise may be due to the trainees being more
familiar and comfortable with the test procedure when going through it a second time
after training.
        We therefore do not believe that the presence of the training distorts in a first
order way the lessons we can draw from the trial for the effects that factories can expect
when they promote more women to supervisor positions (without sending them through
a comparable training program first). The effects that we see on confidence in particular
may imply a "head-start" for our trainees compared to other newly promoted supervisors,
which may need a few more days or weeks to reach the same productivity as the trainees
achieve in the first days after promotion to supervisors. Meanwhile, the mild evidence
for the effect of the training being larger for female trainees implies that our male-female
comparisons may be somewhat biased in favour of women. In particular, this would mean
that the initial negative effects on productivity and evaluations we estimate for female
trainees may be lower bounds for the effect we would find had there been no training, and
that the catch-up we observe between the trial and post-trial period may take somewhat
longer if there were no training.



                                            51
                   Table B.1: Pre-Post Training Differences in Trainee skills
                                       (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)

                                   Confidence      Belief     Drawings     Technical     Drawing     Communic.      Leadership
                                                   best        correct     knowledge      -soft        -soft          -soft

 Post-Training                        0.333*       0.139*       0.122*        -0.040        0.382        0.973         0.310
                                     (0.201)      (0.078)      (0.071)       (0.670)      (0.643)      (0.869)       (0.973)
 Post-Training x Fem. Trainee         0.571*       0.094         0.128         0.684       -0.683       -1.469        -1.039
                                     (0.332)      (0.100)      (0.095)       (0.995)      (0.882)      (1.235)       (1.213)
 Female Trainee                     -0.814***    -0.228***     -0.118*        -1.596       1.034        -0.213        0.144
                                     (0.288)      (0.081)      (0.071)       (1.215)      (0.641)      (0.887)       (0.977)

 Baseline Mean Male Trainees         -0.145       0.653***     0.381***    55.829***      -0.499        0.083         0.137

 Post-Training,                     0.627***      0.186***     0.187***       0.308        0.030        0.215         -0.210
  non-interacted                     (0.169)       (0.050)      (0.048)      (0.498)      (0.440)      (0.620)       (0.607)

 Observations                          284          290           246          287          252          252           140
Notes: Table regresses measures of supervisor skills of the female and male trainees, measured during the first and the last
day at the training center, on an indicator for post-training measurement, interacted with an indicator variable for female
trainee. The skill measures are explained in more detail in section 4. Sample restricted to those trainees for which both pre-
and post measures of skills are available. Robust standard errors in brackets: *** denotes statistical significance at 1%, ** at
5%, and * at 10%




                                                             52
Appendix C: Estimation of Baseline Female Promo-

tion Share in the broader sector, with data from Men-

zel and Woodruff (2019)

        Using administrative wage data from 36 garment factories from Menzel and
Woodruff (2019) that include information on supervisors, we estimate that seven per-
cent of the stock of supervisors in these factories are female. However, this number may
differ from the share of women among promotions to supervisors, if, for example, women
quit from supervisor positions more or less quickly on average. However, data on pro-
motion rates in the sector are difficult to come by, because promotions can occur either
"internally" at a factory, or "externally", when a worker moves from one to another fac-
tory, leaving the previous factory from a worker position and starting work as supervisor
at the new factory. Factory records do not record whether a worker that has joined a
factory as supervisor has already worked on that position in the previous factory. Menzel
and Woodruff (2019) estimate substantial shares of external promotions between pay-
grades among non-supervisor workers in the sector, with higher shares among men. But
we lack rich enough data to repeat this exercise for promotions to supervisors.
        What we do observe in the data from Menzel and Woodruff (2019) are 101
internal promotions to supervisors in 29 of the 36 factories over the course of one year,
with 22 of them being of women. This share, however, is partly driven by one factory
with 18 promotions, six of which are women. This suggests that highly factory-specific
promotion rounds (e.g. due to opening of new floors or lines) could distort this ratio.
Thus we reweight the factory-specific promotion gender ratios by the total number of
workers in the factories, and obtain a new average gender promotion ratio of 16.4 percent
across the 29 factories. Given that external promotions in the sector below supervisor
ranks are more common for men, and given the prevailing rarity of female supervisors in
the sector, we assume that among external promotions to supervisors, the share of men
is higher than for internal promotions. Furthermore, some of the factories in our sample
participated in projects which encouraged the promotion of female supervisors. Excluding

                                           53
these factories reduces our estimate to 13 percent. For these reasons, we interpret the 16
percent share of women among internal promotions to supervisors as an upper bound for
the overall (external + internal) promotion share of women in the sector.



Appendix D: Description Pilot Phase

D.1     Design

        We started a first pilot run of the project in November 2011, in cooperation
with the German Development Corporation GIZ, who had designed a supervisor training
program with the goal of increasing the number of female supervisors in factories. GIZ
initially expressed a preference that we train only female operators as part of the project.
Recognizing the value of having some comparison sample of male operators, we agreed
with GIZ to train four female and one male worker from each of the participating factories.
We began contacting potential factories, with a letter of introduction from a large UK-
based buyer, in August 2011. Our aim was to work with a sample of factories capable
of selling directly to large international buyers. We obtained an initial sample frame of
factories from transaction-level import- and export-data obtained from the Bangladeshi
National Bureau of Revenue. We calculated the average unit value of shipments (USD per
kilogram) on the exporter- and exporter-product-year-level. Using these two measures,
we selected a sample of 230 firms with annual shipment volumes large enough to sell
directly to large foreign buyers, with unit values in the range of mid-level buyers. We
started to contact these factories per telephone, offering participation in this evaluation
scheme of the training course.
        By November 2011, we had received an initial commitment to participate in the
project from 85 factories from the list. Table D.1 shows the characteristics of these 85
factories, and of the 145 other factories on the list. We find that that those factories
agreeing to participate sell to more buyers, and sell to higher-end buyers (in terms of
average unit price paid by buyer). We also find some evidence that the participating
factories had higher rates of recent growth and export products to a larger number of


                                            54
countries. Participating factories were randomly placed into one of six treatment rounds
of 12 factories each. In practice several factories decided in the end not to participate.
Furthermore, the management simulation, which were conducted during the follow-up
surveys, were not implemented with factories from the first two training rounds, reducing
the number of factories with whose trained trainees the simulations were implemented to
48.
        Table D.2 shows additional characteristics of the participating factories, collected
during management surveys at baseline. The factories are large, averaging 19 production
lines and 2,100 workers. Somewhat more than half of the employees in a typical factory
work in the sewing section. The distributions are slightly right-skewed, with the median
factory having 15 production lines, with 2,000 workers in total, of which 59% are in the
sewing section. A typical factory had been operating for 12 years.


                                      Table D.1: Take-up of Pilot
                                             Signed-Up       Not Signed-Up    p-value    p-value
                                              N = 85           N = 145                  (Probit)

               Size (Export, 1000 Kgs)          830.4            683.8         0.11        0.44
               Avg. Unit Value (per Kg)         925.9            883.8         0.15        0.01
               Growth (Sales 2009-10)           1.89             1.46          0.08          ­
               Number of Destinations           10.1              8.3          0.09        0.18
               Number of Buyers                 9.75              8.3          0.06        0.02
               Number of Products               3.01             2.91          0.32        0.31
               Main Product in Woven            0.59             0.54          0.26          ­
               Year of first export             2006            2006.2          0.2          ­
              Notes: Table compares factory-level observables between the pool of factories con-
              tacted for offering participation in the pilot round and declining participation,
              against those agreeing to participate. `Growth (Sales 2009-10)' on a sample of 80
              and 135 exporters respectively. *** denotes statistical significance at 1%, ** at 5%,
              and * at 10%




D.2     Selection of Trainees

        Our aim was to select from each factory four female and one male operator for
training, and a valid control group of workers not attending the training. In all rounds
the selection process started with factories selecting a pool of potential trainees to which
we administered a literacy and simple production knowledge test. Potential trainees were

                                                        55
                    Table D.2: Description, Factories Pilot Phase
                                                                   Mean      Median

                        Number of sewing lines                       19         14
                        Number of employees, total                  2116       2000
                        Number of employees, Sewing                 1171       1000
                        Operators per sewing line                    48         47
                        Number of sewing supervisors (total)         48         36
                        Percentage female supervisors             10.80%      5.60%
                        Percent factories conducting training     68.10%        NA
                        Percent training outside factory           8.90%        NA
                        Year factory established                    1999       2001
                       Notes: Table shows descriptive statistics of the 85 factories
                       that agreed to participate in the pilot, collected using surveys
                       of factory managers at baseline.



excluded if they did not pass the literacy test or said their families would not allow them
to participate in the training.
        For training rounds 1 to 3, we asked the factories to identify 16 female and 4
male operators who were good candidates for the training. We ranked the nominees
according to their diagnostic score and then selected the two females with top marks on
the diagnostic test as trainees. We then assigned a random number to the female trainees
ranked 3rd to 6th on the diagnostic test, and assigned the two with the highest random
numbers to training, and the two with the lowest random numbers to control. Among
the males, we followed a similar procedure by taking the males with the top two marks
and randomly assigning one to treatment and one to control. In round 4, we modified
the selection process to allow the factory to choose two females they wanted to send to
training, conditional only on them demonstrating a basic level of literacy. In round 5, we
modified the process further by reducing the number of operators the factory nominated
to eight females and four males. Over the first six training rounds, 271 operators (213
females and 58 males) received training.


D.3     Description of Trainees

        Around half a year after the return from the training, 90 percent of the male and
77 percent of the female trainees from the factories in which the management simulation
was implemented self-reported that they have been tried out as supervisors, and 77



                                                     56
percent of the male and 54 percent of the female trainees report to be still working
as supervisors in the factory. Meanwhile 20 percent of the male and 23 percent of the
female trainees have left the factories. These numbers are very close to those we see in
the main trial, as reported in Table 4, except for the number of male trainees still working
as supervisors being around 10 percentage points lower.
        Table D.3 shows basic demographic characteristics, separately for male and fe-
male trainees from the pilot, and comparisons for each to the trainees of the same sex
from the main trial. Overall, the two sets of trainees look very similar; none of the ten
comparison for the five characteristics, for each male and female trainees, shows statis-
tically significant differences. Furthermore, the marriage gap that we observed between
male and female trainees from the main sample is visible also among the trainees from
the pilot sample. There seems to be a mild pattern that male trainees in the main trial
are somewhat older and more experienced in the sector, and with more tenure in their
current factory, and somewhat fewer years of schooling on the other hand. But as already
mentioned, none of these differences is statistically significant.


           Table D.3: Pilot Phase, Trainee Demographic Characteristics
                                               Trainees        Diff.     Diff.      Diff.
                                                Pilot          Pilot    Main-Tr.   Main Tr.
                                                Male          Female     Male      Female
                                               N = 42         N = 127   N = 72     N = 73

                   Age                           24.05         -0.43      0.68        0.10
                   Married                       0.60         0.16**      0.01       -0.01
                   Years in School               8.90          -0.44     -0.42       -0.40
                   Experience in Garments        6.03          0.06       0.41        0.11
                   Tenure in Factory             3.02          0.45       0.64       -0.26
                  Notes: Table compares male and female trainees from the pilot phase, who
                  participated in the management simulation, against the male and female
                  trainees from the main trial. The first column shows averages for male
                  trainees from the pilot phase, while the second column the difference to fe-
                  male trainees from the pilot phase. The third column shows the difference
                  of male trainees from main trial to those from the pilot, while the fourth
                  column the same for female trainees from the main trial and the pilot. **
                  denotes statistical significance of differences at 5%




                                                         57
Appendix E: Knowledge Diagnostic Test




                       58
59
