                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 LOCAL ACCESS TO MENTAL HEALTHCARE AND CRIME

                                           Monica Deza
                                     Johanna Catherine Maclean
                                         Keisha T. Solomon

                                        Working Paper 27619
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27619


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2020




All authors contributed equally to this study. Authors are listed in alphabetical order. We thank seminar
participants at the Southern Health Economics Study Group, the American Society of Health Economists
Annual meeting, Indiana University, New York University, Tufts University, RAND Corporation,
University of Connecticut, University of Kentucky, University of New Hampshire, and University
of Wisconsin, and Dhaval Dave, Jose Fernandez, Michael French and Douglas Webber for helpful
comments. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Monica Deza, Johanna Catherine Maclean, and Keisha T. Solomon. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Local Access to Mental Healthcare and Crime
Monica Deza, Johanna Catherine Maclean, and Keisha T. Solomon
NBER Working Paper No. 27619
July 2020
JEL No. I1,I11,K42

                                         ABSTRACT

We estimate the effect of local access to office-based mental healthcare on crime. We leverage
variation in the number of mental healthcare offices within a county over the period 1999 to 2014
in a two-way fixed-effects model. We find that increases in the number of mental healthcare
offices modestly reduce crime. In particular, ten additional offices in a county reduces crime by
1.7 crimes per 10,000 residents. These findings suggest an unintended benefit from expanding the
office-based mental healthcare workforce: reductions in crime.


Monica Deza                                         Keisha T. Solomon
Department of Economics                             Department of Health Policy & Management
Hunter College,                                     Johns Hopkins University
City University of New York                         Bloomberg School of Public Health
New York City, NY 10065                             624 North Broadway, Room 306
monicadeza@gmail.com                                Baltimore, MD 21205
                                                    keishasolomon@jhu.edu
Johanna Catherine Maclean
Department of Economics
Temple University
Ritter Annex 869
Philadelphia, PA 19122
and NBER
catherine.maclean@temple.edu
1       Introduction
As part of the 1960s and 1970s de-institutionalization movement in the United States, state
psychiatric hospitals closed and, among remaining hospitals, censuses declined (Lamb &
Bachrach, 2001). The reduction in the number of Americans receiving treatment in psy-
chiatric hospitals is staggering: 339 per 100,000 in 1955 and 22 per 100,000 by 2000 or a
94% decline (Lamb & Weinberger, 2005). Healthcare scholars suggest that public support for
more humane treatment of the mentally ill, advancements in pharmacology (in particular, the
anti-psychotic medication chlorpromazine [brand name Thorazine]; earlier treatment often
relied on lobotomy and electroshock therapy), the high cost to government associated with
financing long-term psychiatric hospitalization for large numbers of Americans, and changes
in social welfare programs (e.g., Medicaid) were important drivers of de-institutionalization
(Lamb & Bachrach, 2001; Yohanna, 2013). Hospital closures and reduced censuses lead to
many mentally ill patients being displaced into the community.
    As a result of de-institutionalization, concerns that individuals with mental illness were at
elevated risk for crime, and therefore presented a danger to society, grew (Frank & McGuire,
2010). While advocates contended that those with mental illness did not pose an elevated
crime threat, the limited data available at the time did not allow empirical testing of this
hypothesis and public concerns remained. These concerns diminished as crime rates declined
in the 1990s (Levitt, 2004). Recent violent attacks, particularly mass shootings, have been
linked, at least anecdotally, to mental illness.1 These events have revitalized public discussion
of mental healthcare as a potential crime reduction tool.
    While many modalities of mental healthcare improve patient outcomes (American Psy-
chiatric Association, 2006; National Alliance on Mental Ilness, 2020; National Institute of
Mental Health, 2020), there may be broader social benefits, including crime control. If men-
tal healthcare has additional benefits, enhanced investment in such treatment by government
may be warranted. Indeed, clinical studies document a robust correlation between mental
illness and crime (Swanson et al., 2001; Frank & McGuire, 2010). For example, 50% of
those incarcerated in jails and prisons have a mental illness (James & Glaze, 2006). Further,
the number of mentally ill individuals housed in large U.S. incarceration facilities, such as
the Los Angeles County Jail, Cook County Jail, and Rikers Island, exceeds the number of
    1
   Please see the following news stories: https://www.vox.com/2019/8/5/20754770/trump-el-paso
-dayton-speech-white-house-mental-illness-video-games-guns;         https://www.syracuse.com/
crime/2020/05/judge-orders-mental-evaluation-for-suspect-in-syracuse-train-station
-shooting.html; and https://www.psychiatrictimes.com/article/mass-shooter-and-his-mental
-functioning. All websites last accessed on July 18th, 2020.


                                               1
individuals in any psychiatric institution in the country (Frank & McGuire, 2010). These
correlations offer prima facie evidence that mental illness contributes to crime.
    Criminal justice mental healthcare policies in the U.S. are mainly restricted to involuntary
treatment. For instance, the criminal justice system has made use of involuntary commitment
laws, which afford discretion to judges to mandate that convicted offenders receive mental
healthcare. Such laws appear to be effective (Kisely, Campbell, & O'Reilly, 2017; Swartz,
Bhattacharya, Robertson, & Swanson, 2017). Given that these laws focus on individuals
required by the criminal justice system to enter treatment, rather than patients voluntarily
seeking treatment, mental healthcare may be underutilized as a crime reduction policy.
    While mental healthcare is valuable, there are shortages of providers. As recently as 2018,
only 26% of the U.S. population's mental healthcare needs were met (Kaiser Family Founda-
tion, 2018) and, in a given year, more than 50% of individuals meeting diagnostic criteria for
mental illness do not receive any related treatment (Center for Behavioral Health Statistics
and Quality, 2019). A commonly cited barrier to accessing mental healthcare treatment is
inability to locate a provider (Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality, 2019).
Given this backdrop, expanding access to mental healthcare, by increasing the number of
providers offering these services, may allow patients to receive care, manage their illness and
associated symptoms, and, in turn, reduce crime.
    This study is the first to explore the effect of access to office-based mental healthcare on
crime. We hypothesize the following chain of events. Offices open and more patients take
treatment, leading to improved mental health. Better mental health reduces crime through
the likelihood of committing crime (e.g., better assessment of costs and benefits of one's
actions, improved labor market opportunities, less need for substances) and the likelihood
of victimization (e.g., less likely to be viewed as an easy target or to be homeless).
    We estimate two-way fixed-effects models using county-level crime rates provided by
the Federal Bureau of Investigation's (FBI) Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) program to
construct measures of crime and the U.S. Census Bureau's County Business Patterns (CBP)
1999-2014. We identify spillover effects of mental healthcare to crime by exploiting variation
in the county-level number of office-based mental healthcare providers. Our findings are in
line with our hypothesized chain of effects. We find that ten additional offices in a county
reduces crime by 1.7 crimes per 10,000 residents or 0.4%. We show that additional offices
increase treatment-seeking and improve mental health.
    This paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews the related literature and provides a
conceptual framework. Section 3 outlines our data and methods. Results are reported in


                                               2
section 4. Sensitivity analyses are reported in Section 5. Section 6 concludes.


2     Background, literature, and conceptual framework
2.1    Background
The epidemiology of many mental illnesses provides plausible mechanisms through which
these conditions can affect crime. While discussing the specifics of each mental illness is be-
yond the scope of our study, we review several illnesses commonly treated in the office-based
settings that we examine in our analysis (Stamm, Lin, & Christidis, 2018; National Alliance
on Mental Ilness, 2020; National Institute of Mental Health, 2020) and their symptoms to
offer intuition on the mental illness-crime link.
    Mental illness is common: nearly 20% of the U.S. population meets diagnostic criteria
for a mental illness (Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality, 2019). Symptoms
of psychotic disorders ­ a class of serious mental illnesses (e.g., schizophrenia) in which the
affected individual has sensory experiences of things that do not exist and/or beliefs with
no basis in reality ­ are hallucinations, delusions, and disordered thinking. Bipolar disorder
causes oscillations in mood from emotional highs (mania) to lows (depression). Symptoms
experienced during a mania phase include aggression and agitation, an exaggerated sense
of self-confidence, poor decision-making, racing thoughts, and risk-taking behaviors. Anti-
social personality disorder is characterized by aggressive and violent behavior, disregard for
the safety and well-being of others, inability to feel empathy, and lack of remorse. Individ-
uals with narcissistic personality disorder are arrogant, are unable to recognize the needs
and feelings of others, believe that they are special and more important than others, and
frequently take advantage of others. Those with paranoid personality disorder have relent-
less suspicion of people without reason and continuously feel that other people are `out to
get them.' These feelings lead to anger and acts of retaliation, hostility, hypersensitivity
to criticism, and suspicion. These condition symptoms could contribute to crime through
distorted assessments of situations and/or of costs and benefits of actions.
    Even mental illnesses that are, anecdotally, less likely to be linked with crime can have
criminogenic symptoms. For example, anxiety and depression are associated with aggression,
delusions, disruptive behaviors, feeling helpless and worthless, incessant concern for personal
safety and well-being without any evidence to support such unease, and irritation, all of which
could potentially increase the propensity to commit crime.
    Many mental illness impose side effects such as decision-making difficulties, headaches,

                                              3
fatigue, insomnia, memory loss, nausea and gastrointestinal difficulties, physical pain, and a
sense of hopelessness and worthlessness that could reduce employment opportunities (Chatterji,
Alegria, Lu, & Takeuchi, 2007; Chatterji, Alegria, & Takeuchi, 2011; Frijters, Johnston, &
Shields, 2014; Banerjee, Chatterji, & Lahiri, 2017). The incentive to commit financially-
motivated crimes may increase when legal employment options decline.
    Mental illness may also raise the likelihood of developing a substance use disorder (SUD)
as some individuals use alcohol and drugs to self-medicate their illness (Drake & Wallach,
1989; Levy & Deykin, 1989; Kilpatrick et al., 2003; Elliott, Huizinga, & Menard, 2012).
An SUD can lead to crime through distorted decision-making, interacting with criminals
when purchasing illicit drugs, and/or a need to secure funds to procure substances (Wen,
Hockenberry, & Cummings, 2017; Bondurant, Lindo, & Swensen, 2018).
    In addition to increasing the propensity to commit crime, many mental illnesses could
also affect the probability of being victimized as the mentally ill may be viewed as `easy'
targets. Individuals with mental illness experience higher rates of victimization than the
general population (Teplin, McClelland, Abram, & Weiner, 2005; Maniglio, 2009), plausibly
because their symptoms leave them vulnerable. For instance, aggressive and disordered
behavior may draw the attention of offenders (e.g., offenders may view aggressive behavior
as a threat which requires retaliation). Those with mental illness are substantially more
likely to be homeless than the general population (Fazel, Khosla, Doll, & Geddes, 2008),
which plausibly increases opportunities for victimization.
    Overall, the epidemiology of mental illness suggests a correlation between these health
conditions and a range of crime-related outcomes. The extent to which these correlations
reflect a causal relationship is unclear. Mental illness and crime are likely driven by factors
such as abuse, genetic pre-disposition, neglect, poverty, and trauma. These factors are rarely
measured in datasets, preventing adequate adjustment for differences in regression models.
    Office-based care, the modality we consider, includes a range of services that may re-
duce crime through improved mental health. We note that many mental illnesses cannot
be cured and are better contextualized as a chronic condition that is managed, similar to
diabetes. For example, most major mental illnesses can be treated with medications (e.g.,
Aripiprazole [brand name Abilify] for schizophreniaia and sertraline [brand name Zoloft] for
depression) and/or through counseling services (e.g., cognitive behavioral therapy for anxiety
and depression, talk therapy or psychotherapy for narcissistic personality disorder; indeed
the predominant treatment for many personality disorders is talk therapy). We acknowledge
that for many patients office-based care may not be appropriate and optimal care may vary


                                             4
across the lifecycle of the illness (e.g., periods in which more intensive care, for example a
hospitalization, is required). Instead, we simply state that, at various points in the lifecycle
of the condition, many mental illnesses can be treated in the office-based settings that we
consider in our study.


2.2    Literature
Four quasi-experimental studies have examined the causal effect of mental healthcare on
crime. Cuellar and Markowitz (2007) document that increased Medicaid spending by states
on psychotropic prescriptions for stimulants and depression led to a reduction in violent
crimes during the 1990s and 2000s. Marcotte and Markowitz (2011) show that the increased
prescribing of psychotropics that occurred over the 1990s and 2000s decreased crime rates.
Harcourt (2011) documents that institutionalization rates, in a prison or psychiatric hos-
pital, lowered violent crime over the period 1934 to 2001. Finally, Landersø and Fallesen
(2016) show very short-run declines in crime following a psychiatric hospitalization using
administrative data from Denmark. The authors hypothesize that they capture mechanical
incapacitation effects rather than a true reduction in crime.
    While not focusing on mental healthcare per se, two recent studies show that increases
in access to SUD treatment reduce crime (Wen et al., 2017; Bondurant et al., 2018). Given
substantial co-morbidity across mental illness and SUD (Center for Behavioral Health Statis-
tics and Quality, 2019), these findings are plausibly informative to our study as they suggest
that expanding access to treatment reduces crime.
    Our study contributes to this small literature by examining whether changes in access to
office-based mental healthcare providers lead to changes in crime rates. Further, we consider
a recent time period in the U.S. and use the universe of office-based mental healthcare
providers, a modality of care that is becoming increasingly common.


2.3    Conceptual framework
We build a framework in which we can think through the relationship between access to
office-based mental healthcare and crime. To do so, we leverage intuition offered by previous
economic and sociological models of crime (Becker, 1968; Goldstein, 1985; Wen et al., 2017).
    A crime that occurs in county j and in time t (Crimei,k,j,t ) that is committed by offender
i against victim k is a function of mental illness symptoms experienced by the offender
i (M ental illnessi,j,t ) and the victim k in county j in time t (M ental illnessk,j,t ). Crime


                                               5
rates are also influenced by other factors that affect offending and victimization propensities,
X1i,j,t and X1k,j,t . Finally, there are observed and unobserved factors that enhance or limit
opportunities for crime that impact offenders and victims such as police presence and citizen
actions in county j and time t : Pj,t . We can combine these factors in a crime rate production
function outlined in Equation 1:

          Crimei,k,j,t = f (M ental illnessi,j,t , M ental illnessk,j,t , X1i,j,t , X1k,j,t , Pj,t )   (1)

    We estimate the reduced form relationship between access to mental healthcare proxied
by the offices of physicians and non-physicians specializing in mental healthcare in a county
(`MH') and crime. We rewrite mental illness symptoms as a function of office-based mental
healthcare providers in county j and in time t-1 (M Hj,t-1 ), which affect mental illness
symptoms of the potential offender i and victim k. Finally, X2i,j,t and X2k,j,t are factors that
affect mental illness and associated symptoms of the potential offender and victim.
    We can write the reduced form potential offending and victimization equations as follows:

                              M ental illnessi,j,t = g (M Hj,t-1 , X2i,j,t )                           (2)


                              M ental illnessk,j,t = h(M Hj,t-1 , X2k,j,t )                            (3)

    After substituting Equations 2 and 3 into Equation 1, we have the reduced form equation
for crime rates in county j and time t :

                   Crimei,k,j,t = k (M Hj,t-1 , X1i,j,t , X1k,j,t , X2i,j,t , X2k,j,t , Pj,t )         (4)

    We assume that X1i,j,t = X1k,j,t = Xj,t and that X2i,j,t = X2k,j,t = Xj,t . This simplifica-
tion leads to the following crime production function in county j and time t :

                                   Crimej,t = l(M Hj,t-1 , Xj,t , Pj,t )                               (5)

    Based on the established effectiveness of mental healthcare in treating mental illness,
we hypothesize that, ceteris paribus, more office-based mental healthcare providers in a
county will increase a prospective patient's access to treatment which will increase treatment
uptake. Correspondingly, mental illness and associated symptoms will improve through the
increased treatment receipt and, in turn, crime outcomes will fall. Thus, we expect to
observe: Crimej,t /M Hj,t-1 < 0.


                                                       6
    While there are other determinants of access to mental health treatment besides the num-
ber of offices in the local area (e.g., ability to pay, cognitive and social difficulties among those
with mental illness, perceived stigma associated with mental illness and related treatment,
transportation issues), the ability to find a provider within the local market is plausibly an
important predictor of access.
    We also acknowledge that there are other channels through which mental illness may
influence crime. For example, individual-level variables that enter X1i,j,t and X1k,j,t such as
the education or general health. As a particular example, if mental illness affects educa-
tion quantity or quality (Solomon, 2018), this change can reduce employment opportunities
through reduced marginal product and earned wage, leading to an increased propensity to
commit crime. As another example, which may operate in the opposite direction, victims
of crime may be less vulnerable to crime or (in the case of domestic violence) may be more
likely to report the incident or leave the relationship as treatment options expand.2
    Our empirical models will capture the overall effect of mental healthcare providers on
county crime rates. We will not be able to isolate the relative importance of mental healthcare
providers for offending and victimization. While these relationships are clearly important,
we view our study as the first step in understanding the practical importance of local access
to office-based mental healthcare providers as a tool to reduce crime rates.


3       Data and methods
3.1     Uniform Crime Reports
We use the UCR over the period 1999 to 2014. The UCR is compiled by the FBI to track
criminal offenses known to police in the U.S. While we use the term `crime' for brevity,
we note that we capture crimes that are known to police officers which are a subset of all
crimes. We use the County-Level Detailed Arrest and Offense Data (UCRC) prepared by
the Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research.
   The UCRC imputes missing data and includes a `coverage' indicator to diagnose the
amount of imputed data. We include observations with no more than 50% imputation
    2
     We note the possibility that some offenders may be required to receive mental healthcare, including the
modalities we study, as part of a sentence. Further, there is recent evidence that crime within the local area
can impact mental health (Dustmann & Fasani, 2016). This pathway may suggest reverse causality: changes
in crime influence mental health. We explore this possibility through the use of a distributed lag model and
an event study later in the manuscript.



                                                      7
(Freedman & Owens, 2011), thereby excluding 2,962 observations (6% of the sample). We
convert crime counts to the rate per 10,000 residents using population covered by the UCRC.
   We examine changes in Part one crimes recorded in the UCRC: murder, manslaughter,
rape, aggravated assault, robbery, burglary, larceny, and motor vehicle theft. We combine
murder and manslaughter into one group and refer to the combined group as `murder.' We
construct aggregate measures of total, total violent (murder, rape, aggravated assault, and
robbery), and total nonviolent (burglary, larceny, and motor vehicle theft) crimes. We focus
on Part one crimes as they are most likely to be reported.3


3.2     Office-based mental healthcare providers
We use the number of establishments of physicians and non-physicians specializing in mental
healthcare in each county to proxy local access to office-based care drawn from the U.S.
Census Bureau's County Business Patterns (CBP) data. An establishment is: `A single
physical location where business is conducted or where services or industrial operations are
performed.' In our study, an establishment is an office in which one or more physicians or
non-physicians deliver mental healthcare. We refer to establishments as `offices.'
    CBP data include the near universe of establishments in the U.S. each year during the
week of March 12th. These data have been utilized to study the effect of SUD treatment
access on crime in recent economic studies (Swensen, 2015; Bondurant et al., 2018). We select
establishments in the CBP with the following North American Industry Classification System
codes to form a count of physician and non-physician offices in each county: 621112 (offices
of physicians, mental health specialists) and 621330 (offices of mental health practitioners
except physicians). Prior to 1998, the CBP did not include sufficiently fine information
to allow identification of mental healthcare providers. We lag offices one year (Swensen,
2015; Bondurant et al., 2018). This lag structure allows time for an office to open, patients
to access care, and mental illness and associated symptoms (including crime) to improve.
Hence, we begin the study period in 1999. We have 45,577 county-year pairs.
    A patient seeking mental healthcare has a wide range of options from which to choose.
We focus on one modality: office-based care. Other options include community mental health
centers, hospitals, specialized outpatient facilities, and residential facilities. Office-based care
for mental healthcare captures evaluation of the patient and associated health conditions,
   3
     We are not stating that this focus fully eliminates under-reporting as we recognize that surveys of victims,
for example the National Victimization Survey, reports that victims ­ in a survey setting ­ appear to under
report crimes compared to other sources.



                                                       8
which includes treatment with behavioral interventions, counseling services, and prescription
medications. We note that many mental illnesses ­ including anxiety and depression, and
arguably more criminogenic illnesses such as anti-social personality, bipolar, paranoid, and
psychotic disorders ­ can be treated in office-based settings (Stamm et al., 2018; National
Alliance on Mental Ilness, 2020; National Institute of Mental Health, 2020).
    There are several reasons why office-based care may be a particularly relevant, yet under-
studied, tool to mitigate crime. First, office-based providers play an increasingly important
role in delivering mental healthcare. While in 1986 office-based care accounted for 24% of
total mental healthcare expenditures, by 2014 this share had risen to 44%, an increase of
83% (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 2016). Second, many
patients prefer to receive mental healthcare in general settings that we study rather than in
specialized treatment facilities or psychiatric hospitals, thus office-based care may be more
acceptable to patients which may improve treatment adherence. Third, office-based care has
a relatively low variable cost. For example, a group counseling session with a physician costs
$9.84 per patient while a day in a psychiatric hospital costs $999 (McCollister et al., 2017).
Finally, from an empirical perspective, by examining office-based providers we are less con-
cerned with confounding from incarceration effects, that is, when a patient is `incarcerated'
in residential or hospitalization treatment, crime is mechanically reduced.
    The average treatment effect that we estimate in our empirical models is local to the
type of patient who seeks treatment when an office-based mental healthcare provider opens
in their county but not otherwise, and is likely to benefit, in terms of improved mental illness
and reduced crime, from this access and the ensuing treatment use. We hypothesize that the
`compliers' are patients with relatively well-managed mental illness, to the extent that their
health can be effectively treated in an office-based setting at some points in the lifecyle of the
condition. We note that compliers may include individuals who take up new treatment when
an office opens and/or individuals already receiving treatment but for whom the new office
allows a better patient-provider match or simply better access (e.g., longer visits, shorter
waiting times and/or travel times). These are the patients from whom our estimates are
likely generated. The hypothesized complier foreshadows our modest effect sizes.


3.3    Empirical model
We estimate the following two-way fixed-effects regression model:

                  Crimei,s,t = 0 + 1 M Hi,s,t-1 + Hi,s,t 2 + i + s,t + µi,s,t                 (6)

                                                9
    Crimei,s,t is a crime rate for county i in state s in year t. M Hi,s,t-1 is the number of
office-based mental healthcare providers in the county lagged one year. Hi,s,t is a vector of
county-level characteristics (income, poverty rate, unemployment rate, and demographics).
i is a vector of county fixed-effects and s,t is a vector of state-by-year fixed-effects.4 µi,s,t is
the error term. We estimate least squares and cluster the standard errors around the county,
and weight by the county population covered by the UCRC. We use variation in the number
of mental healthcare provider offices to identify treatment effects. This variation is driven
by the opening and closing of mental healthcare provider offices within a county.
    Of note, controlling for demographics at the county-level allows us to account for potential
compositional shifts that occur over time within a county that may lead to differential crime
rates and access to office-based mental healthcare. County fixed-effects account for time-
invariant characteristics of counties that may be correlated with both crime and access to
office-based mental healthcare. The inclusion of state-by-year fixed-effects will account for
state-specific shocks such as government-mandated changes in insurance coverage (public
and private coverage for mental healthcare services is generally regulated at the state-level,
for example, Medicaid expansions or adoption of laws that compel private insurers to cover
mental healthcare treatment) and/or police expenditures. Similarly, the state-by-year fixed-
effects will account for national-level changes in insurance coverage for mental healthcare
services (for example, the Mental Health and Addiction Parity Act of 2010 and the Affordable
Care Act [ACA], together these two Acts required most private insurance plans to cover
mental healthcare service as of 2014), and economic, medical, or social factors that influence
the national as a whole (e.g., new medications used to treat mental illness, stigma towards
mental illness and associated treatment).
    We chose to measure mental healthcare at the county level, rather than some other level
of aggregation, for two reasons. First, we wish to facilitate comparison with previous, related
studies that use the CBP to study the effect of access to healthcare on health and crime
outcomes (Swensen, 2015; Bondurant et al., 2018). Second, the county arguably captures
the geographic area in which individuals seek treatment and that is the relevant area for
our study. For example, the zip-code is too small as most zip-codes do not have any office-
based mental healthcare providers: only 20% have such a provider (authors' analysis of the
CBP zip-code level data). More granular data is useful for other questions, for example,
estimating the impact of healthcare providers on property values (Horn, Joshi, & Maclean,
2019). Alternatively, the state is arguably too large a market, for example, a resident in
  4
      s,t subsumes year fixed-effects.



                                                10
Amarillo Texas is unlikely to travel to Houston Texas for office-based mental healthcare.
Indeed, most patients travel less than ten miles to seek mental healthcare (Schmitt, Phibbs,
& Piette, 2003; Lindrooth, Lo Sasso, & Lurie, 2006; Rosenblum et al., 2011) which suggests
that our use of the county is reasonable.


3.4    Identification
The identifying assumption of Equation 6 is outlined in Equation 7:

                            Cov (M Hi,s,t-1 , µi,s,t |Hi,s,t , i , s,t ) = 0                 (7)

    Put differently, the number of office-based mental healthcare providers per county is
uncorrelated with the error term in Equation 6 after conditioning on county-level time-
varying characteristics, county fixed-effects, and state-by-year fixed-effects. There are several
threats to the validity of our empirical strategy which we next discuss and then investigate
empirically in Section 4.4.
    An important threat to the validity to our research design is reverse causality. Put differ-
ently, changes in crime may lead to changes in the number of office-based mental healthcare
providers through demand-side effects. We do not suspect that mental healthcare providers
observe changes in crime and then elect to open/close their offices. However, crime could in-
directly prompt individuals to seek care through the actions of employers, family, or friends;
the criminal justice system; and so forth, which, in turn, could increase demand for office-
based services. We note that lagging our measure of mental healthcare access by one year
partially addresses this concern. We formally explore reverse causality by estimating a dis-
tributed lag model following Swensen (2015) and Bondurant et al. (2018), and a local event
study in the spirit of Cengiz, Dube, Lindner, and Zipperer (2019).
    A second threat to the validity of our study is that changes in the number of office-based
mental healthcare providers and changes in crime could both respond to a third unobserved
(to the econometrician) factor. Of note, time-invariant unobservable factors will be captured
by our county-level fixed-effects. An example of a time-varying unobserved factor could be
public funds that increase policing (which could affect crime) and the generosity of public
insurance (which could increase demand for mental healthcare providers' services). To the ex-
tent that these factors predominantly vary at the state-level, the state-by-year fixed-effects
plausibly address this concern. Changes in the number of office-based mental healthcare
providers and changes in crime could both respond to a third observable county-level con-


                                                  11
founder. For example, a positive shock in local economic conditions (which is not accounted
for by our time-varying county-level controls), which could decrease incentives for financially
motivated crimes while simultaneously increasing or decreasing demand for office-based men-
tal healthcare providers. We explore the importance of observable confounders in two ways.
(i) We regress the number of office-based mental healthcare providers on controls included
in Equation 6 in order to assess balance across the `treatment' and `comparison' groups
(Pei, Pischke, & Schwandt, 2018), or put differently we test the conditional independence
assumption (CIA).5 (ii) We report how the coefficient estimate on the office-based mental
healthcare provider variable changes as, starting from a parsimonious baseline model that
only controls for area and time fixed-effects, we progressively include covariates in Equation
6 (Altonji, Elder, & Taber, 2005).
    Finally, a third threat to the validity of our study is that openings and closing of office-
based mental healthcare providers may induce some residents to move to/away from a county.
This behavior is a form of program-induced migration that can lead to bias in regression
coefficient estimates (Moffitt, 1992).


4     Results
4.1     Characteristics of patients receiving office-based mental health-
        care
Before proceeding to the main analysis, we first examine the characteristics of individuals
who receive office-based mental healthcare. To do so, we draw data from the public use
2014 National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH). We select respondents ages 18
years and older who report receiving any mental healthcare in the office of a physician or
therapist in the past year.6 Table 1 reports demographics for the NSDUH sample (Panel A).
For comparison, we also report characteristics of the sample that did not report receiving
any mental healthcare (office-based or other modalities) in the past year. The two groups
of respondents are broadly similar across age, insurance status, poverty, and education.
However, there are non-trivial differences across sex, race/ethnicity, education, and labor
    5
      All counties are to some extent treated, thus we are testing for balance across counties with greater (and
lesser) treatment intensity.
    6
      Some patients receive treatment in multiple settings, for example a patient can receive treatment in an
office-based setting and an inpatient setting in the past year. We do not exclude those respondents who
report receiving treatment in multiple settings.



                                                      12
market participation. In particular, those who report office-based mental healthcare in the
past year, relative to those who report no mental healthcare over this time horizon, are more
likely to be female (68% vs 49%), white (80% vs. 63%), and to hold a college degree or
higher (48% vs. 30%), and are less likely to report working in the past week (60% vs. 67%).
     An informative concept for our study is how office-based mental healthcare is financed.
Overall mental healthcare (i.e., office-based care and other modalities)7 in the U.S. is less
reliant on insurance payments than general healthcare. For example, Mark et al. (2016)
show that in 2014 while 73% of general healthcare was financed through some form of insur-
ance, this share was 65% for mental healthcare. There is heterogeneity in financing sources
across different mental healthcare modalities. For example, the type of care that we study
(office-based care) is financed differently than community mental health centers, psychiatric
hospitals, or residential facilities; these modalities rely substantially on government grants
and contracts, and public insurance. Office-based care is more likely to be financed by pri-
vate health insurance or patients themselves. For example, psychiatrists are less likely than
any other specialty to accept Medicaid (Wen, Wilk, Druss, & Cummings, 2019).
     Table 1 Panel B reports how patients in the NSDUH report paying for office-based mental
healthcare. These categories are not mutually exclusive and patients can use more than one
source for payment. We show the most common means of paying for office-based mental
healthcare are self-pay (47%) and private insurance (48%). Public insurance plays a smaller
role in financing office-based care than overall mental healthcare treatment. In our sample,
13% and 7% report using Medicare and Medicaid respectively. Mark et al. (2016) show that
in 2014 Medicare and Medicaid accounted for 15% and 25% of overall mental healthcare
treatment spending. Only 4% of NSDUH respondents report receiving office-based mental
healthcare for free while as much as 14% of total mental healthcare is provided without cost
to patients (Mark et al., 2016).
     As noted earlier in the manuscript, many of the policies that impact insurance coverage
of mental healthcare treatment (public or private) vary at the state (e.g., requirements that
private insurers or Medicaid cover mental healthcare benefits) or federal (e.g., Medicare, the
Federal Employees Health Benefits Program, and the Mental Health Parity Act) level and are
captured by our state-by-year fixed-effects. Thus, the within-county variation that we lever-
age in our empirical models is net of these factors and likely captures local characteristics,
which we explore empirically in Section 4.4.2.
   7
    We exclude informal care such as self-help as financing for this type of care is not available in government
sources.



                                                      13
4.2    Summary statistics and crime trends
Summary statistics are reported in Table 2. The total crime rate per county is 360.0 per
10,000 residents; with 44.1 violent crimes and 315.9 nonviolent crimes per 10,000 residents.
In terms of specific violent crimes, the rates per 10,000 residents are 0.52 murders, 2.95 rapes,
27.4 aggravated assaults, and 13.2 robberies. The rates per 10,000 residents for nonviolent
crimes are: 69.4 burglaries, 213.4 larcenies, and 33.1 motor vehicle thefts. Figure 1 reports
trends in crime rates over our study period in total, violent, and nonviolent crime rates.
All three crime rates are declining modestly over our study period which is in line with
previously established trends in these outcomes.
    On average there are 122.0 mental healthcare provider offices per county, with 67.4 physi-
cian and 54.7 non-physician offices. The average year-to-year increase in offices that we
observe in our data is nine, thus for ease of interpretation we discuss regression coefficient
estimates scaled by ten. This increase reflects an approximately 8% change in the number
of offices relative to the sample mean.


4.3    Baseline two-way fixed effects results
Table 3 reports selected regression results for the effect of county-level changes in the number
of office-based mental healthcare providers on aggregate crime rates: total, violent, and
nonviolent. Ten additional mental healthcare providers in the county reduces the total crime
rate by 1.7 crimes per 10,000 residents or 0.5% (comparing the coefficient estimate with the
sample mean, all relative effects are calculated in this manner). Violent and nonviolent
crime rates decline following the opening of an office-based provider: ten additional offices
in a county leads to 0.9 fewer violent crimes per 10,000 residents (2.0%) and 0.8 fewer
nonviolent crimes per 10,000 residents (0.2%). The relative effect sizes are larger for violent
crimes than nonviolent crimes as the baseline means are different: 44.1 violent crimes vs.
315.9 nonviolent crimes per 10,000 residents.


4.4    Identification testing
We examine several threats to the validity. We focus on total crime rates.




                                               14
4.4.1      Parallel trends

We first explore the ability of our data to satisfy parallel trends. An obvious concern is that
our findings reflect reverse causality: changes in mental illness lead to changes in the number
of offices. Such reverse causality, if present, could lead to a violation of parallel trends. We
note that we focus on crime and do not expect that increases in crime will influence the
number of offices in a county directly. Further, we lag offices by one year, which should
mitigate reverse causality concerns. However, we test parallel trends in two ways.
    First, we estimate an augmented version of Equation 6 that includes two leads in the
number of mental healthcare offices, the contemporaneous number of offices, and two lags
in the number of offices, i.e., a distributed lag model (Swensen, 2015; Bondurant et al.,
2018). Results indicate that crime rates are unaffected by future levels of office-based mental
healthcare and only the one year lag is statistically distinguishable from zero, which provides
suggestive evidence that the findings are not affected by reverse causality (Table 4).
    Second, following Cengiz et al. (2019), who study a continuous treatment variable ­ the
minimum wage ­ as we do, and estimate a `local' event study. We locate a set of `local'
events which are defined as an increase in the number of offices in a county. We define local
events as occurring in counties that experience such a change, and that (i) do not experience
any change in the number of offices three years prior to the event and (ii) do not experience
a change in the number of offices for three years after the event. We then select `comparison'
counties that do not experience any change in offices for this seven year `event window.'8
Results show no evidence of differential pre-trends (Figure 2).

4.4.2      Unobserved heterogeneity

While the state by year fixed effects addresses state-level confounders that could affect crime
and the number of offices (e.g., resident preferences), we next probe the extent to which both
changes in the number of offices and crime respond to a third county level confounder. We
assess whether the number of office-based mental healthcare providers are predicted by our
county-level covariates which could also predict crime (Pei et al., 2018). We find that the
number of mental healthcare offices is predicted by the poverty rate and share of the county
that is young and female (Table 5).
    In addition to allowing a test of the CIA, the balance testing reported in (Table 5)
also offers us an opportunity to examine what factors, not captured by county fixed-effects
  8
      Seven years includes the three years pre-event, year of the event, and three years post-event.



                                                      15
and state-by-year fixed effects, can explain our source of variation. We observe that higher
poverty rates are associated with fewer offices while the share of females ages 18-64 is pos-
itively correlated with the number of offices. The former suggests that relative income is
important and demographics are as well.
    Second, we explore the sensitivity of our estimates to different sets of control variables in
the spirit of Altonji et al. (2005). We initially estimate a model with no time-varying controls
(i.e., including only fixed-effects), and then sequentially add in each county-level control, re-
estimate Equation 6, and report the relevant coefficient estimate (Table 6). Coefficient
estimates are stable as we add controls and 95% confidence intervals overlap substantially.
    While we would prefer to observe full balance in terms of our covariates across counties
with different levels of treatment intensity, reassuringly the effect of office-based mental
healthcare on crime remains largely unchanged if we include, or do not include, covariates
for which there may be imbalance.

4.4.3   Program-induced migration

A third treat to validity is program-induced migration (Moffitt, 1992). In our context,
for example, the opening of an office in a county may prompt individuals to move out
of or into that county. We test for this behavior using data on past-year cross-county
migration information available in the Current Population Survey (CPS) 1999-2014 (King
et al., 2020). Specifically, we construct cross-county migration rates in each county and
regress that outcome on the lagged number of office-based mental healthcare providers using
Equation 6. We note that sample sizes are smaller than our main sample due to privacy-
related suppression in the CPS. Results reveal no evidence that changes in the number of
office-based mental healthcare providers influences such migration (Table 7).

4.4.4   Falsification

Finally, we conduct placebo testing. We randomly re-assign the office variable across counties
and re-estimate our Equation 6 100 times, generating `placebo estimates.' In particular,
the randomization re-shuffles each cell (i.e., county-year) independently across counties and
across years. If we are indeed capturing a `true' effect of access to office-based mental
healthcare, and not some other unobserved factor, we would expect our main estimate to be
an outlier relative to all placebo estimates. We are unaware of any other factor that followed
the same roll-out over U.S. counties. Our main coefficient estimate is an outlier from the
placebo coefficient estimates (Figure 3).

                                               16
4.4.5    Assessment of validity

We view these analyses as suggesting that a violation of parallel trends, reverse causality,
unobserved heterogeneity, program-induced migration, or some other factor that followed
the same staggered roll-out across counties as our office variable do not drive our findings.


4.5     Evidence on the first stage
The mechanism through which we expect that changes in local access to office-based mental
healthcare lead to changes in crime is mental illness: additional office-based mental health-
care offices in a county allow more patients to receive care which, in turn, should reduce
mental illness and crime. We test this hypothesis using data from several different sources.
To study treatment, we follow Tefft (2011) and use Google search data (the Google Index),
in particular we examine key words that suggest the search is related to office-based mental
healthcare treatment. The Google Index captures the relative popularity of a search term,
the index is computed as the quotient of the number of searches for any particular term
divided by the total searches with the researcher-specified geographic area and time period.
The Google Index ranges from zero to 100. Google data scientists conduct some data clean-
ing prior to releasing the data to researchers: low volume searches are assigned a zero value,
duplicate searches are eliminated, and searches that involve special characters are removed.9
These data are commonly used in economic studies (Tefft, 2011; Beheshti, 2019; Chalfin,
Danagoulian, & Deza, 2019; Doleac & Mukherjee, 2019; Borup, Christian, & Sch¨          utte, 2020).
    We generate Google search trends for each state and year separately over our study period,
while ideally we would prefer to measure searches at the county-year level, such data have
substantial missingness and thus meaningful analysis are not possible (full details available
on request). Thus, we note that there may be some measurement error in the definition of the
healthcare market. We include the following search terms: clinical psychologist, psychiatrist,
psychoanalyst, psychologist, psychotherapist, and social worker. We select these search terms
as the overlap with the type of healthcare providers likely to work in the office-based settings
we measure in the CBP. Results, reported in Table 8 Column 1, suggest that searches for
office-based mental healthcare providers increase as the number of offices rises. This pattern
of results is in line with the hypothesis that as access increases in the local healthcare market,
likely patients search online to learn more about such providers. This behavior suggests that
patients become more interested in treatment and, in turn, take-up treatment.
   9
     Please see the Google website for full details: https://support.google.com/trends/answer/4365533?hl=en
(last accessed July 18, 2020).

                                                    17
    Next, we consider measures of mental illness. To do so, we draw data on suicides from
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's Public Use National Vital Statistics System
(NVSS) Underlying Cause of Death public use files (ICD-10 codes U03, X60 to X84, and
Y87.0). Cells with less than ten deaths are suppressed for privacy by the data provider.
We therefore impute a value of five for such cells but results are robust to imputing a value
of zero (lowest possible value) and nine (highest possible value). We convert the deaths to
annual rate per 10,000 adults. We also use data on adults (18+) meeting diagnostic criteria
for any mental illness (AMI) in the public use NSDUH state-level averages; unfortunately
public data are not available at the county-level and thus we likely mis-characterize the
market in which individuals seek care. We find that an additional ten offices in a county and
state reduces the suicide rate by 0.4% and AMI rate by 0.1% (Table 8 Columns 2 and 3).
    Collectively, we view our analysis of Google Index, NVSS, and NSDUH to support our
hypothesized causal pathway from changes in mental healthcare providers to crime. That
is, as the number of office-based mental healthcare providers in the local area increases,
treatment uptake rises and mental illness improves.


4.6    Cost-adjusted crime rates
Our results treat the crimes equivalently in the sense that one additional homicide and
one additional burglary are considered identically. This assumption is not likely true as
different crimes are more and less costly in terms of criminal justice system and victim costs.
Chalfin and McCrary (2018) point out that the benefits from reductions in property crime
are not sufficient to justify the expense of additional police officers. Alternatively, even
relatively small reductions in violent crimes are sufficient to justify additional investments.
Given heterogeneity in costs, we next estimate a cost-adjusted version of our main regression
model following Chalfin and McCrary (2018).
    Accounting for differences in social costs across crime types does not qualitatively alter
our main findings (Table 9). An additional ten offices per county leads to a 2.1% reduction
in the expected cost of total crimes per capita, a 2.2% reduction in the expected cost of
violent crime per capita, and a 0.9% reduction in the expected cost of nonviolent crime per
capita. We note that relative effect sizes are larger after adjusting for crime costs.




                                              18
4.7     Heterogeneity
4.7.1    Heterogeneity by type of crime

We consider broad categories of violent and non-violent crime, but these groupings may mask
differences in the responsiveness to treatment. We examine heterogeneity by specific types of
violent and non-violent crimes (Tables 10 and 11) to allow for differential responsiveness to
treatment. In terms of violent crimes, an additional ten offices in a county reduces murder
rates by 2.5%, aggravated assault rates by 2.2%, and robbery rates by 2.0%. Turning to
nonviolent crimes, rates of burglaries and motor vehicle thefts decline by 0.3% and 1.8%
respectively when the number of offices in a county increases by ten.

4.7.2    Heterogeneity by mental healthcare providers

We replace overall mental healthcare provider offices with two variables that separately con-
sider offices of physicians and offices of non-physicians. The two providers types deliver some-
what distinct types of treatment which may have differential effects on crime. For instance,
physicians are better able to prescribe medications (i.e., generally only those providers hold-
ing an MD or DO can prescribe medications) than non-physicians.10 Medications have known
side effects (e.g., aggression, lethargy) which may increase the propensity to commit crime
or of victimization. Non-physicians rely more on non-medication forms of treatment (e.g.,
cognitive behavioral therapy, group therapy, and family therapy). Further, non-physicians
(e.g., social workers) are more likely to provide support or `wrap-around' services such as
education assistance, employment, and social service. The profile of the marginal patient
seeking care with a physician and non-physician may also differ, leading to differential effects
on crime. Although the CBP has limited information on the number of employees working in
an establishment,11 the offices of non-physicians are larger than physician offices (1.7 times)
suggesting that these offices have differential scope to treat patients.
    Our findings appear to be driven by non-physicians (Table 12). Coefficient estimates on
the number of physician offices, while not precise, carry positive signs. On the other hand,
the coefficient estimates on the non-physicians are similar to our main findings: an additional
ten non-physician offices reduces total crime rates by 0.6%, violent crime rates by 2.4%, and
  10
     We note that psychiatric nurse practitioners can potentially prescribe medications. Such providers could
be listed under the non-physician code but we suspect that most are coded as 621399 (offices of all other
miscellaneous health practitioners). We do not consider this code as it includes a wide range of providers,
most unrelated to mental healthcare (e.g., denturists, dietitians, midwives).
  11
     Over 70% of the employment data is imputed and the data lack any employee job details.



                                                     19
nonviolent crime rates by 0.4%.
    In the bottom panel of Table 12, we include an interaction term between the two provider
types in the regression model. While the main effects are not appreciably different (the main
effects for non-physicians are large but 95% confidence intervals overlap with the confidence
interval associated with the comparable estimate in the non-interacted model), the interac-
tion term is positive which suggests that there may be declining marginal productivity for
non-physicians as the number of physicians increases. We note that the interaction term
coefficient estimate is not precise in the violent crime specification.12

4.7.3    Heterogeneity by baseline county demographics

Counties may experience differential effects of office-based mental healthcare providers based
on their characteristics. For example, more urban areas may have more opportunities for
crime (e.g., greater homeless populations) and may therefore receive greater benefit from
additional offices, on the other hand such localities may have higher poverty rates and thus
individuals maybe less likely to receive care in the settings we study. Further, high crime
areas may have more individuals who could benefit from treatment in terms of reducing crime.
Finally, higher income areas may have the financial resources to receive mental healthcare
treatment, but may also be less likely to have residents that commit crimes.
    To explore these possibilities, we examine heterogeneity by county-level characteristics
(all measured in 1998, thus prior to our study period): (i) population density proxied by the
population per square mile of land area,13 (ii) total crime rates, and (iii) personal income.
We note that the total sample size of the sub-samples is less than our overall sample size,
we lose sample because we do not rely on a balanced panel of counties.
    The effect of office-based mental healthcare provider offices appears to be larger in coun-
ties with lower population density; indeed coefficient estimates are more precisely estimated
and larger in less dense population areas (Table 13). Table 14 reports coefficient estimates for
counties with above and at/below the mean total crime rate. While the coefficient estimates
differ in absolute size, the relative effect sizes are similar. Finally, considering heterogeneity
by average personal income (Table 15), coefficient estimates, both in absolute and relative
terms, are larger among lower income counties. For instance, an additional ten office-based
  12
     Based on these findings, our results appear to be driven by non-physicians. We have re-estimated all
regressions using only non-physicians to define our measure of local access to office-based mental healthcare.
Findings are similar to those reported in the manuscript, but are somewhat larger in magnitude (although
95% confidence intervals overlap so we are reluctant to overstate differences). Results are available on request.
  13
     Population density is measured in 2000. We could not locate this information for 1998.



                                                       20
mental healthcare providers reduces total crime rates by 0.29% in counties with incomes
above the sample mean and 8.61% in counties with incomes at or below the sample mean.
We note that while coefficient estimates differ across some sub-samples, many of the 95%
confidence intervals overlap, thus we are reluctant to place too much emphasize heterogeneity
by county-level characteristics.


5      Robustness
We next report several sensitivity analysis. First, we estimate different specifications and
samples. We remove population weights, exclude state-by-year fixed-effects, estimate a first-
difference model, examine crime counts, apply an inverse hyperbolic sine to the crime rates,
and control for general physicians to capture broader access to healthcare (Appendix Table
A1).14 We exclude counties with no office-based mental healthcare providers, exclude years
in which the ACA was effective (2010-2014), and use the Quarterly Census of Employment
and Wages to construct our office count (Appendix Table A2).15 We also aggregate the data
to the state and core-based statistical area (CBSA) (Table A3), and we use a quadratic in
the number of offices (Table A4).


6      Discussion
In this study we provide the first evidence on the effect of office-based mental healthcare
local access on crime. Our findings suggest that increases in office-based mental healthcare
providers reduce crime rates. An additional ten mental healthcare provider offices in a county
leads to a 0.5% reduction in the overall county crime rate. We provide evidence that mental
illnesses decline as the number of office-based mental healthcare increases within a county,
suggesting that crime declines are driven by improved mental health.
    These findings suggest that increasing access to office-based mental healthcare providers
have positive, albeit modest, spillover effects to crime. The magnitude is reasonable given
  14
       We lose some precision in the total and non-violent crime specifications when we include general physi-
cians in the regression model. We suspect that the drop in precision is attributable to collinearity between
the healthcare variables. The correlation is over 0.95.
    15
       We prefer the CBP for the following reasons. (i) We can use data beginning in 1999 in CPB vs. 2002 in
QCEW. (ii) CBP is more commonly used in the related literature and we wish to facilitate comparison. (iii)
The QCEW does not include proprietors and therefore likely under-counts many of the providers that we
seek to study (https://www.bls.gov/cew/overview.htm; last accessed July 18th, 2020). (iv) CBP excludes
most establishments with government employees but this restriction does not pose a problem when studying
office-based mental health providers as these providers are generally not government-owned.

                                                     21
our hypothesized complier: a patient whose mental illness can be effectively treated in office-
based settings. The costs of crime to society are extremely high, thus even modest declines
in the number of crimes may be valuable. For instance, the value of one averted murder
is $10.9M (McCollister et al., 2017).16 Policymakers seeking to reduce crime may wish to
consider enhanced investments in this modality of mental healthcare, for instance, subsidies
or tax credits to mental healthcare providers who open in areas with high crime rates.
    Our study has limitations. We consider only one dimension of mental healthcare treat-
ment access: the number of office-based providers in a county. Also, our estimates have an
intent-to-treat (ITT) interpretation. While the ITT is arguably informative from a policy
perspective, information on the treatment-on-the-treated (TOT) estimate is also of interest.
    Our study adds to a small but growing literature which suggests that supportive, rather
than punitive, policies are effective in reducing crime related to behavioral health condi-
tions. Wen et al. (2017) exploit changes in state Medicaid Health Insurance Flexibility and
Accountability (HIFA) waivers to non-traditional populations (low-income, childless adults)
that cover SUD treatment to study the effect of SUDs on crime. The authors document
that improved access to SUD treatment through waivers reduces crime, in particular rob-
bery, aggravated assault, and larceny. Using a similar identification to the one we employ,
Bondurant et al. (2018) evaluate the extent to which expanding access to specialty SUD
treatment facilities, measured by opening and closings of such facilities, affect crime. The
authors show that the increased numbers of SUD treatment facilities in a county reduce vi-
olent and financially motivated crimes with the county, in particular murder. Overall, these
studies suggest that expanding the behavioral healthcare workforce can have both direct
health benefits and indirect crime-control benefits to society.




 16
      Inflated by the authors to 2020 dollars using the Consumer Price Index.


                                                     22
                         Table 1: NSDUH demographics 2014
Sample:                         Office-based mental healthcare   No mental healthcare
                                          in past year               in past year
Panel A: Demographics                            ­                         ­
18-20 years                                   0.052                      0.057
21-25 years                                   0.086                      0.094
26-34 years                                    0.15                       0.16
35+ years                                      0.71                       0.69
Male                                           0.32                       0.51
Female                                         0.68                       0.49
White                                          0.80                       0.63
Black                                         0.053                       0.13
Other race                                    0.054                      0.082
Hispanic                                      0.091                       0.17
Less than high school                         0.068                       0.14
High school                                    0.19                       0.29
Some college                                   0.26                       0.27
College degree                                 0.48                       0.30
Work in the past week                          0.60                       0.67
Any health insurance                           0.93                       0.87
No health insurance                           0.066                       0.13
Medicaid                                       0.13                       0.11
Medicare                                       0.21                       0.20
Private insurance                              0.73                       0.67
Other insurance                                0.48                       0.35
Below federal poverty line                     0.13                       0.15
Family income < $20k                           0.17                       0.18
Family income 5k - < $50k                      0.25                       0.31
Family income $50k - < $75k                    0.15                       0.17
Family income > $75k                           0.42                       0.35
Panel B: Mental healthcare
treatment payment source
Self-pay                                       0.47                       ­
Private insurance pay                          0.48                       ­
Medicare pay                                   0.13                       ­
Medicaid pay                                  0.073                       ­
Other pay                                     0.100                       ­
Free care                                     0.038                       ­
Observations                                  2033                      35221
Notes : The data set is the NSDUH 2014. The unit of observation is a survey respondent.
Observations are weighted by NSDUH-provided survey weights.


                                         23
                      Table 2: Summary statistics 1999-2014
           Variable:                                 Mean/proportion
           County crime rates per 10,000 residents
           Total                                           360.0
           Violent                                          44.1
           Nonviolent                                      315.9
           County mental healthcare provider offices
           Physicians & non-physicians                     122.0
           Physicians                                       67.4
           Non-physicians                                   54.7
           County characteristics
           Per capita income                              43673.0
           Poverty rate                                     13.9
           Unemployment rate                                6.45
           White                                            0.87
           African American                                 0.13
           Population 0-17 years                            0.25
           Population 18-64 years                           0.63
           Population 65+ years                             0.12
           Male                                             0.51
           Female                                           0.49
           Observations                                    45577
Notes : The data set is the combined UCRC and CBP 1999-2014. Office-based mental
healthcare providers are lagged one year. The unit of observation is a county in a state
in a year. Observations are weighted by the population covered by the UCR data.




                                         24
Table 3: Effect of office-based mental healthcare providers on aggregate crime rates: 1999-
2014
  Outcome:                                 Total crime Violent crime Nonviolent crime
  Mean                                        360.0           44.1            315.9
  Offices of mental healthcare providers -0.1674***       -0.0886***        -0.0788**
                                             (0.0421)      (0.0078)          (0.0400)
  Observations                                45577          45577            45577
   Notes : The dataset is the combined UCRC and CBP 1999-2014. The unit of observation
   is a county in a state in a year. All models estimated with least squares and control
   for county characteristics (see Section 3.3), state-by-year fixed-effects, and county fixed-
   effects. Observations are weighted by the population covered by the UCRC data. Stan-
   dard errors are clustered at the county level and are reported in parentheses. ***,**,* =
   statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                              25
Table 4: Effect of office-based mental healthcare providers on aggregate crime rates using a
distributed lag model: 1999-2014
         Outcome:                                                  Total crime rate
         Mean                                                             357.0
         Two year lag in offices of mental healthcare providers         -0.0828
                                                                       (0.0736)
         One year lag in offices of mental healthcare providers       -0.1056**
                                                                       (0.0413)
         Contemporaneous offices of mental healthcare providers         -0.0327
                                                                       (0.0556)
         One year lead in offices of mental healthcare providers        -0.0441
                                                                       (0.0452)
         Two year lead in offices of mental healthcare providers         0.1056
                                                                       (0.0941)
         Observations                                                    43180
   Notes : The dataset is the combined UCRC and CBP 1999-2014. The sample size is
   smaller than the main sample as we lose one year of data by including leads and lags
   (CPB data are only available as of 1998 at the six-digit occupation coding level). The unit
   of observation is a county in a state in a year. All models estimated with least squares
   and control for county characteristics (see Section 3.3), state-by-year fixed-effects, and
   county fixed-effects. Observations are weighted by the population covered by the UCRC
   data. Standard errors are clustered at the county level and are reported in parentheses.
   ***,**,* = statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                             26
Table 5: Effect of controls on number of mental healthcare provider offices: 1999-2014
         Outcome:                      Offices of mental healthcare providers
         Mean                                            122.0
         County-level controls
         Per capita personal income                     0.0011
                                                       (0.0008)
         Poverty rate                                  -1.8056*
                                                       (1.0854)
         Unemployment rate                              0.8661
                                                       (2.0935)
         African American                              -63.0616
                                                     (113.4604)
         Males 0-17 years                             -171.8764
                                                     (450.0190)
         Females 0-17 years                           -632.6301
                                                     (889.9781)
         Males 18-64 years                             226.6462
                                                     (179.8463)
         Females 18-64 years                       1661.3863***
                                                     (610.7289)
         F -test of joint significance                   3.43
         (p -value)                                    (0.0006)
         Observations                                   45577
Notes : The data set is the combined UCRC and CBP 1999-2014. Office-based mental
healthcare providers are lagged one year. The unit of observation is a county in a state
in a year. All models estimated with least squares and control for county characteristics,
state-by-year fixed-effects, and county fixed-effects. Observations are weighted by the
population covered by the UCRC data. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.
95% confidence interval is reported in parentheses. ***,**,* = statistically different from
zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                          27
Table 6: Effect of office-based mental healthcare providers on aggregate crime rates using
different sets of control variables: 1999-2014
            Outcome:                                            Total crime rate
            Mean                                                     360.0
            Model includes fixed-effects only                     -0.2011***
                                                                    (0.0538)
            Include county-level controls
            Added control variable: Per capita personal income    -0.2116***
                                                                    (0.0527)
            Added control variable: Poverty rate                  -0.2232***
                                                                    (0.0503)
            Added control variable: Unemployment rate             -0.2243***
                                                                    (0.0495)
            Added control variable: Share African American        -0.2245***
                                                                    (0.0498)
            Added control variable: Age controls                  -0.1971***
                                                                    (0.0440)
            Added control variable: Share female                  -0.1674***
                                                                    (0.0421)
            Observations                                             45577
   Notes : Each row reflects the coefficient estimated in a regression that includes the listed
   variable and all variables reported in the preceding rows. The data set is the combined
   UCRC and CBP 1999-2014. Office-based mental healthcare providers are lagged one
   year. The unit of observation is a county in a state in a year. All models estimated with
   least squares and control for county characteristics, state-by-year fixed-effects, and county
   fixed-effects. Observations are weighted by the county population. Standard errors are
   clustered at the county level and are reported in parentheses. ***,**,* = statistically
   different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                              28
Table 7: Effect of office-based mental healthcare providers on migration rates: 1999-2014
     Outcome:                                 Past year cross-county migration rate
     Mean                                                     0.0430
     Offices of mental healthcare providers                   0.0000
                                                             (0.0000)
     Observations                                              3953
  Notes : The data set is the combined ASEC-CPS and CBP 1999-2014. Office-based
  mental healthcare providers are lagged one year. The unit of observation is a county in
  a state in a year. The sample size is smaller than the main sample due to suppression
  of counties in the ASEC-CPS. All models estimated with least squares and control for
  county characteristics, state-by-year fixed-effects, and county fixed-effects. Observations
  are weighted by the county population. Standard errors are clustered at the county
  level and are reported in parentheses. ***,**,* = statistically different from zero at the
  1%,5%,10% level.




                                            29
Table 8: Effect of office-based mental healthcare providers on mental healthcare take-up and
mental illness
     Outcome:                                   Search rate Suicide rate Any AMI
     Mean                                          295.3           360.0       0.181
     Offices of mental healthcare providers      0.0753***      -0.0005**   -0.00002**
                                                  (0.0215)       (0.0001)    (0.00001)
     Observations                                   450           45577         350
     Data source                               Google Index       NVSS        NSUDH
     Years                                       2004-2014      1999-2014    2002-2014
   Notes : Office-based mental healthcare providers are lagged one year. The unit of obser-
   vation is a state in a year in the Google Index and NSDUH data. The unit of observation
   is a county in a state in a year in the NVSS data. We note that Google Index and
   NSDUH data are not available in all years of our main study period (1999-2014). All
   models estimated with least squares and control for state characteristics, state fixed-
   effects, and year fixed-effects in the Google Index and NSDUH analysis. Google Index
   search terms include: clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, psychoanalyst, psychologist, psy-
   chotherapist, and social worker. All models estimated with least squares and control for
   county characteristics, state-by-year fixed-effects, and county fixed-effects in the NVSS
   analysis. Observations are weighted by the population covered by the UCRC data. Stan-
   dard errors are clustered at the state level and are reported in parentheses in the Google
   Index and NSDUH data. Standard errors are clustered at the county level and are re-
   ported in parentheses in the NVSS data. ***,**,* = statistically different from zero at
   the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                              30
Table 9: Effect of office-based mental healthcare providers on cost-adjusted crime rates:
1999-2014
  Outcome:                               Total crime Violent crime Nonviolent crime
  Mean                                      $573.4        $529.52           $43.9
  Offices of mental healthcare providers -1.2093***     -1.1708***       -0.0385***
                                           (0.1128)      (0.1130)         (0.0106)
  Observations                              45577          45577            45577
   Notes : The dataset is the combined UCRC and CBP 1999-2014. Crime rates are cost-
   adjusted following Chalfin and McCrary (2018): murder ($7M), rape ($142,020), robbery
   ($12,624), aggravated assault ($38,924), burglary ($2,104), larceny ($473), and motor
   vehicle theft ($5,786). The interpretation of the coefficient estimates is a change in
   the crime-rate costs. Office-based mental healthcare providers are lagged one year in
   all regressions. The unit of observation is a county in a state in a year. All models
   estimated with least squares and control for county characteristics (see Section 3.3),
   state-by-year fixed-effects, and county fixed-effects. Observations are weighted by the
   population covered by the UCRC data. Standard errors are clustered at the county
   level and are reported in parentheses. ***,**,* = statistically different from zero at the
   1%,5%,10% level.




                                             31
Table 10: Effect of office-based mental healthcare providers on specific violent   crime rates:
1999-2014
 Outcome:                                  Murder       Rape     Agg. assault       Robbery
 Mean                                        0.52       2.95          27.4             13.2
 Offices of mental healthcare providers -0.0013*** -0.0006        -0.0598***       -0.0269***
                                           (0.0001)   (0.0005)     (0.0057)         (0.0030)
 Observations                               45577      45577         45577            45577
   Notes : The data set is the combined UCRC and CBP 1999-2014. Office-based mental
   healthcare providers are lagged one year. The unit of observation is a county in a state
   in a year. All models estimated with least squares and control for county characteristics,
   state-by-year fixed-effects, and county fixed-effects. Observations are weighted by the
   population covered by the UCRC data. Standard errors are clustered at the county
   level and are reported in parentheses. ***,**,* = statistically different from zero at the
   1%,5%,10% level.



Table 11: Effect of office-based mental healthcare providers on specific nonviolent crime
rates: 1999-2014
      Outcome:                               Burglary Larceny Motor vehicle theft
      Mean                                     69.4     213.4            33.1
      Offices of mental healthcare providers -0.0193* 0.0000         -0.0595***
                                             (0.0102) (0.0263)         (0.0166)
      Observations                            45577     45577           45577
   Notes : The data set is the combined UCRC and CBP 1999-2014. Office-based mental
   healthcare providers are lagged one year. The unit of observation is a county in a state
   in a year. All models estimated with least squares and control for county characteristics,
   state-by-year fixed-effects, and county fixed-effects. Observations are weighted by the
   population covered by the UCRC data. Standard errors are clustered at the county
   level and are reported in parentheses. ***,**,* = statistically different from zero at the
   1%,5%,10% level.




                                             32
Table 12: Effect of office-based mental healthcare providers on aggregate crime rates, het-
erogeneity by mental illness provider type: 1999-2014
     Outcome:                                 Total    Total violent Total nonviolent
     Mean                                     360.0         44.1            315.9
     Do not interact provider types
     Offices of physicians                   0.3408       0.0655           0.2753
                                            (0.2946)     (0.0627)         (0.2469)
     Offices of non-physicians             -0.2307*** -0.1078***         -0.1229**
                                            (0.0557)     (0.0084)         (0.0510)
     Observations                             45577        45577            45577
     Interact provider types
     Offices of physicians                   0.2849       0.0667           0.2182
                                            (0.3083)     (0.0635)         (0.2602)
     Offices of non-physicians             -0.5298*** -0.1012***        -0.4286***
                                            (0.1701)     (0.0314)         (0.1451)
     Interaction                            0.0006**      -0.0000         0.0006**
                                            (0.0003)     (0.0001)         (0.0003)
     Observations                             45577        45577            45577
   Notes : The specification includes both offices of physicians and offices of non-physicians.
   In the top panel, the two provider variables are not interacted. In the bottom panel,
   the two provider type variables are interacted. The data set is the combined UCRC and
   CBP 1999-2014. Office-based mental healthcare providers are lagged one year. The unit
   of observation is a county in a state in a year. All models estimated with least squares
   and control for county characteristics, state-by-year fixed-effects, and county fixed-effects.
   Observations are weighted by the population covered by the UCRC data. Standard errors
   are clustered at the county level and are reported in parentheses. ***,**,* = statistically
   different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                              33
Table 13: Effect of office-based mental healthcare providers on aggregate crime rates, interact
with baseline population density: 1999-2014
  Outcome:                                        Total    Total violent Total nonviolent
  > mean baseline population density
  Mean                                            396.3          52.1            344.2
  Offices of mental healthcare providers         -0.0663     -0.0772***         0.0109
                                                (0.0610)      (0.0107)         (0.0552)
  Observations                                     5029         5029             5029
   mean baseline population density
  Mean                                            314.6          33.2            281.3
  Offices of mental healthcare providers       -1.0170**       -0.0501        -0.9669**
                                                (0.4358)      (0.0471)         (0.4037)
  Observations                                    31441         31441           31441
   Notes : The data set is the combined UCRC and CBP 1999-2014. Office-based mental
   healthcare providers are lagged one year. The unit of observation is a county in a state in a
   year. Baseline population densities are measured in 1998. The sample size is smaller than
   the main sample as the county must appear in the data in 1998. All models estimated
   with least squares and control for county characteristics, state-by-year fixed-effects, and
   county fixed-effects. Observations are weighted by the population covered by the UCRC
   data. Standard errors are clustered at the county level and are reported in parentheses.
   ***,**,* = statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                              34
Table 14: Heterogeneity in the effect of office-based mental healthcare providers on aggregate
crime rates by baseline total crime rates: 1999-2014
   Outcome:                                       Total   Total violent Total nonviolent
   > mean baseline total crime rate
   Mean                                           466.0         58.8             407.2
   Offices of mental healthcare providers        -0.0999    -0.0952***          -0.0047
                                                (0.1365)     (0.0284)          (0.1190)
   Observations                                   12252        12252             12252
    mean baseline total crime rate
   Mean                                            62.5         15.3              55.1
   Offices of mental healthcare providers -0.1188*** -0.0340***               -0.0848**
                                                (0.0397)     (0.0055)          (0.0392)
   Observations                                   24218        24218             24218
   Notes : The data set is the combined UCRC and CBP 1999-2014. Office-based mental
   healthcare providers are lagged one year. The unit of observation is a county in a state in
   a year. Baseline total crime rates are measured in 1998. The sample size is smaller than
   the main sample as the county must appear in the data in 1998. All models estimated
   with least squares and control for county characteristics, state-by-year fixed-effects, and
   county fixed-effects. Observations are weighted by the population covered by the UCRC
   data. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. 95% confidence interval is
   reported in parentheses. ***,**,* = statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10%
   level.




                                             35
Table 15: Heterogeneity in the effect of office-based mental healthcare providers on aggregate
crime rates by baseline personal income: 1999-2014
   Outcome:                                      Total     Total violent Total nonviolent
   > mean baseline personal income
   Mean                                           372.8         46.5            326.3
   Offices of mental healthcare providers -0.1068**         -0.0811***         -0.0257
                                                (0.0424)      (0.0088)        (0.0389)
   Observations                                  22392         22392            22392
    mean baseline personal income
   Mean                                           324.1         36.9            287.1
   Offices of mental healthcare providers -2.8006***         -0.2819**       -2.5187***
                                                (0.8591)      (0.1160)        (0.8157)
   Observations                                  14078         14078            14078
   Notes : The data set is the combined UCRC and CBP 1999-2014. Office-based mental
   healthcare providers are lagged one year. The unit of observation is a county in a state in
   a year. Baseline personal income is measured in 1998. The sample size is smaller than the
   main sample as the county must appear in the data in 1998. All models estimated with
   least squares and control for county characteristics, state-by-year fixed-effects, and county
   fixed-effects. Observations are weighted by the population covered by the UCRC data.
   Standard errors are clustered at the county level. 95% confidence interval is reported in
   parentheses. ***,**,* = statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                              36
                            Figure 1: Trends in crime rates




Notes : The data set is the UCRC 1999-2014. Data are aggregated to the year level using
population weights. The sample mean values of total, violent, and non-violent crimes per
10,000 residents are 360.0, 44.1, and 315.9 respectively.




                                          37
                       Figure 2: Local event study: Total crime rates




Notes : The dataset is the combined UCRC and CBP 1999-2014. The unit of observation
is a county in a state in a year. The outcome variable in all models is the total crime rate
per 10,000 residents in the county. All models estimated with least squares and control for
county characteristics (see Section 3.3), state-by-year fixed-effects, and county fixed-effects.
Observations are weighted by the population covered by the UCRC data. The sample mean
values is 360.0 total crimes per 10,000 residents. 95% confidence intervals account for within
county clustering and are reported with vertical lines. See Section 4.4 for details on the
analysis and specifications.




                                              38
                          Figure 3: Falsification: Total crime rates




Notes : The dataset is the combined UCRC and CBP 1999-2014. The unit of observation
is a county in a state in a year. The outcome variable in all models is the total crime rate
per 10,000 residents in the county. All models estimated with least squares and control for
county characteristics (see Section 3.3), state-by-year fixed-effects, and county fixed-effects.
Observations are weighted by the population covered by the UCRC data. The sample mean
values is 360.0 total crimes per 10,000 residents. The black diamond represents our main
coefficient estimate and the gray cirlces represent the 100 placebo coefficient estimates. See
Section 4.4 for details on the analysis and specifications.




                                              39
Table A1: Effect of office-based mental healthcare providers on aggregate crime rates, using
different specifications: 1999-2014
  Outcome:                                      Total crime    Violent crime   Nonviolent crime
  Unweighted
  Mean                                              244.9            26.1             218.7
  Offices of mental healthcare providers         -0.6758***      -0.1199***        -0.5559***
                                                  (0.1803)        (0.0180)          (0.1722)
  Observations                                      45577           45577             45577
  Drop state-by-year fixed-effects
  Mean                                              360.0            44.1             315.9
  Offices of mental healthcare providers           -0.0593       -0.0668***          0.0075
                                                  (0.1188)        (0.0133)          (0.1081)
  Observations                                      45577           45577            45577
  First-differences model
  Mean                                              244.3            26.1             218.2
  Offices of mental healthcare providers           -0.0011       -0.0220***          -0.0576
                                                  (0.0333)        (0.0033)          (0.2383)
  Observations                                      42521           42521             42521
  Crime counts, control for population
  Mean                                            43037.4          6673.2            36364.2
  Offices of mental healthcare providers       -232.5410***     -88.0923***       -144.4487***
                                                 (39.0182)       (13.6307)          (25.8937)
  Observations                                     45577           45577              45577
  Logarithm of crime rate
  Mean                                             360.0             44.1             315.9
  Offices of mental healthcare providers         -0.0012**       -0.0019***         -0.0010*
                                                  (0.0005)        (0.0004)          (0.0005)
  Observations                                     45577            45577            45577
  Inverse hyperbolic sine of crime rate
  Mean                                              360.0            44.1             315.9
  Offices of mental healthcare providers         -0.0008***      -0.0017***         -0.0006*
                                                  (0.0003)        (0.0003)          (0.0003)
  Observations                                      45577           45577            45577
  Control for general doctors
  Mean                                              360.0           44.1              315.9
  Offices of mental healthcare providers           -0.1015       -0.0427**           -0.0588
                                                  (0.0838)        (0.0190)          (0.0696)
  Observations                                      45577          45577              45577
   Notes : The data set is the combined UCRC and CBP 1999-2014. Office-based mental health-
   care providers are lagged one year. The unit of observation is a county in a state in a year.
   All models estimated with least squares and control for county characteristics, state-by-year
   fixed-effects, and county fixed-effects unless otherwise noted. Observations are weighted by the
   population covered by the UCRC data unless otherwise noted. Standard errors are clustered at
   the county level and are reported in parentheses. ***,**,* = statistically different from zero at
   the 1%,5%,10% level.
                                                40
Table A2: Effect of office-based mental healthcare providers on aggregate crime rates, using
different samples: 1999-2014
  Outcome:                                 Total crime Violent crime Nonviolent crime
  Exclude counties with no offices
  Mean                                         241.0          26.8             214.2
  Offices of mental healthcare providers -0.1405***       -0.0844***          -0.0561
                                             (0.0415)      (0.0082)          (0.0389)
  Observations                                 23919         23919             23919
  Exclude ACA years (2010-2014)
  Mean                                         382.4          47.1             335.3
  Offices of mental healthcare providers -0.2820***       -0.1301***        -0.1518***
                                             (0.0633)      (0.0197)          (0.0574)
  Observations                                 30523         30523             30523
  Use QCEW 2002-2014
  Mean                                         351.3          42.9             308.4
  Offices of mental healthcare providers      -0.1294     -0.0570***          -0.0724
                                             (0.1315)      (0.0209)          (0.1169)
  Observations                                 37771         37771             37771
   Notes : The data set is the combined UCRC and CBP 1999-2014 unless otherwise noted.
   Office-based mental healthcare providers are lagged one year. The unit of observation is a
   county in a state in a year. All models estimated with least squares and control for county
   characteristics, state-by-year fixed-effects, and county fixed-effects unless otherwise noted.
   Observations are weighted by the population covered by the UCRC data. Standard errors
   are clustered at the county level and are reported in parentheses. ***,**,* = statistically
   different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                              41
Table A3: Effect of office-based mental healthcare providers on aggregate crime rates, ag-
gregate to the state and CBSA: 1999-2014
  Outcome:                               Total crime Violent crime Nonviolent crime
  Aggregate data to the state
  Mean                                       271.1           30.7            240.5
  Offices of mental healthcare providers    -0.0423      -0.0157***         -0.0266
                                           (0.0293)       (0.0035)         (0.0262)
  Observations                                800            800              800
  Aggregate data to the CBSA
  Mean                                       335.4           37.4            298.0
  Offices of mental healthcare providers -0.8924**       -0.0977***       -0.7947**
                                           (0.3534)       (0.0250)         (0.3447)
  Observations                               14111          14111            14111
   Notes : The data set is the combined UCRC and CBP 1999-2014. Office-based mental
   healthcare providers are lagged one year. The unit of observation is a state or CBSA in a
   year. State-level models estimated with least squares and control for state characteristics,
   state fixed-effects, and year fixed-effects. CBSA-level models estimated with least squares
   and control for CBSA characteristics, CBSA fixed-effects, and state-by-year fixed-effects.
   Observations are weighted by the population covered by the UCRC data. Standard
   errors are clustered at the state or CBSA level and are reported in parentheses. ***,**,*
   = statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                              42
Table A4: Effect of office-based mental healthcare providers on aggregate crime rates allowing
for a quadratic in offices: 1999-2014
   Outcome:                                 Total crime Violent crime Nonviolent crime
   Mean                                        360.0            44.1            315.9
   Offices of mental healthcare providers -0.3400**         -0.0706**         -0.2694**
                                              (0.1609)       (0.0317)          (0.1370)
   Offices of mental healthcare providers      0.0001         -0.0000          0.0001*
   squared                                    (0.0001)       (0.0000)          (0.0001)
   Observations                                45577           45577            45577
   Notes : Office-based mental healthcare providers are lagged one year. The unit of obser-
   vation is a county in a state in a year. All models estimated with least squares and control
   for county characteristics, state-by-year fixed-effects, and county fixed-effects. Observa-
   tions are weighted by the population covered by the UCRC data. Standard errors are
   clustered at the county level and are reported in parentheses. ***,**,* = statistically
   different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                              43
References
Altonji, J. G., Elder, T. E., & Taber, C. R. (2005). Selection on observed and unobserved
      variables: Assessing the effectiveness of catholic schools. Journal of Political Economy ,
      113 (1), 151­184.
American Psychiatric Association. (2006). American Psychiatric Association Practice guide-
      lines for the treatment of psychiatric disorders: Compendium 2006 (Tech. Rep.). Amer-
      ican Psychiatric Association.
Banerjee, S., Chatterji, P., & Lahiri, K. (2017). Effects of psychiatric disorders on labor
      market outcomes: A latent variable approach using multiple clinical indicators. Health
      Economics , 26 (2), 184­205.
Becker, G. S. (1968). The economic dimensions of crime. Springer.
Beheshti, D. (2019). Adverse health effects of abuse-deterrent opioids: Evidence from the
      reformulation of oxycontin. Health Economics , 28 (12), 1449­1461.
Bondurant, S. R., Lindo, J. M., & Swensen, I. D. (2018). Substance abuse treatment centers
      and local crime. Journal of Urban Economics , 104 , 124­133.
Borup, D., Christian, E., & Sch¨  utte, M. (2020). In search of a job: Forecasting employment
      growth using google trends. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics , Forthcoming .
Cengiz, D., Dube, A., Lindner, A., & Zipperer, B. (2019). The effect of minimum wages
      on low-wage jobs: Evidence from the united states using a bunching estimator (Tech.
      Rep. No. 25434). National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series.
Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality. (2019). Results from the 2018 National
      Survey on Drug Use and Health: Detailed Tables (Tech. Rep.). Substance Abuse and
      Mental Health Services Administration,.
Chalfin, A., Danagoulian, S., & Deza, M. (2019). More sneezing, less crime? health shocks
      and the market for offenses. Journal of Health Economics , 68 , 102230.
Chalfin, A., & McCrary, J. (2018). Are US cities underpoliced? Theory and evidence.
      Review of Economics and Statistics , 100 (1), 167­186.
Chatterji, P., Alegria, M., Lu, M., & Takeuchi, D. (2007). Psychiatric disorders and labor
      market outcomes: evidence from the national latino and asian american study. Health
      Economics , 16 (10), 1069­1090.
Chatterji, P., Alegria, M., & Takeuchi, D. (2011). Psychiatric disorders and labor mar-
      ket outcomes: Evidence from the national comorbidity survey-replication. Journal of
      Health Economics , 30 (5), 858­868.
Cuellar, A. E., & Markowitz, S. (2007). Medicaid policy changes in mental health care
      and their effect on mental health outcomes. Health Economics, Policy and Law , 2 (1),
      23­49.
Doleac, J. L., & Mukherjee, A. (2019). The moral hazard of lifesaving innovations: naloxone
      access, opioid abuse, and crime (Tech. Rep. No. 3135264). SSRN Working Paper
      Series.
Drake, R. E., & Wallach, M. A. (1989). Substance abuse among the chronic mentally ill.
      Psychiatric Services , 40 (10), 1041­1046.


                                              44
Dustmann, C., & Fasani, F. (2016). The effect of local area crime on mental health. The
      Economic Journal , 126 (126), 978­1017.
Elliott, D. S., Huizinga, D., & Menard, S. (2012). Multiple problem youth: Delinquency,
      substance use, and mental health problems. Springer Science & Business Media.
Fazel, S., Khosla, V., Doll, H., & Geddes, J. (2008). The prevalence of mental disorders
      among the homeless in western countries: systematic review and meta-regression anal-
      ysis. PLoS medicine , 5 (12), e225.
Frank, R. G., & McGuire, T. G. (2010). Mental health treatment and criminal justice
      outcomes. In P. J. Cook, J. Ludwig, & J. McCrary (Eds.), (pp. 167­207). University
      of Chicago Press.
Freedman, M., & Owens, E. G. (2011). Low-income housing development and crime. Journal
      of Urban Economics , 70 (2), 115­131.
Frijters, P., Johnston, D. W., & Shields, M. A. (2014). The effect of mental health on
      employment: evidence from australian panel data. Health Economics , 23 (9), 1058­
      1071.
Goldstein, P. J. (1985). The drugs/violence nexus: A tripartite conceptual framework.
      Journal of Drug Issues , 15 (4), 493­506.
Harcourt, B. E. (2011). An institutionalization effect: The impact of mental hospitalization
      and imprisonment on homicide in the united states, 1934­2001. The Journal of Legal
      Studies , 40 (1), 39­83.
Horn, B. P., Joshi, A., & Maclean, J. C. (2019). Substance use disorder treatment centers
      and property values (Tech. Rep. No. 25427). National Bureau of Economic Research.
James, D. J., & Glaze, L. E. (2006). Mental health problems of prison and jail inmates
      (Tech. Rep.). US Dept of Justice and Office of Justice Programs. Retrieved from
      https://www.ncjrs.gov/app/abstractdb/AbstractDBDetails.aspx?id=235099
Kaiser Family Foundation.          (2018).   Mental health care health professional short-
      age areas (hpsas) (Tech. Rep.).         Kaiser Family Foundation.       Retrieved from
      https://www.kff.org/other/state-indicator/mental-health-care-health
      -professional-shortage-areas-hpsas/?currentTimeframe=0&sortModel=%7B%
      22colId%22:%22Location%22,%22sort%22:%22asc%22%7D
Kilpatrick, D. G., Ruggiero, K. J., Acierno, R., Saunders, B. E., Resnick, H. S., & Best, C. L.
      (2003). Violence and risk of PTSD, major depression, substance abuse/dependence,
      and comorbidity: Results from the National Survey of Adolescents. Journal of Con-
      sulting and Clinical Psychology , 71 (4), 692.
King, M., Ruggles, S., Alexander, J. T., Flood, S., Genadek, K., Schroeder, M. B., . . .
      Vick, R. (2020). Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey:
      Version 4.0. [Machine-readable database] (Tech. Rep.). Minnesota Population Center.
Kisely, S. R., Campbell, L. A., & O'Reilly, R. (2017). Compulsory community and involun-
      tary outpatient treatment for people with severe mental disorders. Cochrane database
      of systematic reviews , 3 .
Lamb, H. R., & Bachrach, L. L. (2001). Some perspectives on deinstitutionalization. Psy-
      chiatric Services , 52 (8), 1039­1045.


                                              45
Lamb, H. R., & Weinberger, L. E. (2005). The shift of psychiatric inpatient care from
      hospitals to jails and prisons. Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the
      Law Online , 33 (4), 529­534.
Landersø, R., & Fallesen, P. (2016). Psychiatric hospital admission and later mental health,
      crime, and labor market outcomes (Tech. Rep. No. Study Paper No. 98). The Rockwool
      Foundation Research Unit.
Levitt, S. D. (2004). Understanding why crime fell in the 1990s: Four factors that explain
      the decline and six that do not. Journal of Economic Perspectives , 18 (1), 163­190.
Levy, J. C., & Deykin, E. Y. (1989). Suicidality, depression, and substance abuse in adoles-
      cence. The American Journal of Psychiatry , 146 (11), 1462.
Lindrooth, R. C., Lo Sasso, A. T., & Lurie, I. Z. (2006). The effect of distance to provider
      on employee response to changes in mental health benefits. Health Economics , 15 (10),
      1133­1141.
Maniglio, R. (2009). Severe mental illness and criminal victimization: A systematic review.
      Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica , 119 (3), 180­191.
Marcotte, D. E., & Markowitz, S. (2011). A cure for crime? Psycho-pharmaceuticals and
      crime trends. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management , 30 (1), 29­56.
Mark, T. L., Yee, T., Levit, K. R., Camacho-Cook, J., Cutler, E., & Carroll, C. D. (2016).
      Insurance financing increased for mental health conditions but not for substance use
      disorders, 1986­2014. Health Affairs , 35 (6), 958­965.
McCollister, K., Yang, X., Sayed, B., French, M. T., Leff, J. A., & Schackman, B. R. (2017).
      Monetary conversion factors for economic evaluations of substance use disorders. Jour-
      nal of Substance Abuse Treatment , 81 (25­34), 2017.
Moffitt, R. (1992). Incentive effects of the us welfare system: A review. Journal of Economic
      Literature , 30 (1), 1­61.
National Alliance on Mental Ilness. (2020). Treatments (Tech. Rep.). National Al-
      liance on Mental Illness. Retrieved from https://nami.org/About-Mental-Illness/
      Treatments
National Institute of Mental Health. (2020). Treatments and therapies (Tech. Rep.). National
      Institute of Mental Health. Retrieved from https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/
      topics/index.shtml
Pei, Z., Pischke, J.-S., & Schwandt, H. (2018). Poorly measured confounders are more useful
      on the left than on the right. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics , 1­12.
Rosenblum, A., Cleland, C. M., Fong, C., Kayman, D. J., Tempalski, B., & Parrino, M.
      (2011). Distance traveled and cross-state commuting to opioid treatment programs in
      the united states. Journal of Environmental and Public Health .
Schmitt, S. K., Phibbs, C. S., & Piette, J. D. (2003). The influence of distance on utilization
      of outpatient mental health aftercare following inpatient substance abuse treatment.
      Addictive Behaviors , 28 (6), 1183­1192.
Solomon, K. (2018). State mental health insurance parity laws and college educational
      outcomes (Tech. Rep.). Temple University.
Stamm, K., Lin, L., & Christidis, P. (2018). Mental disorders most frequently treated by


                                              46
      psychologists. News from APA's Center for Workforce Studies , 49 (3), 19.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2016). Behavioral health
      spending and use accounts, 19862014 (Tech. Rep. No. SMA-16-4975). Rockville, MD:
      Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
Swanson, J. W., Borum, R., Swartz, M. S., Hiday, V. A., Wagner, H. R., & Burns, B. J.
      (2001). Can involuntary outpatient commitment reduce arrests among persons with
      severe mental illness? Criminal Justice and Behavior , 28 (2), 156­189.
Swartz, M. S., Bhattacharya, S., Robertson, A. G., & Swanson, J. W. (2017). Involuntary
      outpatient commitment and the elusive pursuit of violence prevention: A view from
      the United States. The Canadian Journal of Psychiatry , 62 (2), 102­108.
Swensen, I. D. (2015). Substance-abuse treatment and mortality. Journal of Public Eco-
      nomics , 122 , 13­30.
Tefft, N. (2011). Insights on unemployment, unemployment insurance, and mental health.
      Journal of Health Economics , 30 (2), 258­264.
Teplin, L. A., McClelland, G. M., Abram, K. M., & Weiner, D. A. (2005). Crime vic-
      timization in adults with severe mental illness: Comparison with the National Crime
      Victimization Survey. Archives of General Psychiatry , 62 (8), 911­921.
Wen, H., Hockenberry, J. M., & Cummings, J. R. (2017). The effect of Medicaid expansion on
      crime reduction: Evidence from HIFA-waiver expansions. Journal of Public Economics ,
      154 , 67 - 94. Retrieved from http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
      pii/S0047272717301445 doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2017.09.001
Wen, H., Wilk, A. S., Druss, B. G., & Cummings, J. R. (2019). Medicaid acceptance by
      psychiatrists before and after medicaid expansion. JAMA Psychiatry , 76 (9), 981­983.
Yohanna, D. (2013). Deinstitutionalization of people with mental illness: causes and conse-
      quences. AMA Journal of Ethics , 15 (10), 886­891.




                                            47
