                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     A QUANTITY-DRIVEN THEORY OF TERM PREMIA AND EXCHANGE RATES

                                          Robin Greenwood
                                          Samuel G. Hanson
                                           Jeremy C. Stein
                                            Adi Sunderam

                                        Working Paper 27615
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27615


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2020




We are grateful to John Campbell, Wenxin Du, Ken Froot, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Gordon Liao,
Hanno Lustig, and Matteo Maggiori and seminar participants at Dartmouth Tuck, the ECB,
Harvard, the NBER Asset Pricing Summer Institute, Oxford Said, SITE 2019, Wharton, and
Warwick Business School for helpful comments. Greenwood, Hanson, and Sunderam gratefully
acknowledge funding from the Harvard Business School Division of Research. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27615.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Robin Greenwood, Samuel G. Hanson, Jeremy C. Stein, and Adi Sunderam. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Quantity-Driven Theory of Term Premia and Exchange Rates
Robin Greenwood, Samuel G. Hanson, Jeremy C. Stein, and Adi Sunderam
NBER Working Paper No. 27615
July 2020
JEL No. F31,G12

                                          ABSTRACT

We develop a model in which specialized bond investors must absorb shocks to the supply and
demand for long-term bonds in two currencies. Since long-term bonds and foreign exchange are
both exposed to unexpected movements in short-term interest rates, a shift in the supply of long-
term bonds in one currency influences the foreign exchange rate between the two currencies, as
well as bond term premia in both currencies. Our model matches several important empirical
patterns, including the co-movement between exchange rates and term premia, as well as the
finding that central banks' quantitative easing policies impact exchange rates. An extension of our
model sheds light on the persistent deviations from covered interest rate parity that have emerged
since 2008.

Robin Greenwood                                  Jeremy C. Stein
Harvard Business School                          Department of Economics
Baker Library 267                                Harvard University
Soldiers Field                                   Littauer 209
Boston, MA 02163                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                         and NBER
rgreenwood@hbs.edu                               jeremy_stein@harvard.edu

Samuel G. Hanson                                 Adi Sunderam
Harvard Business School                          Harvard Business School
Baker Library 361                                Baker Library 359
Soldiers Field                                   Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163                                 Boston, MA 02163
and NBER                                         and NBER
shanson@hbs.edu                                  asunderam@hbs.edu




An Online Appendix is available at
https://www.dropbox.com/s/hoscjn80wx5ua8t/GHSS_FX_IA_FINAL.pdf?dl=0
1       Introduction
There is a growing recognition that ...nancial intermediaries play an important role in determining
foreign exchange (FX) rates (Kouri [1976], Evans and Lyons [2002], Froot and Ramadorai [2005],
Gabaix and Maggiori [2015], Itskhoki and Mukhin [2019]). When there are frictions in ...nancial
intermediation, exchange rates move in response to shifts in the supply and demand for assets
in di¤erent currencies, which intermediaries must absorb. Since the wealth of intermediaries in
FX markets need not be closely tied to aggregate consumption or conditions in broader ...nancial
markets (e.g., equities), this approach can explain the disconnect of exchange rates from macro-
economic fundamentals (Obstfeld and Rogo¤ [2000]) and the predictability of currency returns
(Fama [1984]).
    In this paper, we provide a framework for understanding how the detailed structure of ...nancial
intermediation impacts foreign exchange rates and show that this approach can shed light on
numerous puzzles in the exchange rate literature. We start by assuming that global bond and
FX markets are integrated with one another but segmented from other ...nancial markets. We
make this assumption for two reasons. First, foreign exchange is conceptually similar to long-
term bonds in that both are "interest-rate sensitive" assets: they are heavily exposed to news
about future short-term interest rates. Thus, the physical and human capital needed to trade
long-term bonds can also be used to trade FX. Indeed, at most major dealer-banks and hedge
funds, interest-rate and FX trading are tightly integrated.
    Second, concrete empirical motivation for our paper comes from recent work showing that
quantitative easing (QE) policies-- i.e., large-scale purchases of long-term bonds by central banks--
signi...cantly impacted foreign exchange rates and not just long-term bond yields, suggesting im-
portant linkages between the two markets For example, Neely (2011), Bauer and Neely (2014),
and Swanson (2017) show that the Fed'      s long-term bond purchases were associated with a large
depreciation of the U.S. dollar vis-a-vis other major currencies.
    A quantity-driven, supply-and-demand approach in the spirit of Tobin (1958, 1969) provides a
natural explanation for bond price movements stemming from QE.1 According to this "portfolio
balance" view, holding ...xed the expected path of future short-term rates, a reduction in the
supply of long-term bonds-- such as QE-- leads to a fall in long-term bond yields because it
reduces the total amount of interest rate risk borne by specialized ...nancial intermediaries. Since
the ...xed-income market is assumed to be partially segmented from other parts of the broader
capital markets, these intermediaries cannot diversify away the interest rate risk they bear and
must be paid to absorb shocks to the supply and demand for long-term bonds. This segmentation
explains why QE policies-- which, while large relative to national bond markets, are small relative
to global markets for all ...nancial assets-- have a large impact on long-term yields.
    Our paper shows that this same quantity-driven, supply-and demand approach can also ex-
plain many empirical facts about exchange rates, including their response to QE. The key insight
is that, as noted above, foreign exchange and long-term U.S. bonds are exposed to the same
primary risk factor-- unexpected movements in short-term U.S. interest rates. Thus, if the global
    1
   See, for example, Greenwood and Vayanos (2014), Vayanos and Vila (2019), Hamilton and Wu (2012),
D'
 Amico and King (2013), and Greenwood, Hanson, and Vayanos (2016).


                                                 1
bond and FX markets are integrated with one another, a shift in the supply of long-term U.S.
bonds like QE a¤ects the risk premium on both types of assets.
    Our baseline model is a straightforward generalization of the Vayanos and Vila (2019) term
structure model to a setting with two currencies. Speci...cally, we consider a model with short-
term and long-term bonds in two currencies, which we label the U.S. dollar (USD) and the euro
(EUR). Short-term interest rates in each currency are exogenous and evolve stochastically over
time. We assume that short rates in the two currencies are positively, but imperfectly, correlated.
    The key friction in the model is that the marginal investors in global bond and FX markets--
who we call "global bond investors"    -- are specialized. These investors must absorb exogenous
shocks to the supply and demand for long-term bonds in both currencies, as well as demand
shocks in the foreign exchange market. Since these specialists have limited risk-bearing capacity,
they will only absorb these shocks if the expected returns on long-term bonds in both currencies,
as well as foreign exchange, adjust in response.
    To solve the model, we must pin down three equilibrium prices: the long-term yield in each
currency and the exchange rate between the two currencies-- the number of dollars per euro.
Equivalently, the equilibrium pins down expected returns on three long-short trades: a "yield
curve trade"in each currency-- which borrows short-term and lends long-term in that currency--
and an "FX trade"    -- which borrows short-term in dollars and lends short-term in euros.
    We ...rst show that this baseline model predicts that shifts in the supply of long-term bonds
impact not only term premia, but also the expected returns on the FX trade and hence exchange
rates. For instance, an increase in the supply of long-term U.S. bonds raises both the expected
excess return on long-term U.S. bonds and the expected return on the borrow-in-dollar lend-in-
euro FX trade, leading to a depreciation of the euro versus the dollar.
    The key intuition is that the U.S. yield curve trade and the borrow-in-dollar lend-in-euro
FX trade have similar exposures to U.S. short rate risk. First, when the U.S. short rate rises
unexpectedly, long-term U.S. yields also rise through an expectations hypothesis channel: the
expected path of U.S. short rates is now higher, so long-term U.S. yields must rise for long-term
U.S. bonds to remain attractive to investors. As a result, the price of long-term U.S. bonds falls,
so investors in the U.S. yield curve trade lose money. The borrow-in-dollar lend-in-euro FX trade
is also exposed to U.S. short rate risk. When the U.S. short rate rises unexpectedly, the euro
depreciates through an uncovered-interest-rate-parity (UIP) channel: since future short rates are
now expected to be higher in the U.S. than in Europe, the euro must fall and then be expected
to appreciate for short-term euro bonds to remain attractive. Thus, the FX trade su¤ers losses
at the same time as the U.S. yield curve trade.
    Now consider the e¤ect of an increase in the supply of long-term U.S. bonds-- e.g., because the
Federal Reserve announces it is going to unwind its QE policies. Following this outward supply
shift, global bond investors will be more exposed to future shocks to short-term U.S. interest
rates. As a result, the price of bearing U.S. short rate risk must rise. Since long-term U.S. bonds
are exposed to U.S. short rate risk, this leads to a rise in the term premium component of long-
term U.S. yields. It also leads to a rise in the risk premium on the borrow-in-dollar lend-in-euro
FX trade, which is similarly exposed to U.S. short rate risk. As a result, the euro must depreciate


                                                2
against the dollar and will be expected to appreciate going forward.2
    The baseline model makes several additional predictions. First, we show that bond supply
shocks should have a larger impact on the bilateral exchange rate when the correlation between
the two countries' short rates is lower. For example, the USD-JPY exchange rate should be
more responsive to U.S. QE than the USD-EUR exchange rate because Japanese short rates are
less correlated with U.S. short rates than are Euro short rates. Second, our model matches the
otherwise puzzling ...nding in Lustig, Stathopoulos, and Verdelhan (2019) that the return to the
FX trade declines if one borrows long-term in one currency to lend long-term in the other. In our
model, this pattern arises because the "long-term" FX trade has o¤setting exposures to short-
rate shocks, making it less risky for global bond investors than the standard FX trade involving
short-term bonds.
    After   eshing out these basic predictions, we show that our approach delivers a uni...ed account
linking two well-known facts about the predictability of bond and foreign exchange returns. First,
Campbell and Shiller (1991) showed that the yield curve trade earns positive expected returns
when the yield curve is steep. Second, Fama (1984) showed that the FX trade earns positive
expected returns when the euro short rate exceeds the U.S. one. With one additional assumption,
our model can simultaneously match these two facts. Speci...cally, we assume that global bond
investors' exposure to the FX trade is increasing in the foreign exchange rate due to balance-
of-trade driven    ows. The idea is that when the euro is strong, U.S. net exports to Europe
rise. This in turn creates higher demand from U.S. exporters to swap the euros they receive
from their European sales into dollars, which global bond investors must accommodate. This
assumption, which is needed in Gabaix and Maggiori (2015) to match the Fama (1984) result,
immediately delivers the Campbell-Shiller (1991) result in our model for the yield curve trades
in both currencies.3
    To see the intuition, suppose that the euro short rate is higher than the U.S. short rate. By
standard UIP logic, the euro will be strong relative to the dollar. Our assumed trade       ows mean
that global bond investors must bear greater euro exposure when the euro is strong. This raises
the expected returns on the borrow-in-dollar lend-in-euro FX trade. As a result, the expected
return on the FX trade is increasing in the di¤erence between euro and U.S. short rates as in
Fama (1984). This is the logic of Gabaix and Maggiori (2015). In our model, because global bond
investors will lose money on their FX positions if U.S. short rates rise, the equilibrium expected
returns on the U.S. yield curve trade must simultaneously rise. At the same time, the yield curve
will be steeper in the U.S. than the euro area because U.S. short rates are lower and expected to
mean-revert. Thus, the model will also match Campbell and Shiller'    s (1991) ...nding that a steep
yield curve predicts high excess returns on long-term bonds.
    We then extend our model in several ways to explore how the detailed structure of ...nan-
   2
     We have discussed these e¤ects in terms of U.S. short rate risk, but they apply symmetrically to euro short
rate risk. The supply of long-term euro bonds has the opposite e¤ect on the USD-EUR exchange rate as the
supply of long-term U.S. bonds.
   3
     Symmetrically, the assumption used by Vayanos and Vila (2019) to match the Campbell-Shiller (1991) fact--
that the net supply of long-term bonds is decreasing in long-term yields-- immediately delivers the Fama (1984)
pattern for foreign exchange in our model.



                                                       3
cial intermediation impacts foreign exchange rates. We ...rst explore the post-2008 violations of
covered-interest-rate parity (CIP) recently documented by Du, Tepper, and Verdelhan (2018).
When CIP holds, the short-term U.S. "cash" rate equals the "synthetic" U.S. short rate, which
is obtained by investing in short-term euro bonds and using FX forward contracts to hedge the
associated FX risk. Since CIP violations imply the existence of riskless pro...ts, they cannot be
explained simply by invoking segmentation and limited risk-bearing capacity. Therefore, we make
three changes to the model. First, we split our global bond investors, so half are domiciled in the
U.S. and half are domiciled in the eurozone. Second, we assume the only intermediaries who can
engage in riskless CIP arbitrage trades-- i.e., borrowing at the synthetic U.S. rate to lend at the
cash U.S. rate-- are a set of banks that face non-risk-based balance sheet constraints. Third, we
assume that bond investors must use FX forwards if they want to make FX-hedged investments
in long-term bonds outside their home domiciles. Under these assumptions, we show that devia-
tions from CIP co-move with spot exchange rates as documented by Du, Tepper, and Verdelhan
(2018) and Jiang, Krishnamurthy, and Lustig (2019). The intuition is that a positive U.S. bond
supply shock generates demand from Euro investors to buy U.S. long-term bonds and hedge the
associated FX risk using FX forwards. Banks accommodate this hedging demand and lay o¤
the accompanying FX risk by engaging in riskless CIP arbitrage trades. Since these riskless CIP
arbitrage trades use scarce balance-sheet capacity, banks will only accommodate investor hedging
demand if there are deviations from CIP, leading to comovement between CIP deviations and
spot FX rates.
    We next explore what happens if intermediation is further segmented within global bond
and FX markets. Speci...cally, we replace some of our      exible global bond investors with local-
currency bond specialists, who can only trade short- and long-term bonds in their local currency,
as well as with specialists who only conduct the FX trade. Introducing this further specialization
delivers two additional e¤ects relative to the baseline model. First, shocks to the supply of
long-term bonds in either currency generally have a larger impact on the exchange rate than
in the baseline model. This e¤ect arises because further segmentation e¤ectively reduces bond
investors'collective risk-bearing capacity. Second, shocks to the supply of long-term bonds trigger
FX trading     ows between di¤erent investor types. In this way, we endogenize the FX            ows in
Gabaix and Maggiori (2015), ascribing them to capital markets forces.
    In a third extension, we introduce interest-rate insensitive assets-- e.g., equities-- that are not
exposed to movements in interest rates. In our baseline model, shocks to the supply-and-demand
for rate-insensitive assets have no e¤ect on exchange rates because they do not change the amount
of interest rate risk borne by global bond investors. However, in the presence of deviations from
CIP or other FX hedging frictions, these shocks can impact exchange rates because they generate
demands for di¤erent currencies, which global bond investors must accommodate. In other words,
the CIP deviations that have emerged since 2008 signi...cantly increase the set of capital market
  ows that can impact exchange rates.
    Our paper is most closely related to work studying portfolio balance e¤ects in currency markets
(e.g., Kouri [1976], Evans and Lyons [2002], Froot and Ramadorai [2005], Gabaix and Maggiori
[2015]). In these models, the disconnect between exchange rates and macroeconomic fundamen-


                                                  4
tals is explained by a disconnect between intermediaries in currency markets and the broader
economy.4 Our paper is also closely related to papers studying portfolio balance e¤ects in bond
markets.5 Our key contribution is to show that the structure of ...nancial intermediation, which
links shocks hitting the intermediaries in FX markets to shocks in the bond market, helps to
explain several important empirical patterns.
    The closest paper to ours is independent work by Gourinchas, Ray, and Vayanos (GRV 2020).
GRV also study a two-currency generalization of the Vayanos and Vila (2019) term structure
model. While we work in discrete time with only a short- and long-term bond in each currency,
GRV work in continuous time and consider a continuum of zero-coupon bonds in each currency.
Despite these technical di¤erences, our baseline theoretical results in Section 3 below have close
analogs in their setting and vice versa. Nevertheless, there are a number of important di¤erences
between the two papers, and we believe they are complementary. For instance, GRV numerically
calibrate their model to data on the U.S. and U.K. yield curves and then use the calibrated model
to conduct numerical policy experiments. In contrast, we explore theoretically CIP violations,
other FX hedging frictions, and the role of additional segmentation within the global bond market.
We also establish a number of empirical results that support the key predictions from our baseline
model. In summary, while the results in Section 3 below are similar in spirit to those in GRV,
the results in Sections 2, 4 and 5 are almost entirely distinct.
    Our paper is also related to the vast literature taking a consumption-based, representative
agent approach to exchange rates.6 In contrast to our quantity-driven, segmented-markets model,
these traditional asset pricing theories struggle to explain why supply shocks-- e.g., central bank
QE policies-- impact foreign exchange rates and other asset prices. As Woodford (2012) explains,
this is because a mere "reshu- ing" of assets between households and the central bank does not
change the pricing kernel in standard theories. Furthermore, as we detail below, consumption-
based models generally imply very di¤erent relationships between exchange rates and interest
rates than our model. For instance, in consumption-based models, the expected return on the
borrow-in-dollar lend-in-euro FX trade is negatively correlated with the di¤erence between U.S.
and euro term premia. By contrast, in our model, the correlation is positive.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present some empirical
evidence that motivates our theoretical analysis. Section 3 presents the baseline model. Section
4 extends the model to shed light on deviations from CIP. Section 5 presents an extension
that allows for further segmentation within the global bond and FX markets and considers the
implications when investors are constrained in their ability to hedge FX risk. Section 6 concludes.
   4
     A literature in international economics, including Farhi and Werning (2012) and Itshoki and Mukhin (2019),
features reduced-form "UIP shocks," which similarly disconnect exchange rates from macro fundamentals.
   5
     See, for example, Vayanos and Vila (2019), Greenwood, Hanson, and Stein (2010), Greenwood and Vayanos
(2014), Hanson (2014), Hanson and Stein (2015), Malkhozov, Mueller, Vedolin, and Venter (2016), Hanson, Lucca,
and Wright (2018), and Haddad and Sraer (2019).
   6
     Contributions to this literature include Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland (1992), Backus and Smith (1993),
Backus, Foresi, and Telmer (2001), Verdelhan (2010), Colacito and Croce (2011, 2013), Bansal and Shaliastovich
(2012), Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2014), Farhi and Gabaix (2016), and many others.




                                                      5
2       Motivating evidence
To motivate our theoretical analysis, we present evidence for three related propositions. First,
exchange rates appear to be about as sensitive to changes in long-term interest rate di¤eren-
tials as to changes in short-term interest rate di¤erentials. Second, the component of long-term
rate di¤erentials that matters for exchange rates appears to be a forecastable term premium
di¤erential, rather than the future path of short rates. And third, di¤erences in term premia
that move exchange rates appear to be partially quantity-driven, as they are responsive to QE
announcements. This last feature cannot be captured by complete-markets, representative-agent
models of exchange rates, since in such models supply shocks like QE are mere reshu- ings of
assets between households and the central bank and have no e¤ect on asset prices.


2.1     Contemporaneous movements in foreign exchange rates
Table 1 shows monthly panel regressions of the form

                       h qc;t   = Ac + B        h     ic;t    it + D       h   yc;t   yt +     h "c;t ,              (1)

where h qc;t is the quarterly (h = 3) or annual (h = 12) log change in currency c vis-a-vis the
U.S. dollar (USD), ic;t and it denote the foreign and U.S. short-term interest rates, and yc;t and
yt are the foreign and U.S. long-term interest rates. Positive values of h qc;t denote appreciation
of the foreign currency versus the dollar. The sample includes monthly observations between
2001 and 2017 for the euro (EUR), British pound (GBP), and Japanese yen (JPY). In Table
1, we measure the short-term interest rate as the 1-year government bond yield and the long-
term interest rate as the 10-year zero-coupon government bond yield.7 The regressions include
currency ...xed e¤ects and exploit within currency time-series variation. They are estimated using
monthly data and contain overlapping observations, so we report Driscoll-Kraay (1998) standard
errors-- the panel analog of Newey-West (1987).
    Column (1) shows the well-known result, consistent with standard UIP logic, that the foreign
currency appreciates in response to an increase in the foreign-minus-dollar short rate di¤erential.
A one percentage point increase in the short rate di¤erential in a given quarter leads to a 4:68
percentage point appreciation of the foreign currency.
    Column (2) shows a new result: currencies appear to be at least as responsive to changes in
long-term interest rates as they are to changes in short-term interest rates. Speci...cally, the long-
term yield di¤erential, h (yc;t yt ), enters with a coe¢ cient of 4:37, comparable to the coe¢ cient
of 3:51 on short rate di¤erential, h (ic;t it ). Columns (3) and (4) present speci...cations that
break the rate di¤erentials into their foreign and U.S. dollar components:

            h qc;t   = Ac + B1        h ic;t   + B2          h it   + D1   h yc;t   + D2     h yc;t   +   h "c;t .   (2)
    7
    We obtain data on exchange rates from Bloomberg. Data on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon bond yields is from
Gürkaynak, Sack, and Wright (2007). For the euro, we use data on German government zero-coupon bond yields
from the Bundesbank. Data on the U.K. and Japanese government zero-coupon yield curves are from the Bank
of England and the Bank of Japan, respectively.


                                                                6
Foreign and U.S. short-term rates enter with opposite signs in column (3).8 Similarly, the foreign
and U.S. long-term yields enter with coe¢ cients of 5:09 and 4:83 in column (4), consistent with
the idea that changes in the term premium di¤erential impact the exchange rate.
    Columns (5) to (8) repeat the analysis from columns (1) to (4), but change the forecasting
horizon to be annual. Compared to the prior speci...cations using quarterly changes, the coe¢ cient
on the foreign-minus-U.S. short rate di¤erential is smaller in magnitude (0:80 in column (6) versus
3:51 in column (2)), but the coe¢ cient on the long rate di¤erential is larger (7:37 in column (6)
versus 4:37 in column (2)).
    The evidence in Table 1 suggests that exchange rates react to movements in bond term premia.
However, the change in the 10-year bond yield is not a clean measure of changes in term premia:
it contains both changes in term premia and changes in expected future short-term interest rates.
A potentially cleaner, albeit still imperfect, measure of movements in term premia is the change
in forward interest rates at distant horizons. Distant forward rates re   ect expectations of short-
term interest rates in the distant future plus a term premium component. The idea is that there is
typically relatively little news about short-term rates in the distant future, so changes in distant
forward rates primarily re    ect term movements in premia (Hanson and Stein [2015]). Indeed,
there is a large literature showing that forward rates forecast the excess returns on long-term
bonds (Fama and Bliss [1987], Cochrane and Piazzesi [2005]).
    Table 2 presents regressions of the same form as in Table 1, but now using distant forward
rates (fc;t and ft ) instead of long-term yields (yc;t and yt ) as our proxy for term premia. The
distant forward we use is the 3-year 7-year forward government bond yield. Compared with
Table 1, the coe¢ cients on the short-rate di¤erentials are slightly larger in magnitude and the
coe¢ cients on the long-rate di¤erentials are slightly smaller in magnitude, but the latter remain
highly economically and statistically signi...cant. For example, in column (2) of Table 2, the short-
and long-rate di¤erentials enter with coe¢ cients of 4:72 and 2:99, as compared to coe¢ cients of
3:51 and 4:37 in column (2) of Table 1. Thus, Table 2 reinforces the conclusion that changes in
the term premium component of long-term bond yields are associated with movements in foreign
exchange rates.

2.1.1    Robustness

We have explored several variations on our baseline speci...cations. We ...nd similar results with
di¤erent proxies for short-term rates, including the 2-year yield, and di¤erent proxies for distant
forward rates, including the 1-year 9-year forward. We also ...nd similar results if we expand the
panel to also include the Australian dollar, Canadian dollar, and Swiss franc.
   However, it is important to note that our results are sample dependent. They are statistically
and economically strong when we start our analysis in 2001 or later but become signi...cantly
weaker if we extend the sample back further into the 1990s and 1980s. One possible explanation
   8
    Changes in foreign short rates attract a larger coe¢ cient than changes in domestic short rates. This is what
one would expect if innovations to foreign rates are more persistent than their domestic counterparts. Alternately,
this result would also arise if the U.S. set world short rates and foreign short rates move less than one-for-one
with U.S. short rates-- i.e., if ic;t = c it + c;t where c 2 (0; 1).



                                                        7
for this sample dependence is that in  ation was more volatile in earlier periods. Our theory speaks
to real interest rates and exchange rates, which may be swamped by       uctuations in nominal price
in  ation in earlier data. A second possibility is that currency and long-term bond markets were
less integrated in earlier periods. The development of a more integrated global bond and currency
market may have taken place in the 1990s, especially after the introduction of the euro in 1999
(Mylonidis and Kollias [2010], Pozzi and Wolswijk [2012]). As we discuss in Section 5.1, one
would not expect a tight linkage between exchanges rates and bond term premia if bond markets
are highly segmented from the foreign exchange market.


2.2    Forecasting bond and foreign exchange returns
In Tables 1 and 2, we used changes in long-term yields and forward rates as proxies for movements
in the term premium on long-term bonds. If this interpretation is correct, these same measures
should also forecast excess returns on long-term bonds over short-term bonds in their respective
currencies. Table 3 tests this prediction by running regressions of the form

             rxy
               c;t!t+h      rxy
                              t!t+h = Ac + B           ic;t    it + D       fc;t   ft + "c;t!t+h ,        (3)

and
        rxy
          c;t!t+h    rxy
                       t!t+h = Ac + B1        ic;t + B2         it + D1     fc;t + D2   ft + "c;t!t+h .   (4)

Here rxy c;t!t+h denotes h-month returns on long-term bonds in country c in excess of the short-
term interest rate in that country. rxy  t!t+h denotes h-month excess returns on long-term bonds
in the U.S. As in Tables 1 and 2, the sample period runs from 2001 to 2017 and consists of the
USD-EUR, USD-GBP, and USD-JPY currency pairs.
    The table shows that distant forward rates predict future excess bond returns at 3- and 12-
month horizons. For example, column (2) shows that if the foreign distant forward rate is one
percentage point higher than the U.S. distant forward rate, then, over the next three months,
excess returns (in foreign currency) on long-term foreign bonds exceed excess returns (in dollars)
on long-term U.S. bonds by 1:68 percentage points on average. Similar results obtain at an
annual forecasting horizon.
    In Table 4, we forecast excess returns on investments in foreign currency. The speci...cations
parallel those in Table 3, but the dependent variable is now the log excess return on an investment
in foreign currency that borrows for h-months at the U.S. short-term rate it and invests at the
foreign short-term rate ic;t . In other words, the regressions take the form:

                    rxq
                      c;t!t+h = Ac + B        ic;t     it + D        fc;t    ft + "c;t!t+h ,              (5)

and
              rxq
                c;t!t+h = Ac + B1       ic;t + B2       it + D1      fc;t + D2     ft + "c;t!t+h ,        (6)

where rxqc;t!t+h   qc;t+h     qc;t + (h=12)    (ic;t        it ) is the h-month excess return (in dollars) on
foreign currency c .


                                                        8
    The results in Table 4 are consistent with a risk premium interpretation of our earlier results.
For example, in column (2), an increase in the foreign-minus-U.S. distant forward rate di¤erential
negatively predicts 3-month currency returns with a coe¢ cient of 1:47 (p-value < 0:01).9 This
means that if the foreign distant forward rate rises by one percentage point relative to the U.S.
distant forward rate, investors can expect a 1:47 percentage point lower return on the trade
that borrows in dollars and lends in foreign currency over the next 3 months. This is consistent
with our results in Tables 1 and 2. For instance, Table 2 shows that increases in the foreign-
minus-U.S. distant forward di¤erential are associated with a contemporaneous appreciation of the
foreign currency. Table 4 shows that this increase in distant forward rate di¤erentials is associated
with a subsequent depreciation of foreign currency and thus low foreign currency returns.10


2.3     Central bank quantitative easing announcements
Our results so far are consistent with the idea that bond term premia play a role in driving the
foreign exchange risk premium. That said, our prior results do not tell us precisely what drives
bond term premia in the ...rst place and, thus, do not necessarily single out a supply-and-demand
approach to risk premium determination. As a ...nal piece of more direct motivating evidence
for our quantity-driven approach, we turn our attention to central bank announcements about
changes in the net supply of long-term bonds. As noted earlier, many studies have documented
the impact of central bank quantitative easing (QE) announcements on long-term bond yields
(Gagnon et al [2011], Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen [2011], and Greenwood, Hanson,
and Vayanos [2016]). Drawing on these previous studies, we isolate periods where we have more
con...dence that changes in long-term yields and distant forward rates re  ect quantity-driven news
about term premia, and show that these changes in term premia typically occur alongside changes
in exchange rates.
    Figure 1 illustrates our approach. Expanding the list in Mamaysky (2018), we construct a list
of large-scale asset purchase announcements by the U.S. Federal Reserve, the European Central
Bank, the Bank of England, and the Bank of Japan. For a QE announcement on date t, we show
the appreciation of the foreign exchange rate and the movement in foreign-minus-U.S. distant
forward rates from day t 2 to day t + 2. For the U.S. announcements, we show the average
appreciation of the dollar relative to euro, pound, and yen versus the movement in U.S. long-term
forward rates minus the average movement in forward rates for the euro, pound, and yen. For
the other three currencies, we show their appreciation relative to the dollar versus the movement
in the local currency forward rate minus the dollar forward rate.
    Consider the Fed'  s announcement on March 18, 2009 that it would expand its purchases of
long-term U.S. bonds to $1.75 trillion from a previously announced $600 billion. As can be seen
in Figure 1, distant U.S. forward rates fell by more than 40 basis points relative to those in other
countries in the days surrounding this announcement, and the dollar depreciated by approxi-
   9
     The coe¢ cient on the short-term interest rate di¤erential is essentially zero, consistent with evidence that the
"FX carry trade"that borrows in low short-rate countries and invests in high short-rate countries has been weak
in recent decades (e.g., Jylha and Suominen [2011]).
  10
     Boudoukh, Richardson, and Whitelaw (2016) obtain a similar result.


                                                          9
mately 4 percent vis-a-vis the euro, pound, and yen basket. For many announcements, neither
distant forwards nor currencies move by much, perhaps because the announcements were antici-
pated or because they fell short of the market's expectations of future bond purchases. However,
Figure 1 shows that announcements that were associated with signi...cant relative movements in
distant forward rates were typically associated with sizable currency depreciations.
    In Table 5, we focus our attention to these QE announcements and estimate the regressions
akin to those in Table 2, namely:

             4 qc;t+2   =A+B           4 ic;t+2   4 itt+2    +D      4 fc;t+2        4 ft+2   +   4 "c;t+2 ,       (7)

and

      4 qc;t+2   = A + B1   4 ic;t+2   + B2       4 itt+2   + D1   4 fc;t+2   + D2       4 ft+2   +   4 "c;t+2 .   (8)

Whereas in Tables 1 and 2 we studied quarterly and annual changes, here we restrict attention to
the 55 QE-related announcements in the U.S., Eurozone, U.K., and Japan. The regressions have
more than 55 observations because for the 20 U.S. QE announcements, we include data points
for each of the euro, pound, and yen responses; this is similar to looking at the average change in
the dollar relative to these three currencies. To avoid double-counting events from a statistical
perspective, we cluster our standard errors by announcement date. As in Figure 1, 4 qc;t+2 is
the four-day change in the exchange rate, from two-days before the announcement to the close
two-days after; all other variables are measured over the same period.
    Column (2) shows the main result. Both changes in short-term interest rate di¤erentials and
changes in long-term forward rate di¤erentials measured around QE-news dates are positively
related to movements in exchanges rates. Column (4) shows that the e¤ects of foreign and U.S.
term premia on exchange rate movements are approximately symmetric and of opposite sign,
attracting coe¢ cients of 3:2 and 2:5 respectively.
    In sum, the evidence suggests that, not only is there a close connection between bond term
premia and FX risk premia, but that both of these premia are partially driven by shocks to bond
supply. These stylized facts are the motivation for the model that we turn to next.


3     Baseline model
Our baseline model generalizes the Vayanos and Vila (2019) term-structure model to a setting
with two currencies, say, the U.S. dollar and the euro. We consider a model with short- and long-
term bonds in domestic currency (dollars) and foreign currency (euros). There is an exogenously
given short-term interest rate in each currency. The key friction is that the global bond market
is partially segmented from the broader capital market: we assume the marginal investors in the
global bond market-- who we call "global bond investors"     -- are specialized investors. These bond
investors must absorb exogenous shocks to the supply and demand for long-term bonds in both
currencies, as well as shocks in the foreign exchange market. Since they are concerned about
the risk of near-term losses on their imperfectly diversi...ed portfolios, specialists will only absorb

                                                            10
these shocks if expected returns on bonds and FX adjust.


3.1     Model setup
The model is set in discrete time. To maintain tractability, we assume that asset prices (or yields)
and expected returns are linear functions of a vector of state variables. To model ...xed income
assets, we (i) substitute log returns for simple returns throughout and (ii) use Campbell-Shiller
(1988) linearizations of log returns. We view (i) and (ii) as linearity-generating modelling devices
that do not qualitatively impact our conclusions.

3.1.1    Financial assets

There are four assets in the model: short- and long-term bonds in both domestic (dollars) and
foreign (euros) currency. We then describe the foreign exchange market.

Short-term domestic bonds The log short-term interest rate in domestic currency between
time t and t + 1, denoted it , is known at time t and follows an exogenous stochastic process
described below. Thus, we assume short-term domestic bonds are available in perfectly elastic
supply-- i.e., investors can borrow or lend any desired quantity in domestic currency from t to
t + 1 at it .11 All interest rates and exchanges rates in the model are real.

Long-term domestic bonds The long-term domestic bond is a default-free perpetuity. At
time t, long-term domestic bonds are available in a given net supply sy
                                                                      t which follows an exogenous
stochastic process described below. As shown in the Online Appendix, the log return in domestic
currency on long-term domestic bonds from t to t + 1 is approximately:

                          y            1
                         rt +1 =           yt         yt+1 = yt                  (yt+1    yt ) ,           (9)
                                   1            1                         1

where yt is the log yield-to-maturity on domestic bonds, 2 (0; 1), and D = 1= (1          ) is the
                                                                                       12
duration of the long-term bond-- i.e., the sensitivity of the bond'
                                                                  s price to its yield. A larger
  corresponds to an economy with longer-term bonds, and the return on long-term bonds is the
sum of a "carry" component, yt , that investors earn if yields do not change and a capital gain
component, ( = (1        )) (yt+1 yt ), due to changes in yields.
   Iterating Eq. (9) forward and taking expectations, the domestic long-term yield can be
decomposed into an expectations hypothesis component and a term premium component:
                                                    P1
                                   yt = (1      )    j =0
                                                             j
                                                                 Et [it+j + rxy
                                                                              t+j +1 ],                   (10)
  11
     We think of monetary policy as determining short-term rates outside of the model. The domestic and foreign
central banks independently pursue monetary policy in their currencies by posting an interest rate and then
elastically borrowing and lending at that rate.
  12
     This approximation for default-free coupon-bearing bonds appears in Campbell (2018) and is an approximate
                                                                                                         n
generalization of the fact that the log-return on n-period zero-coupon bonds from t to t + 1 is exactly rt+1 =
   n            n 1                       n
nyt    (n 1) yt+1 where, for instance, yt   is the log yield on n-period zero-coupon bonds at t.



                                                            11
where rxyt+1
                   y
                  rt +1  it is the excess return on domestic long-term bonds over the domestic
short rate. In other words, rxy  t+1 is the log excess return on the "yield curve trade" in domestic
currency-- i.e., the trade that borrows short-term and lends long-term in domestic currency.

Short-term foreign bonds Short-term foreign bonds mirror short-term domestic bonds. The
log short-term riskless rate in foreign currency between time t and t + 1 is denoted it .

Long-term foreign bonds Long-term foreign bonds mirror long-term domestic bonds. They
are available in an exogenous, time-varying net supply sy   t . The log return in foreign currency
on long-term foreign bonds is given by the analog of Eq. (9), and the log yield-to-maturity on
foreign bonds, yt , is given by the analog of Eq. (10). rxy
                                                          t+1
                                                                 y
                                                                rt +1  it denotes the excess return
on the "yield curve trade"in foreign currency.

Foreign exchange Let Qt be the foreign exchange rate de...ned as units of domestic currency
per unit of foreign currency. An exchange rate of Qt means that an investor can exchange foreign
short-term bonds with a market value of one unit of foreign currency for domestic short-term
bonds with a market value of Qt in domestic currency. Thus, a rise in Qt means an appreciation
of the foreign currency relative to domestic currency. Let qt denote the log exchange rate.
    Consider the excess return on foreign currency from time t to t + 1-- i.e., the FX trade that
borrows short-term in domestic currency and lends short-term in foreign currency. The log excess
return on foreign currency is approximately:

                                  rxq
                                    t+1 = (qt+1          qt ) + (it     it ).                  (11)

Thus, the excess return on foreign currency is the sum of the interest rate di¤erential, it it ,
and the change in exchange rates, (qt+1 qt ). Assuming the exchange rate is stationary with a
steady-state level of 0-- i.e., that purchasing power parity holds in the long run, we can iterate
forward and take expectations to obtain:
                                     P1
                              qt =    j =0   Et [(it+j     it+j )     rxq
                                                                        t+j +1 ],              (12)

as in Froot and Ramadorai (2005). Thus, the exchange rate is the sum of a UIP component and
an FX risk premium component.

3.1.2   Risk factors

Investors face two types of risk in our model: interest rate risk and supply risk. First, long-term
bonds and foreign exchange positions are exposed to interest rate risk. For example, both long-
term domestic bonds and foreign currency will su¤er unexpected losses if short-term domestic
rates rise unexpectedly. Second, both long-term bonds and FX positions are exposed to supply
risk: stochastic supply shocks impact equilibrium bond yields and exchange rates, holding ...xed
the expected future path of short rates.


                                                     12
Short-term interest rates We assume short-term interest rates in domestic and foreign cur-
rencies follow symmetric AR(1) processes with correlated shocks:

                                        it+1 = { +        i (it         {) + "it+1 ,                                      (13a)
                                        it+1 = { +        i (it         {) + "it+1 ,                                      (13b)

                                                                    2
where { > 0,   i   2 (0; 1), V art ["it+1 ] = V art ["it+1 ] =      i   > 0, and           = Corr["it+1 ; "it+1 ] 2 [0; 1].

Net bond supplies We assume the net supplies of long-term domestic bonds (sy    t ) and long-
                       y
term foreign bonds (st ) follow symmetric AR(1) processes. These net bond supplies are the
market value of long-term domestic and foreign bonds, both denominated in units of domestic
currency, that arbitrageurs must hold in equilibrium. Speci...cally, we assume:

                                     sy      y
                                      t+1 = s +
                                                              y
                                                         sy (st         s y ) + "s y
                                                                                   t+1
                                                                                       ,                                  (14a)
                                     sy
                                      t+1   = s + y           y
                                                         sy (st
                                                                           y
                                                                         s ) + "s y
                                                                                  t+1
                                                                                      ,                                   (14b)

where sy > 0, sy 2 [0; 1), and V art ["sy t+1
                                              ] = V art ["sy
                                                           t+1
                                                               ] = 2
                                                                   sy 0. These net bond supplies
should be viewed as the gross supply of long-term bonds minus the demand of any inelastic
"preferred habitat" investors-- i.e., they re   ect the combined supply and demand shocks that
global bond investors must absorb in equilibrium.13

Net FX supply We assume that global bond investors must engage in a borrow-domestic and
lend-foreign FX trade in time-varying market value (in domestic currency units) sq
                                                                                 t to accommo-
date the opposing demand of other unmodeled agents. For example, if non...nancial ...rms have
an inelastic demand to exchange foreign currency for domestic currency, global bond investors
must take the other side, going long foreign currency and short domestic currency. We assume:

                                              sq
                                               t+1 =
                                                             q
                                                         sq st    + "s q
                                                                       t+1
                                                                           ,                                                  (15)

where V art ["sq
               t+1
                   ]= 2sq    0 and sq 2 [0; 1). Of course, if we consider all agents in the global
economy, then foreign exchange must be in zero net supply: if some agent is exchanging dollars
for euros, then some other agent must be exchanging euros for dollars. However, the specialized
bond investors in our model are only a subset of all actors in global ...nancial markets, so they
need not have zero foreign exchange exposure.
    Collecting terms, let "t+1 ["it+1 ; "it+1 ; "sy
                                                  t+1
                                                      ; "sy
                                                          t+1
                                                              ; "sq
                                                                  t+1
                                                                      ]0 and V art ["t+1 ]. For simplicity,
we assume the three supply shocks are independent of each other and of both short rates.

3.1.3   Global bond investors

The global bond investors in our model are specialized investors who choose portfolios consisting
of short-term and long-term bonds in the two currencies. They have mean-variance preferences
  13
    The Online Appendix discusses the impact of relaxing these symmetry assumptions on short rates and bond
supply.

                                                         13
over next-period wealth with risk tolerance . Let dy               y
                                                             t (dt ) denote the market value of bond
investors'holdings of long-term domestic (foreign) bonds and let dq         t denote the value of investors'
position in the borrow-domestic and lend-foreign FX trade, all denominated in domestic currency.
Thus, de...ning dt [dy      y     q 0
                       t , dt , dt ] and rxt+1    [rxy       y       q    0
                                                     t+1 , rxt+1 , rxt+1 ] , investors choose their holdings
to solve:14
                                                      1 0
                              max d0t Et [rxt+1 ]       d V art [rxt+1 ] dt ,                           (16)
                                dt                   2 t
so their demands must satisfy:

                                                        1
                                      Et [rxt+1 ] =         V art [rxt+1 ] dt .                              (17)

These preferences are similar to assuming that investors manage their overall risk exposure using
Value-at-Risk or other standard risk management techniques.
    In practice, we associate the global bond investors in our model with market players such
as ...xed-income divisions at global broker-dealers and large global macro hedge funds. Relative
to more broadly diversi...ed players in global capital markets, risk factors related to movements
in interest rates loom large for these imperfectly diversi...ed bond market players. Indeed, the
particular form of segmentation that we assume is quite natural since both government bonds and
foreign exchange are interest-rate sensitive assets. Any human capital or physical infrastructure
that is useful for managing interest-rate sensitive assets can be readily applied to both bonds and
foreign exchange.


3.2     Equilibrium
3.2.1    Conjecture and solution

We need to pin down three equilibrium prices: yt , yt , and qt . To solve the model, we conjecture
that prices are linear functions of a 5 1 state vector zt = [it ; it ; sy         y    q 0
                                                                             t ; st ; st ] . As shown in
the Online Appendix, a rational expectations equilibrium of our model is a ...xed point of an
operator involving the "price-impact"coe¢ cients which govern how the supplies st = [sy              y    q 0
                                                                                                t ; st ; st ]
impact yt , yt , and qt . Speci...cally, the market clearing condition dt = st implicitly de...nes an
operator which gives the expected returns-- and, hence, the price-impact coe¢ cients-- that will
clear markets when investors believe the risk of holding assets is determined by some initial set
of price-impact coe¢ cients. A rational expectations equilibrium of our model is a ...xed point of
this operator.
    In the absence of supply risk ( 2    sy =
                                               2
                                               sq = 0), this ...xed-point problem is degenerate, and

   14
      We assume that global bond investors solve (16) irrespective of whether they are domestic- or foreign-based.
We can represent an investor'  s positions in any asset other than short-term bonds in her local currency as a
linear combination of three long-short trades: the yield curve trade in each currency and the FX trade. Therefore,
assuming all investors have the same risk tolerance in domestic currency terms (i.e., the risk tolerance of any
foreign-based investors is =Qt in foreign-currency terms) and hold the same beliefs about returns, all global bond
investors will choose the same exposures in domestic currency terms to these three long-short trades regardless of
where they are based. As a result, since investors can hedge any FX risk stemming from investments in long-term
bonds in non-local currency, they will only take on FX exposure if they are rewarded for doing so.



                                                       14
there is a straightforward, unique equilibrium. However, when asset supply is stochastic, the
...xed-point problem is non-degenerate: the risk of holding assets depends on how prices react
to supply shocks. For example, if investors believe supply shocks will have a large impact on
prices, they perceive assets as being highly risky. As a result, investors will only absorb supply
shocks if they are compensated by large price declines and high future expected returns, making
the initial belief self-ful...lling. This kind of logic means that (i) an equilibrium only exists when
investors'risk tolerance is su¢ ciently large relative to the volatility of supply shocks and (ii)
the model admits multiple equilibria. However, there is at most one equilibrium that is stable
in the sense that it is robust to a small perturbation in investors'beliefs regarding equilibrium
price impact.15 We focus on this unique stable equilibrium in our analysis.

3.2.2    Equilibrium expected returns and prices

We now characterize equilibrium expected returns and prices. Market clearing implies that
dt = st . Thus, using equation (17), equilibrium expected returns must satisfy:

                                                       1                         1
                                  Et [rxt+1 ] =            V art [rxt+1 ] st =       Vst ,                       (18)

where V = V art [rxt+1 ] is constant in equilibrium. Writing out Eq. (18) and making use of the
symmetry between long-term domestic and foreign bonds in equations (13) and (14), we have:

                                             1
                             Et rxy
                                  t+1 =          [Vy        sy
                                                             t + Cy;y     sy
                                                                           t + Cy;q          sq
                                                                                              t]                (19a)
                                             1
                             Et rxy
                                  t+1 =          [Cy   ;y      sy
                                                                t + Vy    sy
                                                                           t     Cy;q        sq
                                                                                              t]               (19b)
                                             1
                             Et rxq
                                  t+1 =          [Cy;q        (sy
                                                                t   sy
                                                                     t ) + Vq    sq
                                                                                  t] ,                          (19c)

where Vy V art [rxy                      y
                        t+1 ] = V art [rxt+1 ], Cy ;y Covt [rxy       y
                                                              t+1 ; rxt+1 ], and Cy;q Covt [rxy       q
                                                                                              t+1 ; rxt+1 ] =
  Covt [rxy       q
          t+1 ; rxt+1 ]. These variances and covariances are equilibrium objects: they depend both
on shocks to short-term interest rates and on the equilibrium price impact of supply shocks.
  15
    Equilibrium non-existence and multiplicity are common in models like ours where short-lived investors absorb
shocks to the supply of in...nitely-lived assets. Consistent with Samuelson'     s (1947) "correspondence principle,"
the unique stable equilibrium has comparative statics that accord with standard intuition. By contrast, the com-
parative statics of the unstable equilibria are usually counterintuitive. For instance, at an unstable equilibrium,
an increase in the volatility of short rate shocks can reduce the impact that supply shocks have on equilibrium
prices. By contrast, in the stable equilibrium, an increase in the volatility of short rate shocks always increases the
impact of supply shocks on equilibrium prices. For previous treatments of these issues, see De Long, Shleifer, Sum-
mers, and Waldmann (1990), Spiegel (1998), Watanabe (2008), Banerjee (2011), Albagli (2015), and Greenwood,
Hanson, and Liao (2018).




                                                              15
   Making use of Eqs. (10) and (12) and the AR(1) dynamics for it , it , sy    y        q
                                                                          t , st , and st , we can
then characterize equilibrium yields and the exchange rate. The long-term domestic yield is:

                              Expectations hypothesis
                      z                         }|                        {               Steady-state term premium
                              1                                                   z                    }|                        {
                                                                                              1
        yt =              {+                                (it      {) +                         (Vy + Cy;y )             sy                                                             (20a)
                             1                  i
                                            1                                                                                                            1
                      +             1
                                                            [Vy       (sy
                                                                        t             sy ) + Cy;y                 (sy
                                                                                                                    t      sy )] +               1
                                                                                                                                                                        Cy;q       sq
                                                                                                                                                                                    t ;
                                        1            sy                                                                                              1             sq
                          |                                                                                  {z                                                                       }
                                                                                          Time-varying term premium


the long-term foreign yield is:

                              Expectations hypothesis
                      z                         }|                        {               Steady-state term premium
                              1                                                       z                }|                        {
                                                                                              1
        yt    =           {+                                (it      {) +                         (Vy + Cy;y )             sy                                                             (20b)
                             1                  i
                                            1                                                                                                            1
                      +             1
                                                            [Cy;y             (sy
                                                                                t           s y ) + Vy            (sy
                                                                                                                    t          sy )]             1
                                                                                                                                                                        Cy;q       sq
                                                                                                                                                                                    t ;
                                        1            sy                                                                                              1             sq
                       |                                                                                     {z                                                                       }
                                                                                          Time-varying term premium


and the foreign exchange rate is

              Uncovered interest rate parity                                                                      FX risk premium
              z                     }|                      {       z                                                     }|                                                   {
                          1                                                               1                                                              1
    qt =                                (it          it )                     1
                                                                                                   Cy;q           (sy
                                                                                                                    t     sy
                                                                                                                           t    )+           1
                                                                                                                                                                   Vq     sq
                                                                                                                                                                           t       .      (20c)
                  1            i                                                  1           sy                                                 1            sq


Eqs. (20a) and (20b) say that long-term domestic and foreign yields are the sum of an expecta-
tions hypothesis piece that re  ects expected future short-term rates and a term premium piece
that re  ects expected future bond risk premia. The expectations hypothesis component for do-
mestic long-term bonds, for example, depends on the current deviation of short-term domestic
rates from their steady-state level (it {) and the persistence of short-term rates ( i ). Simi-
larly, the domestic term premium depends on the current deviation of asset supplies from their
steady state levels and the persistence of those asset supplies. Eq. (20c) says that the foreign
exchange rate consists of a UIP term, re    ecting expected future foreign-minus-domestic short
rate di¤erentials, minus a risk-premium term that re   ects expected future excess returns on the
borrow-domestic lend-foreign FX trade.

3.2.3        Understanding equilibrium expected returns

We can understand expected returns in terms of exposures to the ...ve risk factors in our model.
Formally, the time-t conditional expected return on any asset a 2 fy; y ; q g satis...es:

                                                                  a               a                     a                 a                          a
                                   Et [rxa
                                         t+1 ] =                  i i;t   +       i        i ;t   +     sy    sy ;t   +   sy         sy ;t   +       sq      sq ;t ,                       (21)

where, for factors f 2 fi; i ; sy ; sy ; sq g, a
                                               f is the constant loading of asset a'
                                                                                   s returns on factor
innovation "ft+1 and f;t is the time-varying equilibrium price of bearing "ft+1 risk. Formally, a    f


                                                                                                   16
is the coe¢ cient on "ft+1 from a multivariate regression of (rxa
                                                                t+1  Et [rxa
                                                                           t+1 ]) on the innovations
to the ...ve risk factors. For instance, long-term domestic bonds have a positive loading on "it+1
and no loading on "it+1 . At time t, the prices of domestic and foreign short-rate risk are:

                                                 1 2
                                                       P            a           a
                                 i;t   =           i      a   [(    i   +       i   )   sa
                                                                                         t],    (22a)
                                                 1 2
                                                       P                a       a
                                i ;t   =           i      a   [(        i   +   i   )   sa
                                                                                         t],    (22b)

and, for f 2 fsy ; sy ; sq g, the prices of supply risk are:

                                                   1 2
                                                              P       a
                                       f;t   =       f             a[ f         sa
                                                                                 t ].           (22c)

The prices of risk all depend on asset supply quantities due to the limited risk tolerance of global
bond investors.
   Expected returns can also be written using a "conditional-CAPM" representation. Letting
  st
rxt+1 = s0t rxt+1 denote the excess return on global bond investors'portfolio from t to t + 1, the
conditional expected return on any risky asset a 2 fy; y ; q g is:
                                                              st
                                             Covt [rxa
                                                     t+1 ; rxt+1 ]
                             Et [rxa
                                   t+1 ] =                                       Et [rxs
                                                                                       t+1 ].
                                                                                         t
                                                                                                 (23)
                                               V art [rxs t+1 ]
                                                           t




The expected return on each asset equals its conditional with respect to the portfolio held by
bond investors times the conditional expected return on that portfolio. Relatedly, the stochas-
tic discount factor (SDF) that prices risky assets-- i.e., the random variable mt+1 that satis...es
Et [rxa
      t+1 ] =  Covt [rxa
                       t+1 ; mt+1 ] for all a-- is mt+1 =
                                                             1
                                                               rxs
                                                                 t+1 . In other words, "bad times" in
                                                                  t


our model-- states of the world where mt+1 is high-- are states where the excess return on global
bond investors'portfolio (rxs  t+1 ) is low.
                                t


    Eq. (23) is super...cially similar to the pricing condition that would obtain if the true
conditional-CAPM held in fully-integrated global capital markets. However, in our model, the
portfolio return that prices risky assets is the return on the portfolio held by specialized bond
investors. By contrast, in fully integrated markets, the portfolio return that prices all ...nancial
assets is the market portfolio consisting of all global ...nancial wealth.


3.3    Bond term premia and exchange rates
The major payo¤ from our baseline model is that we are able to study the simultaneous de-
termination of domestic term premia, foreign term premia, and foreign exchange risk premia.
Speci...cally, we can ask how a shift in the supply on any of these three assets impacts the equi-
librium expected returns on the two other assets using Eq. (19).




                                                         17
3.3.1    Limiting case with no supply risk

Many of the core results of the model can be illustrated using the limiting case in which asset
                                                                                        16
supplies are constant over time, leaving only short rate risk-- i.e., where 2    2
                                                                            sy = sq = 0.

                                                                                      2                2
Proposition 1 Equilibrium without supply shocks. If                                   sy      =        sq   = 0 and               2 (0; 1), then
                                              2                                               2
                                                      2                           1                                  2
                  Vy =                                i   > 0 and Vq = 2                          (1         )       i   > 0,                 (24)
                              1       i                                       1       i
                                                  2
                                                          2                                                      1           2
               Cy;y    =                                  i   > 0 and Cy;q = (1       )                                      i   > 0.         (25)
                                  1       i                                               1             i1               i


Thus, @Et [rxq       y
             t+1 ]=@st =
                            1
                              Cy;q is decreasing in the correlation between domestic and foreign
short rates, , whereas @Et [rxy        y
                               t+1 ]=@st =
                                             1
                                               Cy;y is increasing in .

Proof. All proofs are in the Online Appendix, which is available here.
    Proposition 1 provides guidance about how shifts in long-term bond supply-- e.g., due to QE
policies-- should impact exchange rates and term premia. There are two key takeaways.
    First, Proposition 1 shows that a shift in domestic bond supply impacts the domestic term
premium, the foreign term premium, and the FX risk premium. For example, suppose there is
an increase in the supply of dollar long-term bonds. This increase in dollar bond supply raises
the price of bearing dollar short-rate risk in Eq. (22a), lifting the expected returns on the dollar
yield curve trade and thus dollar long-term yields as in Vayanos and Vila (2019). The increase
in dollar bond supply also raises the euro term premium and euro long-term yields when dollar
and euro short rates are correlated ( > 0). Turning to exchange rates, Eq. (20c) shows that
the borrow-in-dollars to lend-in-euros FX trade is also exposed to dollar short-rate risk: the euro
depreciates when dollar short rates rise through the standard UIP channel. Because the price of
bearing dollar short-rate rises following an increase in the supply of dollar long-term bonds, the
expected returns on the FX trade must also rise. Thus, an increase in the supply of long-term
dollar bonds leads the euro to depreciate; it is then expected to appreciate going forward.17
    Second, Proposition 1 shows that the e¤ects of a shift in domestic bond supply depend on
the correlation between domestic and foreign short-rates. When is higher, more of the e¤ect
of the domestic bond supply shift appears in long-term foreign yields and less shows up in the
exchange rate. For instance, U.S. short-term rates are more highly correlated with euro short
rates than with Japanese yen short rates. Thus, Proposition 1 suggests we should expect U.S.
QE-- a reduction in dollar bond supply-- to lead to a larger depreciation of the dollar versus the
yen than versus the euro. At the same time, U.S. QE should lead to a larger reduction in euro
  16
     Technically, the comparative statics in Proposition 1 must be interpreted as comparative statics on the steady-
state level of expected returns across economies where asset supplies are constant over time-- i.e., they give the
e¤ects of supply shifts that investors think are impossible. Nevertheless, the limiting case without supply risk
highlights the core mechanism at the heart of our model.
  17
     More precisely, when > 0, an increase in the supply of long-term dollar bonds raises the prices of both
dollar and euro short-rate risk per Eqs. (22a) and (22b). As shown in Eq. (20c), the FX trade has o¤setting
exposures to dollar and euro short rates due to standard UIP logic. However, when the two short rate processes
are symmetric as in Eq. (13), the exposure to dollar short rates dominates and we have @Et [rxq           y
                                                                                                  t+1 ]=@st > 0.


                                                                    18
term premia than yen term premia. Intuitively, if foreign and domestic short rates are highly
correlated, the UIP component of the exchange rate will not be very volatile; if domestic short
rates rise, foreign short rates are also likely to rise, leaving the UIP component of the exchange
rate largely unchanged. This means that the FX trade is not very exposed to interest rate risk
and, therefore, its expected return should not move much in response to bond supply shifts.
    Corollary 1 details the limiting case where ! 1; and therefore the duration of long-term
bonds D = 1= (1       ) goes to in...nity.

Corollary 1 Limit where the duration of long-term bonds becomes in...nite. Suppose
 2    2
 sy = sq = 0 and consider the limit where ! 1. In this limit, we have
                               2
                       1           2
           Vy =                    i   > 0, Vq = 2 (1   ) Vy , Cy;y = Vy , and Cy;q = (1        ) Vy ,      (26)
                   1       i


so V art rxq           y
              t+1 + rxt+1    rxy
                               t+1   = Vq + 2Vy 2Cy;y      4Cy;q = 0-- i.e., the long-term FX carry
trade is riskless. Thus, long-term UIP must hold state-by-state and hence also in expectation (i.e.,
rxq         y
   t+1 + rxt+1     rxy             q
                     t+1 = Et rxt+1 + rxt+1
                                           y
                                                rxyt+1   = 0). As a result, @Et [rxy        y
                                                                                    t+1 ]=@st =
                                                                                                1
                                                                                                  Vy
                           y       y     1               q       y      1
equals the sum of @Et [rxt+1 ]=@st =       Vy and @Et [rxt+1 ]=@st =      (1    ) Vy .

    In the ! 1 limit where the duration of long-term bonds becomes in...nite, the long-term FX
carry trade that borrows long-term in dollars and lends long-term in euros becomes riskless. As
a result, the return on the long-term carry trade must be zero by the absence of arbitrage-- i.e.,
we must have lim !1 rxq   t+1 + rxt+1
                                     y
                                           rxy
                                             t+1  = 0 state-by-state.18 Even though long-term UIP
holds in this limit, our model still pins down precise mix of equilibrium adjustments that ensure it
holds following a change in asset supply. For instance, suppose there is an increase in dollar bond
supply sy                                                                                       y
         t . This bond supply shock raises the term premium on long-term U.S. bonds, Et [rxt+1 ].
Long-term UIP implies that some combination of the term premium on Euro bonds (Et [rxy          t+1 ])
                               q
and the FX premium (Et [rxt+1 ]) must adjust in response. What Corollary 1 shows is that the
correlation between domestic and foreign short rates, , governs whether the adjustment comes
through the foreign term premium or the FX risk premium. Speci...cally, when the correlation
  is higher, more of the adjustment comes through a rise in the foreign term premium and less
comes through a rise in the FX premium.

3.3.2    Adding supply shocks

We now show that these results generalize once we add stochastic shocks to the net supplies of
domestic and foreign long-term bonds and to foreign exchange.19
  18
     The fact that lim !1 V art rxq          y
                                    t+1 + rxt+1    rxy
                                                     t+1    = lim !1 Et rxq         y
                                                                           t+1 + rxt+1    rxy
                                                                                            t+1  = 0 continues
to hold once we introduce stochastic supply shocks below. However, whether or not supply is stochastic, the long-
term FX carry trade remains exposed to interest rate risk when < 1 and long-term bonds have ...nite durations.
As a result, long-term UIP fails in our model when < 1.
  19
     As shown in the Online Appendix, when 2                 2
                                                sy > 0 and sq > 0, solving the model involves characterizing the
stable solution to a system of four quadratic equations in four unknowns. When 2               2
                                                                                  sy > 0 and sq = 0, the model
can be solved analytically: we simply need to solve two quadratics and a linear equation.



                                                        19
Proposition 2 Equilibrium with supply shocks. If 0                 < 1, 2 sy   0, 2  sq   0, then in
                                       q      y      1
any stable equilibrium we have @Et [rxt+1 ]=@st =      Cy;q > 0. If in addition > 0 and 2     sq = 0,
                                                y       y      1
then in any stable equilibrium we have @Et [rxt+1 ]=@st =        Cy;y > 0: Thus, by continuity of
the stable equilibrium in the model's underlying parameters, we have @Et [rxy           y
                                                                               t+1 ]=@st > 0 unless
foreign exchange supply shocks are especially volatile and is near zero.

      Proposition 2 shows that, once we allow supply to be stochastic, shifts in bond supply continue
to impact bond yields and foreign exchange rates as they did in Proposition 1 where supply was
...xed. Shifts in supply tend to amplify the comovement between long-term bonds and foreign
exchange that is attributable to shifts in short-term interest rates.
      The exception is when FX supply shocks are especially volatile ( 2   sq is large) and the corre-
lation of short rates is low. Because FX supply shocks push domestic and foreign long-term
yields in opposite directions by Eq. (20), if these shocks are highly volatile they can result in
a negative equilibrium correlation between domestic and foreign bond returns, Cy;y , even if the
underlying short rates are positively correlated. However, in the empirically relevant case where
    is meaningfully positive, we have Cy;y > 0 and bond yields behave as in Proposition 1.

3.3.3      Empirical implications of the baseline model

In Section 2, we presented evidence for three propositions. First, exchange rates appear to
be about as sensitive to changes in long-term interest rate di¤erentials as they are to changes
in short-term interest rate di¤erentials. Second, the component of long rate di¤erentials that
matters for exchange rates appears to be a term premium di¤erential. Third, the term premium
di¤erentials that move exchange rates appear to be, at least in part, quantity-driven. Using our
baseline model, we can now formally motivate these empirical results.
    For simplicity, we focus on the case where FX supply shocks are small-- i.e., the limit where
 q                     20
st = 0 and 2   sq = 0.     In this case, the foreign exchange risk premium is decreasing in the
di¤erence between foreign and domestic bond supply (sy   t   sy
                                                              t ),

                                                       <0
                                                   z   }| {
                                   Et rxq
                                        t+1    =        1
                                                          Cy;q    (sy
                                                                    t    sy
                                                                          t),                               (27)

and the di¤erence between foreign and domestic bond risk premia is increasing in sy
                                                                                  t                   sy
                                                                                                       t:

                                                             >0
                                                   z          }|     {
                          Et rxy
                               t+1      rxy
                                          t+1 =
                                                       1
                                                           (Vy Cy;y )        (sy
                                                                               t      sy
                                                                                       t).                  (28)

Eqs. (27) and (28) motivate our regressions examining QE announcement dates in Section 2. In
the context of the model, we think of a euro QE announcement as news indicating that the supply
of euro long-term bonds sy t will be low. Eq. (28) shows that this decline in euro bond supply
should reduce euro term premia relative to dollar term premia. And, Eq. (27) shows that this
decline in sy
            t should increase the risk premium on the borrow-in-dollar lend-in-euros FX trade,
 20
      The Online Appendix shows that a similar set of results obtains when    2
                                                                              sq   > 0 and sq
                                                                                            t 6= 0.



                                                       20
leading the euro to depreciate relative to the dollar. By symmetry, U.S. QE announcements-- i.e.,
news that syt will be low-- will have the opposite e¤ects.
    Combining Eqs. (27) and (28), the FX risk premium is negatively related to the di¤erence
between foreign and domestic bond term premia:
                                                    < 1
                                            z     }|    {
                                                  Cy;q
                           Et rxq
                                t+1 =                           Et rxy
                                                                     t+1         rxy
                                                                                   t+1 .                      (29)
                                                Vy Cy;y

Eq. (29) motivates Table 4 in Section 2 where we forecast foreign exchange returns using the
di¤erence in (proxies for) foreign and domestic term premia. When euro bond supply is high, the
euro term premium is high and the risk premium on the borrow-in-dollars lend-in-euros FX trade
is low. Thus, the FX risk premium moves inversely with the foreign term premium. The same
argument applies to the domestic term premium with the opposite sign-- the FX risk premium
moves proportionately with the domestic term premium.21
    Combining Eq. (12) and (29), the exchange rate re   ects the sum of expected (i) foreign-minus-
domestic short rate di¤erentials and (ii) foreign-minus-domestic bond risk-premium di¤erentials:

                                                          >1
                                                z     }|   {
                      P1                             Cy;q         P1
               qt =     j =0   Et [it+j   it+j ] +                   j =0   Et [rxy
                                                                                  t+j +1   rxy
                                                                                             t+j +1 ].        (30)
                                                   Vy Cy;y

This result motivates Tables 1 and 2 where we regress changes in exchange rates on changes in
short rate di¤erentials and changes in (proxies for) term premium di¤erentials. When foreign
bond supply is high, the foreign term premium is high and the risk premium on the borrow-
at-home to lend-abroad FX trade is low. For investors to earn low returns on foreign currency,
foreign currency must be strong-- qt must be high-- and must be expected to depreciate.22
    Lastly, our model can match the otherwise puzzling ...nding in Lustig, Stathopoulos, and
Verdelhan (2019) that the return to the FX trade-- conventionally implemented by borrowing
and lending short-term in di¤erent currencies-- declines if one borrows long-term and lends long-
term.23 To see this, note that the return on a long-term FX trade that borrows long-term at
   21
      The constant of proportionality in Eq. (29), Cy;q = (Vy Cy;y ), is less than 1 because foreign exchange is
e¤ectively a "longer duration" asset than long-term bonds when < 1.
   22
      An alternative interpretation is that our results on long-term yields and foreign exchange rates reect move-
ments in convenience premia, as in Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) and Jiang, Krishnamurthy, and
Lustig (2019). Convenience premia are also quantity-driven, but are conceptually distinct from the bond term
premia that are our focus. Fluctuations in convenience premia should generate the opposite relationship between
contemporaneous changes in foreign exchange rates and U.S. Treasury yields. Suppose there is an increase in the
supply of U.S. Treasury debt and the demand for Treasuries is downward sloping. Then the convenience premium
falls, pushing up Treasury yields. If foreign investors derive greater convenience services from Treasuries than
do U.S. investors, this increase in supply should also lead foreign currencies should appreciate versus the dollar.
Thus, movements in the convenience premium should lead to a positive correlation between Treasury yields and
movements in foreign currencies. In untabulated results, we control for the innovation to U.S. Treasury basis as
constructed by Jiang, Krishnamurthy, and Lustig (2019) and ...nd that the coe¢ cients of interest in Tables 1 and
2 are essentially unchanged.
   23
      The Lustig, Stathopoulos, and Verdelhan (2019) result is closely related to the ...nding in Meredith and
Chinn (2004) that long-horizon, hold-to-maturity FX carry trades earn much lower returns than the traditional


                                                           21
home to lend long-term abroad is just a combination of our three long-short returns. Speci...cally,
the return on this long-term FX trade equals (i) the return to borrowing long to lend short
domestically ( rxy t+1 ), plus (ii) the return to borrowing short domestically to lend short in the
foreign currency (rxq t+1 ), plus (iii) the return to borrowing short to lend long in the foreign
             y
currency (rxt+1 ). Thus, the expected return on the long-term FX trade is:

                                                           2(0;1)
                                                   z        }|    {
                                                          Vy Cy;y
                       Et rxq       y
                            t+1 + rxt+1   rxy
                                            t+1   = 1                       Et rxq
                                                                                 t+1 .                   (31)
                                                             Cy;q

Eq. (31) shows that the expected return on the long-term FX trade is smaller in absolute
magnitude-- and hence less volatile over time-- than that on the standard short-term FX trade.
The intuition is that the long-term FX trade has o¤setting exposures that reduce its riskiness
for global bond investors as compared to the standard FX trade. For instance, the standard FX
trade (rxqt+1 ) will su¤er when there is an unexpected increase in domestic short rates. However,
borrowing long to lend short in domestic currency (i.e., rxy     t+1 ) will pro...t when there is an
unexpected rise in domestic short rates. Thus, the long-term FX trade is less exposed to interest
rate risk than the standard short-term FX trade. As a result, the expected return on the long-
term FX trade moves less than one-for-one with the return on the standard short-term FX trade.
    We collect these observations in the following proposition:

                                                                       2               2
Proposition 3 Empirical implications. Suppose              2 [0; 1),   sy   > 0, and   sq   = 0. Then:

      The FX risk premium (Et rxq  t+1 ) is decreasing in the di¤erence in net long-term bond
      supply between foreign and domestic currency (syt    sy
                                                            t ). The di¤erence between foreign
      and domestic bond risk premia, Et rxt+1 rxt+1 , is increasing in sy
                                           y       y
                                                                         t   syt.


      Et rxq                                 y
           t+1 is negatively related to Et rxt+1        rxy
                                                          t+1 .

      The foreign exchange rate (qt ) is the sum of expected future foreign-minus-domestic short-
      rate di¤erentials and a term that is proportional to expected future foreign-minus-domestic
      bond risk premium di¤erentials.

      The expected return on the borrow-long-in-domestic to lend-long-in-foreign FX trade
      (Et rxq         y
             t+1 + rxt+1    rxy
                              t+1 ) is smaller in magnitude than that on the standard borrow-
      short-in-domestic to lend-short-in-foreign FX trade, (Et rxq
                                                                 t+1 ).



3.4     A uni...ed approach to carry trade returns
In this subsection, we show that our model can deliver a uni...ed explanation that links return pre-
dictability in foreign exchange and long-term bond markets to the levels of domestic and foreign
short-term interest rates. For foreign exchange, Fama (1984) showed that the expected return on
the borrow-domestic to lend-foreign FX trade is increasing in the foreign-minus-domestic short
short-horizon trade.


                                                  22
rate di¤erential, it it , a well-known and empirically robust failure of UIP. For long-term bonds,
Fama and Bliss (1987) and Campbell and Shiller (1991) showed that the expected return on the
borrow-short to lend-long yield curve trade is increasing in the slope of the yield curve, yt it , a
well-known and empirically robust failure of the expectations hypothesis of the term structure.
    The baseline model we developed above does not generate either predictability result. In our
baseline model, shocks to short-term interest rates make foreign exchange and long-term bonds
risky investments for global bond investors. As a result, supply shocks impact the expected
returns on foreign exchange and long-term bonds. However, the levels of domestic and foreign
short-term interest rates do not a¤ect the expected excess returns on FX and long-term bonds.
    However, a simple extension of our model can simultaneously match these two facts if we
follow Gabaix and Maggiori (2015) and, appealing to balance-of-trade       ows, assume that global
bond investors'exposure to foreign currency is increasing in the strength of the foreign currency.
Put simply, our model makes it possible to "kill two birds with one stone." Speci...cally, the
assumption that Gabaix and Maggiori (2015) need to make to match the Fama (1984) pattern
in their model, immediately delivers the Campbell-Shiller (1991) result for both the domestic
and foreign yield-curve trades in our model. Symmetrically, the assumption that Vayanos and
Vila (2019) need to make to match the Campbell-Shiller (1991) fact in their model-- that the net
supply of long-term bonds is decreasing in the level of long-term yields-- immediately delivers
the Fama (1984) pattern for foreign exchange in our model.
    Concretely, we extend the model by allowing the net supplies to depend on equilibrium prices:

                                         ny    y
                                          t = st           Sy yt ,                            (32a)
                                         ny
                                          t    =   sy
                                                    t       Sy yt ,                           (32b)
                                          nq
                                           t   =   sq
                                                    t   + S q qt ,                            (32c)

where Sq , Sy     0. That is, we assume the net supply of each asset is increasing that asset'   s
price. For example, the assumption that Sq > 0 follows Gabaix and Maggiori (2015) and is a
reduced-form way of modeling balance-of-trade     ows in the FX market. Speci...cally, assume that
when foreign currency is strong, domestic exports rise and imports fall, so the domestic country
runs a trade surplus of Sq qt with the foreign country: If the domestic country is running a trade
surplus, domestic exporters will want to swap the foreign currency they receive from their foreign
sales for domestic currency. By FX market clearing, global bond investors must take the other
side of these trade-driven   ows. Thus, when foreign currency is strong, the expected returns on
foreign exchange must rise to induce global bond investors to increase their exposure to foreign
currency, delivering the Fama (1984) result as Gabaix and Maggiori (2015) show.
    Proposition 4 describes the new results.

Proposition 4 Matching Fama (1984), Campbell-Shiller (1991), and Lustig, Stathopou-
los, and Verdelhan (2019). Suppose 2 [0; 1). If (i.a) Sq > 0 and Sy = 0 or (i.b) Sq = 0 and
                                                                                     q
Sy > 0 and (ii) there are no independent supply shocks ( 2     2
                                                         sy = sq = 0), then @Et rxt+1 =@it =
  @Et rxqt+1 =@it > 0. Since exchange rates are less responsive to short rates than under UIP,




                                                    23
if one estimates the time-series regression:

                                               rxq
                                                 t+1 =        q   +   q        (it    it ) +       q
                                                                                                   t+1 ,                                        (33)

one obtains q = @Et [rxq  t+1 ]=@it > 0 as in Fama (1984).
    Under the same conditions, we also have @Et rxy                     y
                                                     t+1 =@it = @Et rxt+1 =@it < 0. Thus, long-
term yields are less responsive to movements in short rates than under the expectations hypothesis,
so expected returns on long-term bonds are high when short rates are low. Furthermore, since the
term spread is high when short rates are low, if one estimates the time-series regressions:

            rxy
              t+1 =       y     +   y    (yt     it ) +    y
                                                           t+1        and rxy
                                                                            t+1 =              y    +      y        (yt      it ) +     y
                                                                                                                                        t+1 ,   (34)

one obtains y = y > 0 as in Campbell and Shiller (1991).
   Finally, if one estimates the following time-series regression:

                                rxq       y
                                  t+1 + rxt+1        rxy
                                                       t+1 =               q;lt   +   q;lt     (it         it ) +    q;lt
                                                                                                                     t+1 ,                      (35)

one obtains 0 < q;lt < q as in Lustig, Stathopoulos, and Verdelhan (2019). In other words, the
long-term FX carry trade is less pro...table than the short-term FX carry trade.

   To see the logic, assume 2      2
                             sy = sq = 0-- i.e., there are no independent supply shocks, so net
supplies only  uctuate because of movements in short-rates. In this case, we have

                                    Et rxq
                                         t+1 =
                                                          1
                                                              [Cy;q Sy         (yt     yt ) + V q           S q qt ] ,                          (36)

and
                    Et rxy
                         t+1            rxy
                                          t+1 =
                                                      1
                                                          [(Vy        Cy ;y ) Sy         (yt         yt ) + 2Cy;q Sq           qt ] .           (37)

    First, assume Sq > 0 and Sy = 0 and suppose that it it > 0-- i.e., euro short rates exceed
dollar short rates. By standard UIP logic, the positive short-rate di¤erential means the euro will
be strong-- i.e., qt will be high. The assumption that Sq > 0 implies that global bond investors
must bear greater exposure to the euro when the euro is strong, raising the expected returns on
the borrow-in-dollars lend-in-euros FX trade. As a result, the expected return on the FX trade
is increasing in the euro-minus-dollar short-rate di¤erential as in Fama (1984). However, because
these FX exposures mean that global bond investors will lose money if dollar short rates rise, the
expected return on the dollar yield curve trade must also rise. Since the U.S. term structure will
steeper when it it > 0 by standard expectations-hypothesis logic, the extended model will also
match Campbell and Shiller'    s (1991) ...nding that a steep yield curve predicts high excess returns
on long-term bonds. Finally, due to the negative relationship between the short-term interest
rate and the bond term premium in each currency, the model delivers Lustig, Stathopoulos, and
Verdelhan'  s (2019) ...nding that the returns on the FX carry trade are lower when borrowing
long-term in currencies with low interest rates to lend long-term in currencies with high rates.24
 24
      Indeed, lim   !1   q;lt   = 0. Speci...cally, as shown above, rxq       y
                                                                      t+1 + rxt+1                           rxy
                                                                                                              t+1 converges to zero state-by-




                                                                          24
     Another way to simultaneously match these two facts within our model is to follow Vayanos
and Vila (2019) and assume the net supply of long-term bonds is decreasing in the level of long-
term yields-- i.e., to assume that Sy > 0. This would be the case if, as in the data, ...rms and
governments tend to borrow long-term when the level of interest rates is low, or if there are
"yield-oriented investors" who tend substitute away from long-term bonds and towards equities
when interest rates are low. As Vayanos and Vila (2019) show, assuming Sy > 0 delivers the
Campbell-Shiller (1991) result for long-term bonds. Speci...cally, assume Sy > 0 and Sq = 0 and
suppose that it it > 0. By standard expectations hypothesis logic, euro long-term rates will
be higher than dollar long-term rates, but the yield curve will be steeper in dollars since dollar
short rates will be expected to rise more over time. However, since the net supply of long-term
bonds is decreasing in long-term yields, the net supply of dollar long-term bonds will be higher
than the supply of euro long-term bonds. This means the term premium component of long-term
yields will be larger in dollars than in euros, matching Campbell-Shiller (1991). In addition, since
global bond investors will have a larger exposure to dollar short-rate shocks, the expected return
on the FX trade will also be positive. As a result, the expected return on the FX trade will be
increasing in the di¤erence between euro and dollar short-term rates, matching the Fama (1984)
pattern.
     Finally, once we link supply to prices, changes in conventional monetary policy in the eurozone
(it ) impact U.S. term premia (Et rxy   t+1 ) and vice versa, meaning the Friedman-Obstfeld-Taylor
trilemma fails. In the absence of capital controls, foreign monetary policy impacts domestic
...nancial conditions despite    oating exchanges rates. The sign of this e¤ect is ambiguous and
depends on Sq , Sy , and . Speci...cally, we have the following result:
Proposition 5 Impact of foreign short rates on domestic term premia and vice versa.
Suppose 2        2
           sy = sq = 0. (i) If Sq > 0, Sy = 0, and   2 [0; 1), @Et rxy                y
                                                                     t+1 =@it = @Et rxt+1 =@it >
0. (ii) If Sq = 0, Sy > 0, and 2 (0; 1], @Et rxy                     y
                                                  t+1 =@it = @Et rxt+1 =@it < 0.

    When Sq > 0, Sy = 0, and < 1, raising foreign short rates raises the domestic term premium.
To understand the intuition, suppose that it rises-- i.e., the ECB tightens monetary policy. This
results in an appreciation of the euro relative to the dollar (i.e., qt rises) for UIP reasons. Since
Sq > 0 and Sy = 0, this appreciation in turn raises global bond investors'exposure to the borrow-
in-dollars lend-in-euros trade, which raises their exposure to U.S. short rate risk. Thus, the term
premium on long-term U.S. bonds, Et rxy     t+1 , must rise in equilibrium.
    By contrast, if Sq = 0, Sy > 0, and > 0, raising foreign short rates lowers the domestic term
premium. Suppose again that short-term euro rates it rise. This raises long-term euro yields yt
and reduces the supply of long-term euro bonds. Since excess returns on long-term U.S. bonds
are positively correlated with the those on long-term euro bonds when > 0, the term premium
on long-term U.S. bonds must decline (i.e., Et rxy   t+1 must fall).
    More generally, when Sq > 0 and Sy > 0, the sign of @Et rxy                            y
                                                                      t+1 =@it = @Et rxt+1 =@it is
ambiguous and depends on Sq (increasing Sq raises @Et rxy      t+1 =@it when      < 1), Sy (increasing
                   y                                                          y
Sy lowers @Et rxt+1 =@it when > 0), and (raising reduces @Et rxt+1 =@it ).
state as the duration of long-term bonds approaches in...nitity ( ! 1) and is therefore independent of the short
rate di¤erential.

                                                      25
3.5     Relationship to consumption-based models
Our quantity-driven, segmented-markets model provides a uni...ed way to understand term premia
and exchange rates. Table 6 compares our model'     s implications with those of leading frictionless,
consumption-based asset pricing models. The table shows that our model is able to simultane-
ously match many important stylized facts about long-term bonds and foreign exchange rates.
By contrast, leading consumption-based models struggle to simultaneously match these empirical
patterns in a uni...ed way.
     The key driver of the di¤erences is that our assumption that the global bond and foreign
exchange markets are partially segmented from ...nancial markets more broadly. As a result,
the wealth of intermediaries in these global bond markets need not be closely tied to aggregate
consumption or conditions in other ...nancial markets (e.g., equities). To be clear, we are not
assuming that ...nancial markets are highly segmented; we are simply positing that there is some
segmentation at the level of broad ...nancial asset classes.
     As shown in column (1) of Table 6, the starkest implication of this assumption is that, in
our model, FX rates move in response to shifts in the supply and demand for assets in di¤erent
currencies-- e.g., central banks'QE policies-- which intermediaries must absorb. By contrast, in
frictionless asset-pricing theories, a mere "reshu- ing" of assets between di¤erent agents in the
economy has no asset pricing implications.
     A second implication of this segmentation assumption is that "bad times" for the marginal
investors in global bond markets need not coincide with "bad times"for more broadly diversi...ed
investors or for the representative households in, say, the U.S. and Europe. In particular, while
there is a SDF Mt+1 that prices risky assets in our model, it is not the case that short-term riskless
rates satisfy the usual relationship, exp ( it ) = Et [Mt+1 ], with respect to that SDF. As shown
in columns (2)-(4) of Table 6, this helps us ...t several features of the term structure of interest
rates. Empirically, short-term real interest rates typically rise in economic expansions and fall in
recessions. As a result, long-term real bonds are a macroeconomic hedge for the representative
household, which leads most consumption-based models to predict negative real term premia.25
Empirically, however, both real term and nominal term premia are positive. By contrast, in our
model as in Vayanos and Vila (2019), long-term bonds are risky for specialized bond investors,
who su¤er capital losses when short rates rise, and real term premia are therefore positive.
     Traditional complete-markets models also imply di¤erent patterns of comovement between
exchange rates and real interest rates than our model, summarized in columns (5)-(7) of Table
6. In complete-markets models, foreign currency appreciates in bad times for foreign agents--
i.e., Qt+1 =Qt = Mt+1 =Mt+1 in these models, where Mt+1 and Mt+1 are the foreign and domestic
SDF, respectively. This appreciation occurs despite the fact that short-term foreign interest rates
fall in bad foreign times (Engel [2016]) and makes domestic assets risky for foreign agents, thus
rationalizing imperfect international risk sharing with complete ...nancial markets.26 Furthermore,
  25
     There are consumption-based models in which real interest rates rise in recessions, implying a positive real
term premium (e.g., Wachter [2006]). Empirically, however, real interest rates tend to fall in recessions.
  26
     Lustig and Verdelhan (2019) consider the implications of relaxing the "complete-spanning" assumption that
  qt+1 = mt+1 mt+1 and instead assume qt+1 = mt+1 mt+1 + t+1 where t+1 is wedge term that captures
market incompleteness. If both domestic and foreign agents are both on their Euler equations for short-term


                                                       26
since long-term bonds are hedge assets in consumption-based models, foreign long-term bond
yields fall in the same bad foreign times that foreign currency appreciates. As a result, foreign
currency returns are positively correlated with long-term foreign bond returns and negatively
correlated with long-term domestic bond returns. Thus, in most consumption-based models,
the FX risk premium is increasing in the foreign-minus-domestic term premium di¤erential (i.e.,
Et [rxq                                     y
      t+1 ] is positively related to Et [rxt+1   rxyt+1 ]). See the Online Appendix for additional
discussion.
    By contrast, in our theory and in the data, foreign currency appreciates when short-term for-
eign interest rates rise relative to short-term domestic interest rates (Engel [2016]). Furthermore,
the realized returns on foreign currency are negatively correlated with foreign bond returns and
positively correlated with domestic bond returns. This is because the realized returns on foreign
exchange and long-term bonds are both driven by shocks to short-term interest rates. As a result,
the expected return on foreign currency is negatively related to the foreign-minus-domestic term
premium di¤erential.
    As we showed in Section 3.4, our model can also jointly match the Fama (1984) and Campbell-
Shiller (1991) forecasting results, thereby linking expected returns to the level of short-term
interest rates. While consumption-based models can match the Fama (1984) result (see, e.g.,
Verdelhan [2010] and Bansal and Shaliastovich [2012]), they struggle to simultaneously match
the Campbell-Shiller (1991) pattern, as summarized in columns (8)-(10) of Table 6. Consider,
for instance, the habit formation model of Verdelhan (2010). When domestic agents are closer to
their habit level of consumption than foreign agents, domestic agents are more risk averse. Thus,
the expected excess return to holding foreign currency must be positive at these times. Since
the precautionary savings e¤ect dominates the intertemporal substitution e¤ect in Verdelhan'          s
(2010) model, domestic short rates will be below foreign short rates at these times, thereby
generating the Fama (1984) pattern. However, since interest rates decline in bad economic
times in the model, long-term real bonds hedge macroeconomic risk and carry a negative term
premium. Furthermore, bond risk premia are more negative when short rates are low. Thus,
if the Verdelhan (2010) model is calibrated so the term structure is steep when short rates are
low, the model delivers a negative association between the term spread and bond risk premia,
contrary to Campbell-Shiller (1991). The same is true for Bansal and Shaliastovich (2012), a
long-run risks model of foreign exchange.
    While it poses a challenge for existing models, it will be possible to develop complete-markets
models that, like our model, can match Lustig, Stathopoulos, and Verdelhan'      s (2019) ...nding that
the FX carry trade earns lower returns when implemented with long-term bonds instead of short-
term bonds. As explained in Lustig et al (2019), the resolution is to assume that the domestic
and foreign SDFs share a similar permanent component but di¤erent transitory components,
implying that international risk-sharing is greater in the long-run. However, to the extent that
short- and long-term interest rates still fall in bad times in this next generation of consumption-
bonds in both currencies, Lustig and Verdelhan (2019) show that this alone imposes tight restrictions on the
wedge term t+1 . As a result, while this form of market incompleteness can help explain the volatility of exchange
rates and FX risk premium, they show it cannot overturn the crucial (and arguably counterfactual) implication
that foreign exchange rates appreciate in bad times for foreign agents.


                                                       27
based models, they will still struggle to match the correlation structure between contemporaneous
returns and between di¤erent risk premia that we see in the data.


4    Deviations from covered-interest-rate parity
In this section, we enrich the structure of intermediation in our model to explore the post-2008
violations of covered interest rate parity (CIP), which have recently been documented by Du,
Tepper, and Verdelhan (2018) and Jiang, Krishnamurthy, and Lustig (2019). To do so, we extend
the set of intermediaries we consider to include banks. In addition, we introduce 1-period FX
forward contracts, which allow period t investors to lock in an exchange rate for t + 1. When CIP
holds, the "cash"domestic short-term rate equals its "synthetic"counterpart, which is obtained
by investing in short-term foreign bonds and hedging the associated FX risk using FX forwards.
Since CIP violations imply the existence of riskless pro...ts, unlike deviations from UIP, CIP
violations cannot be explained simply by invoking limited investor risk-bearing capacity.
    To model deviations from CIP and their connection to other asset prices, we make three
changes to the baseline model. First, we split our global bond investors, so half are domiciled in
the domestic country and half are domiciled in the foreign country. Second, we assume that the
only market participants who can engage in riskless CIP arbitrage trades-- i.e., borrowing at the
synthetic domestic short rate to lend at the cash domestic short rate-- are a set of global banks
who face non-risk-based balance sheet constraints. Third, we assume that bond investors must
use FX forwards if they want to hedge the currency risk associated with making investments
in long-term bonds outside their domiciles. This is equivalent to saying that bond investors
cannot directly borrow (i.e., obtain "cash" funding) in non-local currency. They can of course
convert their local currency to non-local currency in the spot market and then purchase assets.
But if they wish to obtain leverage in non-local currency, they must use "synthetic" funding
by transacting in FX forwards. They construct this synthetic funding by borrowing in local
currency, converting the proceeds to non-local currency in the spot market, and then forward
selling non-local currency in the forward market.
    In this setting, we show that deviations from CIP co-move with spot exchange rates as docu-
mented in Du, Tepper, and Verdelhan (2018) and Jiang, Krishnamurthy, and Lustig (2019). The
intuition is that bond supply shocks generate investor demand to hedge foreign currency risk--
or, equivalently, demand for funding in non-local currency-- which in turn generates demand for
FX forward transactions. When banks accommodate this demand, they engage in riskless CIP
arbitrage trades. These trades consume scarce bank balance sheet capacity, so banks are only
willing to accommodate FX forward demand if they earn positive pro...ts doing so-- i.e., only if
there are deviations from CIP.
    To illustrate, suppose there is an increase in the supply of long-term domestic bonds. As
in our baseline model, this supply shock raises the domestic term premium and the FX risk
premium, leading domestic currency to appreciate against foreign. To take advantage of the
elevated domestic term premium, foreign bond investors want to buy long-term domestic bonds.
They want do so on an FX-hedged basis to isolate the elevated domestic term premium component


                                               28
of the investment. This puts pressure on the market for FX forwards, generating deviations from
CIP. Equivalently, foreign bond investors want synthetic funding in domestic currency, pushing
up the synthetic domestic short rate relative to its cash counterpart. Thus, deviations from CIP
are driven by supply-and-demand shocks in the global bond market.
    Once we allow for CIP deviations, domestic investors acquire an endogenous comparative
advantage at absorbing domestic bond supply shocks relative to foreign investors. Intuitively,
domestic investors can hold long-term domestic bonds without bearing currency risk or paying
the costs of hedging currency risk with FX forwards, while foreign investors cannot.

Forward foreign exchange rates Let FtQ denote the 1-period forward exchange rate at time
t: FtQ is the amount of domestic currency per unit of foreign currency that investors can lock
in at t to exchange at t + 1. Once we introduce forwards, there are two ways to earn a riskless
return in domestic currency between t and t + 1. First, investors can hold short-term domestic
bonds, earning the gross "cash"rate of It . Second, investors can convert domestic currency into
1=Qt units of foreign currency, invest that foreign currency in short-term foreign bonds at rate It ,
and enter into an forward contact to exchange foreign for domestic currency at t + 1, obtaining
the gross "synthetic" rate of Ftq It =Qt units of domestic currency at t + 1. Under CIP, the cash
(It ) and synthetic (Ftq It =Qt ) domestic short rates must be equal, implying Ftq = Qt It =It or
ftq = qt (it it ) in logs.
     By contrast, if CIP fails, the "cross-currency basis", xcip
                                                             t , given by


                                      xcip
                                       t = it       (it + ftq          qt )                     (38)

is nonzero. The cross-currency basis, xcip
                                       t , is the return on a riskless CIP arbitrage trade that
borrows short-term in domestic currency on a synthetic basis at rate (it + ftq qt ) and lends
short-term in domestic currency on a cash basis at rate it . Alternately, we have:

                                     ftq = qt     (it        it )     xcip
                                                                       t .                      (39)

Thus, xcip
       t   is positive when the forward FX rate is lower than it would be if CIP held.

Positions involving FX forwards We introduce three positions that involve FX forwards:

      Forward investment in FX: Consider the excess return in domestic currency on a position
      in foreign currency that is obtained through a forward purchase of foreign currency. The
      log excess return on this position is:

                        qt+1   ftq = [(qt+1     qt ) + (it          it )] + xcip   q      cip
                                                                             t = rxt+1 + xt ,   (40)

      which follows from using the expression for ftq in equation (39) and the fact that rxqt+1
      (qt+1 qt ) + (it it ). Thus, a forward investment in foreign currency is equivalent to
      "stapling" together a standard FX trade, which earns rxq   t+1 , and a long position in the
                                         cip
      CIP arbitrage trade, which earns xt . Using FX forwards in this way is a synthetic way

                                                    29
       of obtaining funding or leverage for a standard FX trade. An investor in FX uses little or
       none of their own capital up-front when they use forwards, just as they use little or none
       of their own capital up-front when they use leverage.

    In our baseline model in Section 3 where CIP held, it did not matter where our global bond
investors were domiciled. Because bond investors could frictionlessly hedge any exchange rate
risk stemming from investments in non-local bonds, we could simply think of investors as picking
their exposures to three risky excess returns: on the domestic yield-curve trade, the foreign yield-
curve trade, and FX trade. However, once CIP does not hold, it matters where bond investors
are domiciled. For instance,    uctuations in the cross-currency basis change the attractiveness
of investing in long-term foreign bonds for domestic bond investors because they must either
(i) not hedge the FX risk stemming from their foreign bond holdings or (ii) hedge this FX risk
at cost xcip
          t . Thus, in this section, we distinguish between foreign and domestic investors when
considering FX-hedged investments in non-local long-term bonds:

       FX-hedged investment in long-term foreign bonds by domestic investors. To obtain this
       return from t to t + 1, a domestic investor exchanges domestic for foreign currency in the
       spot market at the time t, invests that foreign currency in long-term foreign bonds from t
       to t + 1, and then exchanges foreign for domestic currency at t + 1 at the pre-determined
       forward rate FtQ . The log excess return on this position is approximately:

                                          y       q
                                        (rt +1 + ft    qt )   it = rxy
                                                                     t+1    xcip
                                                                             t ,                              (41)

       which follows from using equation (39) and rxy    t+1
                                                                y
                                                               rt +1  it . Thus, an FX-hedged invest-
       ment in long-term foreign bonds is akin to "stapling"together the foreign yield-curve trade,
       which earns rxyt+1 , and a short position in the CIP arbitrage trade, which earns  xcip
                                                                                           t . Using
       forwards to hedge FX risk in this way is e¤ectively a way of converting domestic currency
       funding into foreign currency funding.27

       FX-hedged investment in long-term domestic bonds by foreign investors. To obtain this
       return from t to t + 1, a foreign investor exchanges foreign for domestic currency in the spot
       market at the time t, invests that domestic currency in long-term domestic bonds from t
       to t + 1, and then exchanges domestic for foreign currency at t + 1 at the pre-determined
       forward rate 1=FtQ . The log excess return on this position is approximately:

                                          y
                                         rt +1 + qt   ftq     it = rxy      cip
                                                                     t+1 + xt .                               (42)

       This hedged investment staples together the domestic yield-curve trade, which earns rxy
                                                                                             t+1 ,
                                                                    cip
       and a long position in the CIP arbitrage trade, which earns xt .
  27
    FX-hedged positions in foreign risky assets do not completely eliminate the exchange rate risk that investors
must bear because the size of the hedge cannot be made contingent on the foreign asset'        s subsequent return.
Thus, the full FX-hedged return includes a second-order interaction between the local currency excess return on
the foreign asset and the excess return on foreign currency. For simplicity, we omit this second-order term-- which
converges to a constant when investors continuously rebalance their hedges-- from our analysis.


                                                        30
Investor types We assume half of all bond investors are domiciled in the domestic country
and half are domiciled in the foreign country. Both domestic and foreign investors have mean-
variance preferences over one-period-ahead wealth and a risk tolerance of in domestic currency
terms.28 Investors di¤er only in terms of the returns they can earn because of CIP violations:

  1. Domestic bond investors are present in mass 1=2. They can obtain a riskless return of it
     from t to t +1 by investing in short-term domestic bonds. They can buy long-term domestic
     bonds, earning an excess return of rxy  t+1 ; they can take FX-hedged positions in long-term
     foreign bonds, generating an excess return of rxy      t+1     xcip
                                                                      t ; and they can make forward
     investments in foreign currency, earning an excess return of rxq             cip
                                                                          t+1 + xt . In e¤ect, domestic
     investors only have access to excess returns [rxy            y
                                                          t+1 ; rxt+1    xcip    q      cip 0
                                                                           t ; rxt+1 + xt ] . Domestic
     investors can make unhedged investments in long-term foreign bonds-- by combining an
     FX-hedged investment in long-term foreign bonds with a forward investment in foreign
     currency, they can earn an excess return of rxy                q
                                                         t+1 + rxt+1 , which is independent of xt .
                                                                                                    cip

     However, if they want FX-hedged exposure to foreign long-term bonds, they must pay xcip        t .


  2. Foreign bond investors are present in mass 1=2 and are the mirror image of domestic
     investors. Foreign investors have access to excess returns [rxy      cip   y       q      cip 0
                                                                   t+1 + xt ; rxt+1 ; rxt+1 + xt ] .


    While domestic and foreign bond investors may transact in FX forwards, they cannot engage
in the riskless CIP arbitrage trade in isolation. Speci...cally, to the extent these bond investors
transact in FX forwards, they "staple" together the returns on a riskless CIP arbitrage trade
together with those on other risky trades. This assumption is crucial for preventing bond in-
vestors, who are risk averse but are not subject to other constraints, from fully arbitraging away
deviations from CIP. It is equivalent to assuming that bond investors cannot obtain leverage
in non-local currency (i.e., short non-local short-term bonds); they can only obtain synthetic
non-local currency funding, which embeds a spread (xcipt ) that re   ects banks'balance sheet costs.
    We assume the only players who can engage in the riskless CIP arbitrage are a set of balance-
sheet constrained banks. Speci...cally, we assume these banks choose the value of their positions
in the CIP arbitrage trade, dcip
                              B;t , to solve:


                                        max
                                         cip
                                             xcip cip
                                              t dB;t       ( =2) (dcip
                                                                   B;t )
                                                                        2
                                                                          ,                       (43)
                                         dB;t


where       0. Here ( =2) (dcip  2
                            B;t ) captures non-risk-based balance sheet costs faced by banks. These
costs arise because equity capital is costly and banks are subject to non-risk-based equity capital
requirements (i.e., simple leverage ratios). Thus, banks take a position in the CIP arbitrage trade
equal to:
                                           dcip
                                             B;t =
                                                     1 cip
                                                      xt .                                     (44)

    These assumptions are purposely stark and serve to highlight the key mechanisms. In par-
ticular, our results would be qualitatively unchanged if some bond investors could engage in the
 28
      That is, the risk tolerance of foreign bond investors is =Qt in foreign currency terms.


                                                         31
CIP arbitrage trade in limited size. Similarly, we are assuming that banks have zero risk-bearing
capacity, so that anytime they transact in the forward market, it is as part of a CIP arbitrage
trade. However, we would obtain qualitatively similar results if we assumed that banks had ...nite
risk-bearing capacity and thus could also take on risky FX positions.

Market equilibrium We need to clear four markets at time t: (i) the market for risky long-
term domestic bonds; (ii) the market for risky long-term foreign bonds; (iii) the market for risky
forward FX exposure, which we assume is in net supply sq        t ; and (iv) the market for the CIP
                 29
arbitrage trade.    Because forwards and the CIP arbitrage trade span the spot market, (iii)
and (iv) are equivalent to clearing the forward and spot FX markets. This is because making
a risky spot FX investment, which earns rxq    t+1 , is equivalent to combining a risky forward FX
investment, which earns rxt+1 + xt , with a reverse CIP arbitrage trade, which earns xcip
                             q      cip
                                                                                             t .
    To clear the market for risky forward FX exposure at time t, investors must be willing to make
a forward FX investment with a domestic notional value of sq        t . Turning to the CIP arbitrage
market, recall that the CIP arbitrage trade exchanges currency at the time t spot rate and to
then reverses that exchange at t +1 at the forward FX rate ftQ . For simplicity, we assume that the
CIP arbitrage trade is in zero net supply (scip
                                             t       0), implying that banks must take the opposite
                                30
side of bond investors'trades.

Proposition 6 Allowing for CIP deviations. Consider the extended model where the banks
are potentially balance-sheet constrained. We have the following results:

       In the limiting case where banks are not balance-sheet constrained-- i.e., where ! 0, CIP
       holds (xcip
                t ! 0) and the extended model converges to the baseline model in Section 3.


       If banks are balance-sheet constrained ( > 0), we have

                       Et rxy
                            t+1       =      1
                                                 [Vy     sy
                                                          t + Cy;y     sy
                                                                        t + Cy;q    sq
                                                                                     t]     xcip
                                                                                             t =2,           (45a)
                       Et rxy
                            t+1       =      1
                                                 [Cy;y     sy
                                                            t   + Vy   sy
                                                                        t   Cy;q    sq
                                                                                     t] +   xcip
                                                                                             t =2,           (45b)
                       Et rxq
                            t+1       =      1
                                          [Cy;q          sy y
                                                          (st
                                                          t ) + Vq   sq
                                                                      t]            xcip
                                                                                     t ,                     (45c)
                                               Vy + Cy;y
                               xcip
                                t     =                          (sy
                                                                   t    sy
                                                                         t ).                                (45d)
                                          2 (Vy + Cy;y ) +
                                        |        {z           }
                                                          <0


       Eqs. (45c) and (45d) show that the bond supply shocks sy            y            q         cip
                                                                   t and st push Et [rxt+1 ] and xt
       in opposite directions; as a result, these shocks push qt and xcip
                                                                       t  in the same direction.
  29
      To clearly separate the amount of risky FX exposure and the amount of balance-sheet intensive riskless funding
that bond investors and banks must intermediate, we assume here that sq   t is the net supply of risky FX exposure
on a forward basis. Since bond investors can accommodate shocks to the supply of forward FX exposure without
using scarce bank balance sheet capacity, sq                      cip                  q
                                              t does not impact xt . By contrast, if st were instead the supply of
risky FX exposure on a spot basis, then a rise in st would be associated with a decline in xcip
                                                     q
                                                                                              t .
   30
      In the Online Appendix, we add exogenous shocks to the supply of the CIP arbitrage trade that banks must
undertake.




                                                          32
    In the limiting case where banks balance-sheet costs vanish ( ! 0), CIP holds-- i.e., we
have xcip
        t ! 0, and equilibrium bond yields and exchange rates behave exactly as they did in the
baseline model in Section 3. This limit arguably approximates the pre-2008 era, when CIP held
and banks did not face binding non-risk-based equity capital constraints.
    Next, consider the case where bank balance sheet costs are positive ( > 0). In this case,
risk premia are given by Eq. (45) and the cross-currency basis xcip        t   is given by Eq. (45d).
To understand the intuition for Eq. (45d), suppose there is an increase in the supply of long-
term domestic bonds, sy   t . As in our baseline model, this supply shock raises the domestic term
premium and the FX premium, leading domestic currency to appreciate against foreign. Foreign
bond investors then want to buy long-term domestic bonds, but they want to hedge the associated
FX risk to isolate the elevated domestic term premium. Hedging the FX risk involves forward
selling domestic currency. Because banks are balance-sheet constrained, banks are only willing
to accommodate investor demand for FX hedges if domestic currency is weaker than CIP would
imply in the forward market, meaning that the forward exchange rate ftq rises and the basis xcip    t
declines. Equivalently, the domestic bond supply shock boosts foreign bond investors'demand
for short-term synthetic funding in domestic currency. Since banks are balance-sheet constrained,
this shift in funding demand pushes up the synthetic domestic short rate (it + ftq qt ) relative
to its cash counterpart (it ), thereby driving down the basis.
    Eqs. (45d) and (45c) show that the two bond supply shocks (sy          y          cip         q
                                                                      t , st ) push xt and Et rxt+1
in opposite directions. As a result, these supply shocks induce a positive correlation between the
basis xcip
        t and the spot exchange rate qt , consistent with the recent ...ndings of Avdjiev, Du, Koch,
and Shin (2019) and Jiang, Krishnamurthy, and Lustig (2019). Intuitively, in our model, demand
to buy domestic currency in the spot market, which drives down qt , is linked with hedging demand
to sell domestic currency in the forward market, which drives down xcip      t : Since risk premia are
not directly observable but CIP deviations are, the CIP basis is an informative signal about the
underlying supply-and-demand shocks that drive UIP failures in our model (i.e., movements in
Et rxq t+1 ).
             31

    Figure 2 illustrates these results. We show the impact of a shock to domestic bond supply
on equilibrium expected returns as a function of bank capital cost, . As in the baseline model
in Section 3, when = 0, we have xcip      t   = 0. Following an increase in domestic bond supply,
foreign investors use FX forwards to hedge purchases their of domestic bonds. Banks costlessly
supply these FX forwards when = 0: As we increase , xcip      t must decline to induce balance-sheet
constrained banks to accommodate hedging demand from foreign investors.
    CIP deviations generate an endogenous comparative advantage for domestic investors in do-
mestic bonds because they can hold these bonds without bearing currency risk or paying the costs
of hedging currency risk with FX forwards. This endogenous comparative advantage means that
increasing balance sheet costs, ; raises the impact of a domestic bond supply shock on domestic
term premia (Et rxy                                   q
                      t+1 ) and FX premia (Et rxt+1 ), and reduces the impact on foreign term
premia (Et rxy  t+1 ). Intuitively, foreign investors do less to accommodate the shock, raising the
  31
    Relatedly, Du, Hebert, and Huber (2019) argue that the CIP basis is a measure of how tightly banks'regulatory
constraints are binding and therefore should price the typical portfolio returns studied in the intermediary-based
asset pricing literature. They provide empirical evidence consistent with this argument.

                                                       33
impact on domestic term premia and lowering the impact on foreign term premia.


5     Model extensions
5.1     Further segmenting the global bond market
In this section, we further enrich the structure of intermediation in our model to capture two
signi...cant, real-world features of global bond and FX markets. First, real-world markets feature
a variety of di¤erent investor types-- each facing a di¤erent set of constraints-- opening the door
for meaningful segmentation within global bond and FX markets. Second, real-world bond and
FX markets involve substantial trading       ows between di¤erent investor types (Evans and Lyons
[2002] and Froot and Ramadorai [2005]).
    We ...rst further segment the global bond market as in Gromb and Vayanos (2002), assuming
some bond investors cannot trade short- and long-term bonds in both currencies. A ...rst take-
away is that, with further segmentation, exogenous bond supply shocks give rise to endogenous
foreign exchange trading      ows that are associated with changes in exchange rates. A second
take-away is that a small amount of additional segmentation always increases the impact of bond
supply shocks on exchange rates.
    Our extended model features four types of bond investors. All types have mean-variance
preferences over one-period-ahead wealth and a risk tolerance of in domestic currency terms.
Types only di¤er in their ability to trade di¤erent assets. Speci...cally:

    1. Domestic bond specialists, present in mass , can only choose between short- and long-term
       domestic bonds-- i.e., they can only engage in the domestic yield curve trade.

    2. Foreign bond specialists, also present in mass , can only choose between short- and long-
       term foreign bonds-- i.e., they can only engage in the foreign yield curve trade.

    3. FX specialists, present in mass (1 2 ), can only choose between short-term domestic
       and foreign bonds-- i.e., they can only engage in the FX trade.

    4. Global bond investors, present in mass (1    ), can hold short- and long-term bonds in both
       currencies and can engage in all three long-short trades.

    We assume 2 [0; 1] and 2 (0; 1=2). Increasing the combined mass of specialist types, ,
is equivalent to introducing greater segmentation in the global bond market. Thus, our baseline
model corresponds to the limiting case where = 0. At the other extreme, markets are fully
segmented when = 1. And, when 2 (0; 1) markets are partially segmented.
    Our domestic bond specialists are reminiscent of the specialized bond investors in Vayanos and
Vila (2019) in the sense that their positions in long-term domestic bonds are a su¢ cient statistic
for the expected returns on the domestic yield curve trade. Our FX specialists are similar to the
FX intermediaries in Gabaix and Maggiori (2015): their FX positions are a su¢ cient statistic for
the expected returns on the FX trade. In practice, we associate the domestic and foreign bond


                                                34
specialists with market participants who, for institutional reasons, exhibit signi...cant home-bias
and are essentially unwilling to substitute between bonds in di¤erent currencies.
   In the Online Appendix, we derive the following results:

Proposition 7 Further segmenting the bond market. Suppose                           2 (0; 1) and that fraction
 of investors are specialists. We have the following results:

 (i.) Price impact. Suppose 2                  2
                                      sy = sq = 0. (a) Greater segmentation increases own-
      market price impact. Formally, for any a 2 fy; y ; q g, @ 2 Et [rxa               a
                                                                                t+1 ]=@st @ > 0. (b) Seg-
      mentation has a hump-shaped e¤ ect on cross-market price impact. For any a1 2
      fy; y ; q g and a2 6= a1 , @Et [rxat+1 ]=@st
                                          1       a2
                                                       is hump-shaped function of with @Et [rxa          a2
                                                                                                 t+1 ]=@st
                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                            >
                                     a1        a2
      0 when = 0 and @Et [rxt+1 ]=@st = 0 when = 1. (c) Greater segmentation in-
      creases bond market-wide price impact. For any supply st 6= 0, the expected return
      on the global bond market portfolio rxs               0                                st
                                                   t+1 = st rxt+1 is increasing in : @Et [rxt+1 ]=@ > 0.
                                                     t




(ii.) Segmentation leads to endogenous trading              ows. Suppose 2   sy    0, 2sq     0. For
      any 2 (0; 1), a shock to the supply of any asset a 2 fy; y ; q g triggers trading in all assets
      a0 6= a between global bond investors and specialist investors.

    Further segmenting the global bond market-- i.e., increasing -- has two direct e¤ects. First,
as we increase , there is an "ine¢ cient risk-sharing"e¤ect because fewer investors can absorb a
given supply shock. This e¤ect tends to increase the price impact of all supply shocks. Second,
as we increase , there is a "width of the pipe"e¤ect because we increase the mass of specialist
investors who do not alter their demand for their asset in response to shocks in other markets.
This e¤ect tends to diminish the impact of a supply shock in one market on prices in other
markets because price impact is only transmitted across markets by global bond investors--
"the pipe"  -- whose demands for each asset are impacted by shocks to other markets. Finally,
there is an "endogenous risk"e¤ect. To the extent that greater segmentation directly alters the
price impact of supply shocks, greater segmentation a¤ects equilibrium return volatility, further
altering equilibrium price impact.
    Part (i) of Proposition 7 characterizes equilibrium price impact as a function of in the
                                                         32
limit where supply risk vanishes ( 2          2
                                        sy = sq = 0).       In this limiting case, the endogenous risk
e¤ect disappears, leaving only the ine¢ cient risk-sharing and width of the pipe e¤ects. As we
raise , these two e¤ects always increase the impact of a supply shock in market a on expected
returns in that market: @ 2 Et [rxa        a
                                  t+1 ]=@st @ > 0 for any a 2 fy; y ; q g. Cross-market price impact
under partial segmentation is more complicated. For instance, consider how the FX risk premium
responds to domestic bond supply, @Et [rxq           y
                                             t+1 ]=@st , as a function of . When there are only global
bond investors ( = 0), a shock to domestic bond supply raises expected returns on the FX trade:
@Et [rxq       y
       t+1 ]=@st > 0. This is the key result from our baseline model. By contrast, when markets
  32
    To prove part (i) of the proposition and draw all ...gures in the paper, we assume there is some FX-speci...c
                                                              1                           1     1
fundamental risk. That is, we assume limT !1P  Et [qt+T ] = qt   follows a random walk qt +1 = qt + "q 1 ;t+1 with
                    2                      1    1                           q          2
V art ["q1 ;t+1 ] = q1 > 0, implying qt = qt + j =0 Et [(it+j it+j ) rxt+j +1 ]. If q1 = 0, then in the absence
of supply risk, FX is a redundant asset. FX returns are a linear combination of those on domestic and foreign
bonds. Cross-market impact would still be hump-shaped in this case so long as 2         2
                                                                                  sq ; sy > 0.


                                                       35
are completely segmented and there are no global bond investors, bond supply shocks have no
impact on FX-- i.e., @Et [rxq           y
                               t+1 ]=@st = 0 when    = 1. In between, however, has a hump-shaped
e¤ect on cross-market price impact. This hump-shape re          ects the combination of the ine¢ cient
                                                    q       y
risk-sharing e¤ect, which typically leads @Et [rxt+1 ]=@st to rise with and dominates when is
near 0, and the width of the pipe e¤ect, which typically leads @Et [rxq             y
                                                                            t+1 ]=@st to fall with and
dominates when is near 1.
    When we introduce stochastic supply shocks ( 2                   2
                                                       sy > 0 and sq > 0), the endogenous risk e¤ect
comes into play. By continuity of the stable equilibrium in the model'        s underlying parameters,
the results in part (i) of Proposition 7 must continue to hold when supply risk is small. More
generally, the endogenous risk e¤ect typically ampli...es the sum of the ine¢ cient risk-sharing and
width of pipe e¤ects, so the hump-shaped pro...le of @Et [rxa            a2
                                                                 t+1 ]=@st
                                                                  1
                                                                            becomes more pronounced
in the presence of supply risk. In addition, when asset supply is stochastic, greater segmentation
typically increases equilibrium market volatility. Furthermore, the endogenous risk e¤ect typically
steepens the relationship between segmentation and the expected return on the global bond
market portfolio.33
    The results in Proposition 7 are illustrated in Figure 3. Panel A of Figure 3 plots the im-
pact of a domestic bond supply shock on expected returns as a function of . The plot shows
that, while @Et [rxy         y
                     t+1 ]=@st is always increasing in , segmentation has a hump-shaped e¤ect on
@Et [rxq        y
        t+1 ]=@st . Unless   is near 1 and the global bond markets is highly segmented, the e¤ect of
bond supply shocks on foreign exchange exceeds that in our baseline model where = 0. Thus,
it is natural to conjecture that the impact of bond supply shocks on foreign exchange markets
has risen in recent decades because has fallen over time. In other words, relative to earlier
periods where markets were highly segmented (            1), the global bond market has become more
                             q        y
integrated, raising @Et [rxt+1 ]=@st (Mylonidis and Kollias [2010], Pozzi and Wolswijk [2012]).
    The next two plots in Panel B of Figure 3 show the trading response to a unit domestic bond
supply shock as a function of . When 2 (0; 1), markets are partially segmented, global bond
investors and the three specialist types disagree on the appropriate compensation for bearing
factor risk exposure. Thus, as shown in part (ii) of Proposition 7, following a supply shock to any
one asset, global bond investors trade across markets to align-- but not equalize-- the way that
factor risk is priced in di¤erent markets. For instance, a shock to the supply of domestic bonds
leads to foreign exchange trading between global bond investors and FX specialists. Speci...cally,
following a positive shock to domestic bond supply, global bond investors want to increase their
exposure to domestic bonds and reduce their exposure to the FX trade. FX specialists must
take the other side, increasing their exposure to the FX trade. These endogenous FX trading
  ows are associated with an increase in FX risk premia and a depreciation of foreign currency.
In this way, our extension with additional bond market segmentation endogenizes the kinds of
capital market driven FX        ows considered in Gabaix and Maggiori (2015). Rather than being
exogenous quantities that specialist FX investors are required to absorb, these endogenous FX
  33
    Formally, for any bond portfolio pt 6= 0 with returns rxp t     0                                    pt
                                                            t+1 = pt rxt+1 , we typically have @V art [rxt+1 ]=@ > 0.
When the endogenous risk e¤ect is positive in this portfolio sense, then for any set of supply shocks st 6= 0,
the expected return on the global bond market portfolio rxs            0
                                                                t+1 = st rxt+1 rises more steeply with -- i.e., the
                                                                 t

                                    st
endogenous risk e¤ect raises @Et [rxt+1 ]=@ > 0.


                                                         36
ows are tied to supply-and-demand shocks for long-term bonds.


5.2    Adding unhedged bond investors
A variety of frictions, including constraints on short-selling or using derivatives, may limit some
investors'ability to hedge FX risk. In our second extension, we add bond investors who cannot
hedge FX risk-- i.e., investors who cannot separately manage the FX exposure resulting from in-
vestments they make in non-local, long-term bonds. For example, if unhedged domestic investors
want to buy long-term foreign bonds to capture the foreign term premium, they must take on
exposure to foreign currency. Thus, unlike global bond investors, who can separately manage
their exposures to foreign currency and the foreign yield-curve trade, these unhedged domestic
investors always "staple together"the returns on the FX trade and the foreign yield-curve trade.
We show that adding unhedged investors is like introducing a particular form of market segmen-
tation. Thus, adding unhedged investors ampli...es the e¤ect of supply shocks on exchange rates
and leads to endogenous trading     ows.
    Concretely, we assume there are three investor types-- all with mean-variance preferences
over one-period-ahead wealth and risk tolerance in domestic currency terms-- who only di¤er
in terms of the assets they can trade:

  1. Unhedged domestic investors are present in mass =2. They can trade short-term domestic
     bonds, long-term domestic bonds, and long-term foreign bonds, but not short-term foreign
     bonds. Thus, if they buy long-term foreign bonds, they must take on foreign exchange
     exposure, generating an excess return of rxy       q
                                                t+1 + rxt+1 over short-term domestic bonds.

  2. Unhedged foreign investors are present in mass =2 and are the mirror image of unhedged
     domestic investors. If they buy long-term domestic bonds, they must take on FX exposure,
     generating an excess return of rxyt+1   rxq
                                               t+1 over short-term foreign bonds.

  3. Global bond investors, present in mass (1    ), can hold short- and long-term bonds in both
     currencies and can engage in all three carry trades.

    Unhedged investors will exhibit home bias in equilibrium. For instance, since an FX-unhedged
position in long-term domestic bonds is always riskier than the FX-hedged position, it is partic-
ularly risky for foreign unhedged investors to invest in domestic bonds. Thus, relative to global
bond investors and domestic unhedged investors, foreign unhedged investors face a comparative
disadvantage in holding long-term domestic bonds.
    In the Online Appendix, we solve for equilibrium and obtain the following results:

Proposition 8 Adding unhedged bond investors. Suppose 2 (0; 1) and that fraction                 of
bond investors cannot hedge FX risk. We have the following results:

 (i.) Price impact. Suppose 2          2
                                sy = sq = 0. Increasing the fraction of unhedged investors :
      (a) increases own-market price impact: @ 2 Et rxa      a
                                                      t+1 =@st @ > 0 for all a 2 fy; y ; q g; (b)



                                                37
      reduces the impact of domestic bond supply shocks on long-term foreign yields and vice-
      versa: @ 2 Et rxy      y             2        y      y
                      t+1 =@st @ < 0 and @ Et rxt+1 =@st @ < 0; (c) increases the impact of
      bond supply shocks on exchange rates: @ 2 Et rxq       y            2     q      y
                                                      t+1 =@st @ > 0 and @ Et rxt+1 =@st @ <
      0; and (d) raises the expected returns on the bond market portfolio rxs          0
                                                                               t+1 = st rxt+1 :
                                                                                t


      @Et [rxs
             t+1 ]=@ > 0 for any st 6= 0.
               t




(ii.) Introducing unhedged bond investors leads to endogenous trading. Suppose 2            sy
               2
      0, and sq 0. For any 2 (0; 1], a shock to the supply of any asset a 2 fy; y ; q g triggers
      trading in all assets a0 6= a.

    Figure 3 shows how a domestic bond supply shock impacts expected returns of as a function of
the fraction of unhedged investors . In our baseline model where = 0, an increase in domestic
bond supply sy  t raises the expected returns on all three trades. As     rises, the impact on domestic
bond returns rises. Own-market price impact rises because we are replacing global bond investors
with unhedged foreign investors who are at a comparative disadvantage at absorbing this domestic
bond supply shock. Thus, @Et [rxy              y
                                      t+1 ]=@st must rise with   to induce unhedged domestic investors
and the remaining global bond investors to pick up the slack. The same comparative advantage
logic explains why the impact of a domestic supply shock on foreign bond returns declines with :
there are fewer players who are willing to elastically substitute between long-term domestic and
foreign bonds. As a result, @Et [rxy            y
                                       t+1 ]=@st must fall with : otherwise unhedged foreign investors'
demand for foreign bonds will exceed the (unchanged) net supply of foreign bonds. Finally, as
increases, the domestic bond supply shock has a larger impact on foreign exchange markets. To
see the intuition, note that the foreign currency demands of all three investor types are increasing
in Et [rxq                y                               y                       y      y
         t+1 ] and Et [rxt+1 ] and decreasing in Et [rxt+1 ]. Thus, with @Et [rxt+1 ]=@st rising with
and @Et [rxy         y                  q        y
             t+1 ]=@st falling, @Et [rxt+1 ]=@st must rise with    to keep the foreign exchange market
in equilibrium.
    The three plots in Panel B of Figure 3 show the trading response to a positive shock to do-
mestic bond supply as a function of . In keeping with their comparative advantage, unhedged
domestic investors and global bond investors absorb this shock to domestic bond supply. Un-
hedged domestic investors buy domestic bonds and-- to lower their common short-rate exposure--
reduce their unhedged holdings of foreign bonds. Global rates investors buy long-term domestic
bonds and hedge their increased exposure to short-term domestic rates by reducing their holdings
of long-term foreign bonds and foreign exchange. Thus, both unhedged domestic investors and
global bond investors sell long-term foreign bonds and foreign currency. In equilibrium, unhedged
foreign investors must take the opposite side of these        ows, buying both long-term foreign bonds
and foreign currency. And, in order to buy foreign currency, unhedged foreign investors must
reduce their holdings of long-term domestic bonds.
    This extension captures one common intuition about how QE policies may impact exchange
rates rates. For instance, explaining in May 2015 how he believed large-scale bond purchases by
the European Central Bank had weakened the euro, President Mario Draghi commented:

          [The ECB'   s bond purchases] encourage investors to shift holdings into other asset
      classes ... and across jurisdictions, reected in a falling of the exchange rate.

                                                 38
Speci...cally, domestic QE policies-- i.e., a reduction in sy
                                                            t -- lead unhedged domestic investors
to buy foreign bonds on an unhedged basis, putting additional downward pressure on domestic
currency relative to our baseline model. In summary, the presence of unhedged investors gives rise
to a form of segmentation in the global bond market. This segmentation implies that a reduction
in domestic bond supply leads to trading       ows in the FX market and a larger depreciation of
domestic currency than in our baseline model.


5.3     Interest-rate insensitive assets
The key intuition in our baseline model is that foreign exchange is an "interest-rate sensitive"
asset-- i.e., it is highly exposed to news about future short-term interest rates. This leads shocks
to the supply of other rate-sensitive assets-- such as long-term domestic and foreign bonds-- to
impact exchange rates. However, in the absence of additional frictions, shocks to the supply
of interest-rate insensitive assets-- assets whose returns are not naturally exposed to short rate
risk-- will not impact exchange rates. For instance, we can add domestic and foreign stocks
to the model and make a series of (admittedly strong) assumptions which guarantee that the
excess returns on domestic and foreign equities are naturally uncorrelated with those on foreign
exchange.34
    If all equity investors can separately manage their FX exposures and CIP holds, then equity
supply shocks will not impact equilibrium exchange rates. In this case, an increase in the supply
of domestic equities pushes up the domestic equity risk premium, leaving FX premia unchanged.
The shock will lead foreign equity investors to purchase domestic equities, but they will do so on
a fully FX-hedged basis, leaving the FX exposure of equity investors and global bond investors
unchanged.
    However, if there are CIP violations as in Section 4 or if some equity investors cannot hedge
FX risk as in Subsection 5.2, then equity supply shocks will also impact spot FX rates. Under
these conditions, equity investors will not fully FX-hedge their non-local investments-- either
due to the endogenous cost of hedging in the former case or by assumption in the latter case.
As a result, equity supply shocks will alter the FX exposures of non-local equity investors and,
thus by market-clearing, global bond investors. In this way, shocks to the supply-and-demand
for interest-rate-insensitive assets can impact spot exchange rates when FX hedging is limited,
consistent with recent empirical ...ndings (Hau and Rey [2005], Hau, Massa, and Peress [2009],
Lilley, Maggiori, Neiman, and Schreger [2019], and Pandol... and Williams [2019]). This line
of reasoning suggests that the rise in bank balance sheet costs-- and the corresponding CIP
deviations-- that have emerged since 2008 may have increased the set of capital market            ows
that can impact spot exchange rates. Furthermore, when bank balance sheet costs lead to CIP
deviations, the cross-border     ows triggered by shocks to interest-rate-insensitive assets can lead
  34
    Unexpected stock returns depend on news about future dividend growth, news about future short rates, and
news about future equity risk premia. For the sake of the argument, we assume any bad news about higher
short-term rates is perfectly o¤set by good news about future dividend growth. We also assume that news about
future equity risk premia is driven by equity supply-and-demand shocks that are independent of those driving
bond and FX markets.



                                                     39
spot exchange rates and the CIP basis to co-move positively as in Section 4.


6    Conclusion
We develop a workhorse model in which the limited risk-bearing capacity of global bond market
investors plays a central role in determining foreign exchange rates. In our baseline model,
specialized bond investors must accommodate supply-and-demand shocks in the markets for
foreign and domestic long-term bonds as well as in the foreign exchange market.
      This simple model captures many features of the data, including (i) correlations between
realized excess returns on foreign currency and long-term bonds, (ii) the relationship between the
foreign exchange risk premium and term premia, (iii) the e¤ects of quantitative easing policies
on exchange rates, and (iv) the fact that currency trades are more pro...table when implemented
using short-term bonds than using long-term bonds. In addition, our baseline model provides a
uni...ed account linking the Fama (1984) and Campbell-Shiller (1991) predictability results. We
then enrich the structure of intermediation in our model in two ways. First, we add balance-
sheet constrained banks, which allow us to study CIP deviations. Second, we further segment
the bond market, introducing investors who cannot      exibly trade bonds of any maturity in both
currencies. This segmentation leads to endogenous trading       ows in currency markets that are
associated with movements in the exchange rate. Overall, our paper shows that the structure
of ...nancial intermediation in bond and currency markets helps explain a number of empirical
regularities in these markets.
      From a policy perspective, our model demonstrates that the ability to in     uence exchange
rates-- and hence presumably trade     ows-- remains a potentially important channel for monetary
policy transmission even when central banks are pinned against the zero lower bound (ZLB) and
must rely on quantitative easing to provide monetary accommodation. Indeed, our analysis
leaves open the interesting possibility that when other conventional channels of transmission are
compromised by low rates (Brunnermeier and Koby [2019]), this QE-exchange-rate channel may
become a relatively more important part of the overall monetary transmission mechanism. If so,
and given the zero-sum nature of this channel across countries, arguments for monetary-policy
coordination e.g., (Rajan [2016]) may gather more force near the ZLB. To be clear, neither our
model nor any of the evidence that we have presented gives decisive guidance on this point.
But the model does provide a framework in which questions of this sort can be pursued more
rigorously.




                                               40
References
Avdjiev, S., C. Koch, W. Du, & H. Shin. 2018. The dollar, bank leverage and deviations from covered
interest rate parity. American Economic Review: Insights, forthcoming.

Backus, D., P. Kehoe, & F. Kydland. 1992. Dynamics of the trade balance and the terms of trade: The
S-curve. NBER Working Paper No. 4242.

Backus, D. K., & G. W. Smith. 1993. Consumption and real exchange rates in dynamic economies with
non-traded goods. Journal of International Economics, 35(3-4): 297-316.

Backus, D. K., S. Foresi, & C. I. Telmer. 2001. A¢ ne term structure models and the forward premium
anomaly. Journal of Finance, 56(1), 279-304.

Bansal, R., & I. Shaliastovich. 2012. A long-run risks explanation of predictability puzzles in bond and
currency markets. Review of Financial Studies, 26(1): 1-33.

Bauer, M. D., & C. J. Neely. 2014. International channels of the Fed'
                                                                    s unconventional monetary policy.
Journal of International Money and Finance, 44: 24-46.

Boudoukh, J., M. Richardson, & R. Whitelaw. 2016. New evidence on the forward premium puzzle.
Jounral of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 51(3): 875-897.

Brunnermeier, M., & Y. Koby. 2019. The reversal interest rate. Princeton University working paper.

Campbell, J. Y., & R. J. Shiller. 1988. Stock prices, earnings, and expected dividends. Journal of Finance
43:661­76.

Campbell, J.Y. & R. J. Shiller. 1991. Yield spreads and interest rate movements: A bird's eye view,
Review of Economic Studies 58, 495­ 514.

Campbell, J. Y. 2018. Financial Decisions and Markets: A Course in Asset Pricing. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, NJ.

Cochrane, J. H., & M. Piazzesi. 2005. Bond risk premia. The American Economic Review, 95(1): 138-
160.

Colacito, R., & M. M. Croce. 2011. Risks for the long run and the real exchange rate. Journal of Political
Economy, 119(1): 153-181.

Colacito, R., & M. M. Croce. 2013. International asset pricing with recursive preferences. Journal of
Finance, 68(6): 2651-2686.

D'Amico, S. & T. King. 2013. Flow and stock e¤ects of large-scale Treasury purchases: Evidence on the
importance of local supply. Journal of Financial Economics 108(2): 425-448.

De Long, J. B., A. Shleifer, L. H. Summers, R. J. & Waldmann. 1990. Noise trader risk in ...nancial
markets. Journal of Political Economy, 98(4): 703­738.

Driscoll, J. C., & A. C. Kraay. 1998. Consistent covariance matrix estimation with spatially dependent
panel data. Review of Economics and Statistics, 80(4): 549­ 560.

Du, W., B. Hébert, & A. W. Huber. 2019. Are intermediary constraints priced? NBER Working Paper
No. 26009.

                                                   41
Du, W., A. Tepper, & A. Verdelhan. 2018. Deviations from covered interest rate parity. Journal of
Finance, 73(3): 915­957.

Engel, C. 2016. Exchange rates, interest rates, and the risk premium. American Economic Review,
106(2): 436-74.

Evans, M. D. D., & R. K. Lyons. 2002. Order ow and exchange rate dynamics. Journal of Political
Economy, 110(1): 170-180.

Fama, E. F. 1984. Forward and spot exchange rates. Journal of monetary economics, 14(3): 319-338.

Fama, E. F., & R. R. Bliss. 1987. The information in long-maturity forward rates. American Economic
Review, 77(4): 680-692.

Farhi, E., & X. Gabaix. 2016. Rare disasters and exchange rates. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
131(1): 1-52.

Farhi, E., & I. Werning. 2012. Dealing with the Trilemma: Optimal capital controls with ...xed exchange
rates. NBER Working Paper No. 18199

Froot, K. A., & T. Ramadorai. 2005. Currency returns, intrinsic value, and institutional-investor ows.
Journal of Finance, 60(3): 1535-1566.

Gabaix, X. & M. Maggiori. 2015. International liquidity and exchange rate dynamics. Quarterly Journal
of Economics 130: 1369-1420.

Gagnon, J., M. Raskin, J. Remache, & B. Sack. 2011. The Financial Market E¤ects of the Federal
Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchases. International Journal of Central Banking, 7(1), 3-43.

Gourinchas, P.O., W. Ray, & D. Vayanos. 2020. A Preferred-Habitat Model of Term Premia and Cur-
rency Risk. London School of Economics working paper.

Greenwood, R., S. G. Hanson, & G. Y. Liao. 2018. Asset price dynamics in partially segmented markets.
Review of Financial Studies 31: 3307-3343.

Greenwood, R., S. G. Hanson, & J. C. Stein. 2010. A gap-...lling theory of corporate debt maturity
choice. Journal of Finance 65(3), 993-1028.

Greenwood, R., S. G. Hanson, & D. Vayanos. 2016. Forward guidance in the yield curve: Short rates
versus bond supply. In Monetary Policy through Asset Markets: Lessons from Unconventional Measures
and Implications for an Integrated World, edited by Albagli, E., D. Saravia, & M, Woodford, Central
Bank of Chile.

Greenwood, R. & D. Vayanos. 2014. Bond supply and excess bond returns. Review of Financial Studies
27: 663-713.

Gromb, D., & D. Vayanos. 2002. Equilibrium and welfare in markets with ...nancially constrained arbi-
trageurs. Journal of Financial Economics, 66(2-3): 361­407.

Gürkaynak, R. S., B. Sack, & J. H.Wright. 2007. The U.S. Treasury yield curve: 1961 to the present.
Journal of Monetary Economics 54: 2291-2304.

Haddad, V., & D. Sraer. 2019. The banking view of bond risk premia. Journal of Finance, Forthcoming.
1-78.

                                                  42
Hamilton, J. D., & Wu, J. C. 2012. The e¤ectiveness of alternative monetary policy tools in a zero lower
bound environment. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 44: 3-46.

Hanson, S. G. 2014. Mortgage convexity. Journal of Financial Economics 113: 270-299.

Hanson, S. G. & J. C. Stein. 2015. Monetary policy and long-term real rates. Journal of Financial
Economics 115: 429-448.

Hanson, S. G., D.O. Lucca, & J.H. Wright. 2018. The excess sensitivity of long-term rates: a tale of two
frequencies. 2018. Harvard University working paper.

Hau, H., M. Massa, & J. Peress. 2009. Do demand curves for currencies slope down? Evidence from the
MSCI Global Index change. Review of Financial Studies, 23(4): 1681­ 1717.

Hau, H., & H. Rey. 2005. Exchange rates, equity prices, and capital ows. Review of Financial Studies,
19(1): 273­317.

Itskhoki, O. & D. Mukhin. 2019. Exchange rate disconnect in general equilibrium. Prnceton University
working paper.

Jiang, Z., A. Krishnamurthy, & H. N. Lustig. 2019. Dollar safety and the global ...nancial cycle. Stanford
University working paper..

Jylhä, P., & M. Suominen. 2011. Speculative capital and currency carry trades. Journal of Financial
Economics, 99(1): 60­75.

Kiefer, N. M., & T. J. Vogelsang. 2005. A new asymptotic theory for heteroskedasticity-autocorrelation
robust tests. Econometric Theory, 21(06): 1130-1164.

Kouri, P. J. K. 1976. The exchange rate and the balance of payments in the short run and in the long
run: A monetary approach. Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 78(2): 280-304.

Krishnamurthy, A., & A. Vissing-Jorgensen. 2011. The e¤ects of Quantitative Easing on interest rates:
Channels and implications for policy, NBER Working Paper No. 17555.

Krishnamurthy, A., & A. Vissing-Jorgensen. 2012. The demand for Treasury debt. Journal of Political
Economy, 120(2): 233-267.

Lilley, A., M. Maggiori, B. Neiman, & J. Schreger. 2019. Exchange rate reconnect. NBER Working
Paper No. 26046.

Lustig, H. N., N. L. Roussanov, & A. Verdelhan. 2014. Countercyclical currency risk premia. Journal of
Financial Economics, 111(3), 527­ 553.

Lustig, H., A. Stathopoulos, & A. Verdelhan. 2019. The term structure of currency carry trade risk
premia. American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Lustig, H., & A. Verdelhan. 2019. Does incomplete spanning help to explain exchange rates? American
Economic Review, 109(6): 2208-44.

Malkhozov, A., P. Mueller, A. Vedolin, & G. Venter. 2016. Mortgage risk and the yield curve. Review
of Financial Studies, 29(5): 1220-1253.



                                                   43
Mamaysky, H. 2018. The time horizon of price responses to quantitative easing. Journal of Banking &
Finance, 90: 32-49.

Meredith, G., & M. Chinn. Monetary policy and long-horizon uncovered interest parity. IMF sta¤ papers,
51(3): 409-430.

Mylonidis, N., & C. Kollias. 2010. Dynamic European stock market convergence: Evidence from rolling
cointegration analysis in the ...rst euro-decade. Journal of Banking & Finance, 34(9): 2056-2064.

Neely, C. J. 2011. The Large-Scale Asset Purchases had large international e¤ects. Federal Reserve Bank
working paper.

Newey, W. K., & K. D. West. 1987. A simple, positive semi-de...nite, heteroskedasticity and autocorre-
lation consistent covariance matrix. Econometrica 55(3): 703-708.

Obstfeld, M., & K. Rogo¤. 2000. The six major puzzles in international macroeconomics: Is there a
common cause? NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, Volume 15, 339-412.

Pandol..., L., & T. Williams. 2019. Capital   ows and sovereign debt markets: Evidence from index
rebalancings. Journal of Financial Economics, 132(2): 384-403.

Pozzi, L., & G. Wolswijk. 2012. The time-varying integration of euro area government bond markets.
European Economic Review, 56(1): 36-53.

Rajan, R.. 2016. Towards rules of the monetary game. Speech by R. Rajan, Governor of the Reserve
Bank of India, at the IMF/Government of India Conference on Advancing Asia: Investing for the Future.

Samuelson, P. A. 1947. Foundations of Economic Analysis, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Spiegel, M. 1998. Stock price volatility in a multiple security overlapping generations model. Review of
Financial Studies 11: 419-447.

Swanson, E. T. 2017, Measuring the e¤ects of Federal Reserve forward guidance and asset purchases on
...nancial markets. NBER Working Paper No. 3311.

Tobin, J. 1958. Liquidity preference as behavior towards risk. Review of Economic Studies 25(2), 65-86.

Tobin, J. 1969. A general equilibrium approach to monetary theory. Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking: 15-29.

Vayanos, D. and J. Vila. 2019. A preferred-habitat model of the term structure of interest rates. London
School of Economics working paper.

Verdelhan, A. 2010. A habit-based explanation of the exchange rate risk premium. Journal of Finance,
65(1): 123-146.

Wachter, J. 2006. A consumption-based model of the term structure of interest rates. Journal of Financial
Economics, 79: 365-399.

Watanabe, M. 2008. Price volatility and investor behavior in an overlapping generations model with
information asymmetry. Journal of Finance 63: 229-272.

Woodford, M. 2012. Methods of policy accommodation at the interest-rate lower bound. Proceedings -
Economic Policy Symposium - Jackson Hole, 185-288.


                                                   44
Figure 1. Movements in foreign exchange versus differential movements in forward rates on QE
announcement dates. The figure shows the movement in foreign exchange rates versus movements in
the difference between foreign and domestic long-term forward rates around Quantitative Easing (QE)
announcement dates by the U.S. Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank, the Bank of England,
and the Bank of Japan. For an announcement on date t, we show the change in the foreign exchange
rate and the movement in foreign minus domestic long-term rates from day t ­ 2 to day t + 2. The
long-term forward rate is the 3-year yield, 7-years forward. For the U.S. announcements, we show the
average appreciation of the dollar relative to euro, pound, and yen versus the movement in U.S. long-
term forward rates minus the average movement in forward rates for the euro, pound, and yen. For
the other three currencies, we show their appreciation relative to the dollar versus the movement in
the local currency forward rate minus the dollar forward rate.


                                                                                                    EUR 6/30/10
                                                                                                     USD 8/10/10        EUR 10/6/11
                                  2                                                                                              GBP 11/5/09      EUR 5/7/09
                                                                                GBP 11/29/11                      JPY
                                                                                                                EUR   4/27/12
                                                                                                                     9/6/12
                                                                                                                 JPY 3/19/15
                                                                                                                 USD 12/1/08 GBP 10/6/11
                                                                            USD 9/21/11                 JPY 10/5/10
                                                                                                                EUR  8/12/16 USD 10/15/10
                                                                                                             EUR
                                                                                                        EUR 8/2/12  JPY 7/12/12 6/22/11
                                                                                                                  3/10/16              USD 6/20/12
      Currency appreciation (%)




                                                                                                                            GBP 5/7/09
                                  0                                                                            USD 8/27/10                  USD 1/28/09
                                                                                                                                   EUR 5/10/10
                                                                                                           USDUSD  11/3/10
                                                                                                                9/23/09           USD 12/12/12
                                                                                                                                  JPY 10/30/12
                                                                                                                                         USDUSD  10/12/10
                                                                                                                                              11/4/09 USD 9/13/12
                                                                                                                                                GBP 2/9/12
                                                                                                          USDJPY    EUR
                                                                                                                    USD10/26/17
                                                                                                               8/12/09    8/22/12
                                                                                                                             GBP 7/5/12
                                                                                                                  1/29/16
                                                                         EUR 10/15/08                     USD 9/21/10          EUR 3/28/08
                                                                                                  EUR 12/8/11            JPY 2/14/12
                                  -2         GBP 3/5/09
                                                                                                                     USD 11/25/08
                                                                                                                                      GBP 2/4/10
                                                                                                               JPY 10/27/11
                                                                                                       EUR 1/22/15
                                                                                                   GBP 8/6/09
                                       USD 12/16/08
                                                           USD 3/18/09
                                                                             GBP 2/11/09
                                  -4
                                                                                EUR 3/9/15
                                                                                                               GBP 1/19/09
                                                                                                                 JPY 11/3/14



                                  -6                                                                             JPY 4/5/13

                                       -.6                   -.4               -.2                 0                                               .2
                                                   Foreign minus other change in 3-year, 7-years forward (%)
                                       Appreciation of Currency (%)                        Fitted values




                                                                                          45
Figure 2. Allowing for deviations from covered-interest-rate parity (CIP). This figure illustrates the
model allowing for CIP deviations from Section 4. The figure shows the impact of a shock to domestic
bond supply on expected returns and investor holdings as a function of banks' costs of capital, . We
chose the other model parameters so each period represents one month. We assume:  = 0.3%,  =
0.98,  = 0.5,  = 1,  = 0.95 ,  = 1,  = 0.95 ,  = 1,  = 0.95,  = 0.5%,
 = 119/120 (i.e., the long-term bond has a duration of 120 months or 10 years), and,  = 1.75.

Panel A: Impact of a large shock (4 times  ) to domestic bond supply (sy) on expected returns




Panel B: Impact of a unit shock to domestic bond supply (sy) on investor holdings




                                                 46
Figure 3. Further segmenting the global bond markets. This figure illustrates the model with further
segmentation from Section 5.1. The figure shows the impact of a shock to domestic bond supply on
expected returns and investor holdings as a function of the fraction of specialists, . The figure assumes
 = 1/3, so specialists are evenly split between domestic bonds, foreign bonds, and foreign exchange.
We chose the other parameters so each period represents one month. We assume:  = 0.3%,
 = 0.98,  = 0.5,  = 1,  = 0.95 ,  = 1,  = 0.95 ,  = 0.5%,  = 119/120 (i.e., the
long-term bond has a duration of 120 months or 10 years), and  = 1.75.

Panel A: Impact of a large shock (4 times  ) to domestic bond supply (sy) on expected returns




Panel B: Impact of a unit shock to domestic bond supply (sy) on investor holdings




                                                   47
Figure 4. Unhedged bond investors. This figure illustrates the model with unhedged bond investors
from Subsection 5.2. The figure shows the impact of a shock to domestic bond supply on expected
returns and investor holdings as a function of the fraction of unhedged investors, . We chose the
other model parameters so each period represents one month. We assume:  = 0.3%,  = 0.98,  =
0.5,  = 1,  = 0.95,  = 1,  = 0.95,  = 0.5%,  = 119/120 (i.e., the long-term bond has
a duration of 120 months or 10 years), and  = 1.75.

Panel A: Impact of a large shock (4 times  ) to domestic bond supply (sy) on expected returns




Panel B: Impact of a unit shock to domestic bond supply (sy) on investor holdings




                                                48
Table 1. Contemporaneous relationship between movements in foreign exchange, short-term interest
rates, and long-term interest rates. This table presents monthly panel regressions of the form:
                     h qc,= Ac + B ×  h (ic ,t - it ) + D ×  h ( yc ,t - yt ) +  h c ,t ,
                                          *                       *
                          t

and
               h qc,t =Ac + B1 ×  hic ,t + B2 ×  hit + D1 ×  h yc ,t + D2 ×  h yt +  h c ,t .
                                    *                           *


We regress h-month changes in the foreign exchange rate on h-month changes in short-term interest
rates and in distant forward rates in both the foreign currency and in U.S. dollars. All regressions
include currency fixed effects. We show results for Euro-USD, GBP-USD, and JPY-USD where a
higher value of , means that currency c is stronger versus to the dollar. The sample runs from
2001m1 to 2017m12. Our proxy for the short-term interest rate in each currency is the 1-year
government yield. Our proxy for the long-term interest rate is the 10-year government bond yield. For
regressions involving h-month changes, we report Driscoll-Kraay (1998) standard errors--the panel
data analog to Newey-West (1987) standard errors--allowing for serial correlation up to
(1.5 × ) lags. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels,
respectively. Statistical significance is computed using the asymptotic theory of Kiefer and Vogelsang
(2005).

                              h = 3-month changes                           h = 12-month changes
                     (1)         (2)        (3)           (4)       (5)         (6)          (7)        (8)
  
 ( ,   -  )        4.68 ***
                                3.51 **
                                                                    2.39        0.80
                   (1.63)       (1.69)                             (1.54)      (1.64)
  
 ( , -  )                       4.37***                                        7.37***
                                (1.20)                                         (1.71)
 
  ,                                        7.00***     5.86***                              5.60***     2.45
                                           (1.32)      (1.34)                               (1.37)     (1.90)
                                          -3.87***    -2.50**                                -1.84      -0.01
                                           (1.18)      (1.13)                               (1.17)     (1.27)
 
  ,                                                    5.09***                                        11.51***
                                                       (1.48)                                          (2.26)
                                                      -4.83***                                        -7.44***
                                                       (1.07)                                          (1.91)
DK lags              5            5          5            5          18          18           18         18
N                   612          612        612         612         612         612          612         612
R-squared           0.14         0.19       0.19        0.25        0.07        0.16         0.16       0.28




                                                     49
Table 2. Contemporaneous relationship between movements in foreign exchange, short-term interest
rates, and long-term forward rates. This table presents monthly panel regressions of the form:
                      h qc,= Ac + B ×  h (ic ,t - it ) + D ×  h ( f c ,t - f t ) +  h c ,t ,
                                           *                         *
                           t

and
                h qc,t =Ac + B1 ×  hic ,t + B2 ×  hit + D1 ×  h f c ,t + D2 ×  h f t +  h c ,t .
                                     *                             *


We regress h-month changes in the foreign exchange rate on h-month changes in short-term interest
rates and in distant forward rates in both the foreign currency and in U.S. dollars. All regressions
include currency fixed effects. We show results for Euro-USD, GBP-USD, and JPY-USD where a
higher value of , means that currency c is stronger versus to the dollar. The sample runs from
2001m1 to 2017m12. Our proxy for the short-term interest rate in each currency is the 1-year
government bond yield. Our proxy for the distant forward rate is the 3-year, 7-year forward
government bond yield. For regressions involving h-month changes, we report Driscoll-Kraay (1998)
standard errors allowing for serial correlation up to (1.5 × ) lags. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively. Statistical significance is computed using
the asymptotic theory of Kiefer and Vogelsang (2005).

                               h = 3-month changes                            h = 12-month changes
                      (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)        (5)         (6)          (7)       (8)
  
 ( ,   -  )         4.68 ***
                                 4.72***
                                                                      2.39        2.63
                    (1.63)       (1.56)                              (1.54)      (1.51)
 (, -  )                         2.99***                                         4.01***
                                 (0.85)                                          (1.33)
 
  ,                                          7.00***     7.02***                               5.60***   5.33***
                                             (1.32)      (1.21)                                (1.37)    (1.37)
                                            -3.87***    -3.89***                                -1.84     -1.62
                                             (1.18)      (1.11)                                (1.17)    (1.16)
 ,                                                       3.33***                                         7.10***
                                                         (1.15)                                          (1.45)
                                                        -3.04***                                         -3.77**
                                                         (0.76)                                          (1.31)
DK lags                 5           5          5            5          18           18           18         18
N                     612         612        612          612         612          612          612        612
R-squared             0.14        0.18       0.19         0.23        0.07         0.12         0.16      0.24




                                                       50
Table 3. Forecasting foreign minus domestic bond excess return using short-term interest rates and
long-term forward rates. This table presents monthly panel forecasting regressions of the form:

                      t t + h - rxc ,t t + h =
                                             Ac + B × (ic ,t - it ) + D × ( f c ,t - f t ) +  c ,t t + h ,
                                                        *                      *
                 rxcy,*           y


and

                    t t + h - rxc ,t t +
               rxcy,*                   =  Ac + B1 × ic ,t + B2 × it + D1 × f c ,t + D2 × f t +  c ,t t + h .
                                y                     *                        *
                                         h

We forecast the difference between foreign and domestic h-month bond returns using short-term
interest rates and distant forward rates in both the foreign currency and in U.S. dollars. All regressions
include currency fixed effects. We show results for Euro-USD, GBP-USD, and JPY-USD where a
higher value of , means that currency c is stronger versus to the dollar. The sample runs from
2001m1 to 2017m12. Our proxy for the short-term interest rate in each currency is the 1-year
government bond yield. Our proxy for the distant forward rate is the 3-year, 7-year forward
                                          
government bond yield. ,+ - ,+ is the difference between the h-month excess returns on
10-year foreign bonds and those on 10-year domestic bonds--i.e., the difference between the returns
on two yield-curve carry trades that borrow short- and lend long-term. For regressions involving h-
month excess returns, we report Driscoll-Kraay (1998) standard errors allowing for serial correlation
up to (1.5 × ) lags. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels,
respectively. Statistical significance is computed using the asymptotic theory of Kiefer and Vogelsang
(2005).

                             h = 3-month excess returns                           h = 12-month excess returns
                       (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)       (8)

 ,    -               -0.22        -0.28   **
                                                                             -0.42         -0.53
                     (0.14)        (0.14)                                   (0.41)        (0.45)
, -                                1.68***                                                4.16***
                                   (0.31)                                                 (0.45)

 ,                                              -0.38**         -0.18                                  -1.06**     -0.58
                                                (0.15)         (0.16)                                  (0.42)     (0.42)
                                                 0.08           0.16                                    -0.02      0.17
                                                (0.16)         (0.15)                                  (0.44)     (0.44)
,                                                              1.27***                                            3.02***
                                                               (0.30)                                             (0.44)
                                                              -1.65***                                           -3.90***
                                                               (0.33)                                             (0.46)
DK lags                5             5             5              5           18            18            18        18
N                     609           609           609            609         582           582           582        582
R-squared             0.01          0.12          0.03          0.15         0.01          0.29          0.13      0.37




                                                            51
Table 4. Forecasting foreign exchange excess return using short-term interest rates and long-term
forward rates. This table presents monthly panel forecasting regressions of the form:

                          , t t + h =
                                    Ac + B × (ic ,t - it ) + D × ( f c ,t - f t ) +  c ,t t + h ,
                        q                      *                      *
                      rxc
and

                        , t t + h =
                                  Ac + B1 × ic ,t + B2 × it + D1 × f c ,t + D2 × f t +  c ,t t + h .
                      q                      *                        *
                    rxc
In words, we forecast h-month foreign exchange excess returns using short-term interest rates and
distant forward rates in both the foreign currency and in U.S. dollars. All regressions include currency
fixed effects. We show results for Euro-USD, GBP-USD, and JPY-USD where a higher value of ,
means that currency c is stronger versus to the dollar. The sample runs from 2001m1 to 2017m12. Our
proxy for the short-term interest rate in each currency is the 1-year government bond yield. Our proxy
                                                                                           
for the distant forward rate is the 3-year, 7-year forward government bond yield. ,+ is the h-
month return on the FX carry trade strategy that borrows short-term in U.S. dollars and lends short-
term in currency c. For regressions involving h-month excess returns, we report Driscoll-Kraay (1998)
standard errors allowing for serial correlation up to (1.5 × ) lags. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
significance at the 0.10, 0.05, and 0.01 levels, respectively. Statistical significance is computed using
the asymptotic theory of Kiefer and Vogelsang (2005).

                            h = 3-month excess returns                          h = 12-month excess returns
                      (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)      (8)

 ,    -              -0.00        0.06                                     0.26          0.38
                    (0.36)       (0.34)                                   (1.47)        (1.43)
, -                             -1.47***                                               -4.44***
                                 (0.49)                                                 (1.27)

 ,                                              0.13         -0.24                                      1.05     0.11
                                               (0.43)       (0.49)                                     (1.73)   (1.73)
                                                0.11         0.07                                       0.28     0.14
                                               (0.35)       (0.33)                                     (1.28)   (1.23)
,                                                            -0.79                                               -2.32
                                                            (0.57)                                              (1.64)
                                                            1.52***                                             4.21***
                                                            (0.52)                                              (1.39)
DK lags               5            5             5             5            18            18            18        18
N                    609          609           609           609          582           582           582        582
R-squared            0.00         0.03          0.01         0.05          0.00          0.07          0.04      0.11




                                                          52
Table 5. Daily movements in foreign exchange, short-term interest rates, and long-term forward rates
on QE announcement dates. This table presents daily panel regressions of the form:
                 4 qc,t + 2 =A + B ×  4 (ic ,t + 2 - it + 2 ) + D ×  4 ( f c ,t + 2 - f t + 2 ) +  4 c ,t + 2 ,
                                          *                                 *


and
          4 qc,t + 2= A + B1 ×  4ic ,t + 2 + B2 ×  4it + 2 + D1 ×  4 f c ,t + 2 + D2 ×  4 f t + 2 +  4 c ,t + 2 .
                                  *                                     *


on days with major QE news announcements. In words, we regress 4-day changes in the foreign
exchange rate on 4-day changes in short-term interest rates and in distant forward rates in both the
foreign currency and in U.S. dollars. For an announcement on date t, we look at changes from date
t ­ 2 to t + 2. We show results for Euro-USD, GBP-USD, and JPY-USD where a higher value of ,
means that currency c is stronger versus to the dollar. Our proxy for the short-term interest rate in
each currency is the 1-year government bond yield. Our proxy for the distant forward rate is the 3-
year, 7-year forward government bond yield. Standard errors are clustered by date in these
specifications. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels.

                                           (1)                      (2)                     (3)                     (4)
   
4 ( ,+2   - +2 )                         7.92  **
                                                                 10.46    ***

                                         (3.26)                   (1.90)
4 (,+2 - +2 )                                                     4.62***
                                                                  (1.12)
  
4  ,+2                                                                                    7.36**                  10.17***
                                                                                          (3.22)                   (2.00)
4 +2                                                                                     -15.66**                 -12.70**
                                                                                          (7.35)                   (5.89)
4 ,+2                                                                                                              4.53***
                                                                                                                   (1.35)
4 +2                                                                                                              -4.43***
                                                                                                                   (1.28)
N                                          95                       95                      95                       95
R-squared                                 0.10                     0.31                    0.14                     0.31




                                                             53
Table 6: Comparison of our segmented-markets, quantity-driven model of foreign exchange (FX) with leading consumption-based models.
                                        (1)          (2)        (3)            (4)            (5)               (6)             (7)           (8)           (9)            (10)         (11)
                                                                                                                               
                                    FX rates       Real      Real         Real term      Shocks to       FX trade loses       [+1 ]       Fama (`84)   Campbell-       Real yield    Lustig et
                                                                                          
                                    respond to     short     short        premia can     +1  - +1        (makes) money       negatively   FX carry     Shiller (`91)   curve steep   al ('19):
                                    supply and     rates     rates fall   be positive:   associated      when foreign        related to   trade:       yield curve     when short    Long-term
                                                                                                                                                
                                    demand         fall in   in "bad       [+1 ]>0       with foreign    (domestic) yield-    [+1          [+1 ]       carry trade:    rates low:    FX carry
                                                                                                                                                             
                                    for assets     recessi   times"                      currency        curve trade does:        
                                                                                                                             - +1 ]       increasing    [+1 ] is       ( -  )        trade less
                                                                                                                 
                                    in different   ons       for bond                    appreciation:    [+1 ,                           in ( 
                                                                                                                                                -  )   increasing      decreasing    profitable
                                                                                                                   
                                    currencies               investors                    [+1 ,          +1 - +1 ]<0.                                  in ( -  )       in            than short-
                                                                                          
                                                                                         +1  - +1 ]>0                                                                                term trade
     Data
                                        Yes         Yes        N/A            Yes            Yes               Yes              Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes
     Our model
                                        Yes         Yes         No            Yes            Yes               Yes              Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes          Yes
     Textbook C-CAPM model:
                                        No          Yes         Yes            No             No                No              N/A          N/A           N/A             Yes          N/A
     Power utility, homoskedastic
     growth shocks, positive
     autocorrelation of growth i
     Non-standard C-CAPM:                                                                                                                                                  Yes          N/A
                                        No           No         No            Yes            Yes               Yes              N/A          N/A           N/A
     Power utility, homoskedastic
     growth shocks, negative
     autocorrelation of growth ii
     Long-run risks: News about
                                        No          Yes         Yes            No             No                No               No          Yes         No/Yes          Yes/No          No
     long-run growth, stochastic
     volatility, EZ-W utility,
     CRRA () exceeds inverse-
     EIS ( -1 ). iii
     Long-run risks: News about                                                                                                                                          Yes/No         Yes
                                        No          Yes         No            Yes            Yes               Yes              Yes           No         No/Yes
     long-run growth, stochastic
     volatility, EZ-W utility,
     inverse-EIS ( -1 ) exceeds
     CRRA (). iv
     Time-varying probability of
                                        No          Yes         Yes            No             No                No               No          Yes         No/Yes          Yes/No          No
     rare consumption disasters v
     Habit formation: Short rate
                                        No          Yes         Yes            No             No                No               No          Yes         No/Yes          Yes/No          No
     rises when surplus-
     consumption ratio rises vi
     Habit formation: Short rate
                                        No           No         No            Yes            Yes               Yes              Yes           No         No/Yes          Yes/No         Yes
     falls when surplus-
     consumption ratio rises vii



i
   See Campbell (1986), Campbell (2003), Campbell (2018).
ii
   See Campbell (1986), Campbell (2003), Campbell (2018).
iii See Campbell (2003), Bansal and Yaron (2004), Colacito and Croce (2011), Bansal and Shaliastovich (2013), Campbell (2018).
iv See Campbell (2003), Bansal and Yaron (2004), Colacito and Croce (2011), Bansal and Shaliastovich (2013), Campbell (2018).
v See Wachter (2013) and Campbell (2018).
vi See Campbell and Cochrane (1999), Wachter (2006), Verdelhan (2010), and Campbell (2018).
vii See Campbell and Cochrane (1999), Wachter (2006), Verdelhan (2010), and Campbell (2018).


                                                                                                    54
