                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   THE MACROECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT

                                         Valerie A. Ramey

                                       Working Paper 27625
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27625


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2020




This is a revised version of the paper prepared for the November 15-16, 2019 NBER Conference
on the "Economics of Infrastructure." I am grateful for helpful comments from my discussant
Jason Furman, as well as from Hafedh Bouakez, Gabriel Chodorow-Reich, John Fernald,
Christopher House, Per Krusell, Daniel Leff Yaffe, James Poterba, Johannes Wieland, Sarah
Zubairy, seminar participants at Duke, U. of Michigan, UT Austin, and NBER conference
participants. Dan Wilson kindly provided supplemental data from his 2017 paper with Sylvain
Leduc. I gratefully acknowledge financial support from National Science Foundation Grant No.
1658796. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

The author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research. Further
information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27625.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Valerie A. Ramey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Macroeconomic Consequences of Infrastructure Investment
Valerie A. Ramey
NBER Working Paper No. 27625
July 2020
JEL No. E62,H41,H54

                                           ABSTRACT

Can greater investment in infrastructure raise U.S. long-run output? Are infrastructure projects a
good short-run stimulus to the economy? This paper uses insights from the macroeconomics
literature to address these questions. I begin by analyzing the effects of government investment in
both a stylized neoclassical model and a medium-scale New Keynesian model, highlighting the
economic mechanisms that govern the strength of the short-run and long-run impacts. The
analysis confirms earlier findings that the implementation delays inherent in infrastructure
projects reduce short-run multipliers in most cases. In contrast, long-run multipliers can be
sizable when government capital is productive. Moreover, these multipliers are greater if the
economy starts from a point below the socially optimal amount of public capital. Turning to
empirical estimation, I use the theoretical model to explain the econometric challenges to
estimating the elasticity of output to public infrastructure. Using both artificial data generated by
simulations of the model and extensions of existing empirical work, I demonstrate how both
general equilibrium effects and optimal choice of public capital are likely to impart upward biases
to output elasticity estimates. Finally, I review and extend some empirical estimates of the short-
run effects, focusing on infrastructure spending in the ARRA.


Valerie A. Ramey
Department of Economics, 0508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
vramey@ucsd.edu
1    Introduction
    Public capital can play an important role in increasing long-run output and standards
of living. Because of nonrivalry in consumption and/or non-excludability in use, the
private sector will tend to underprovide key types of productive capital. Hence, there
is a role for government to raise social welfare by providing public capital, even when
it must tax private resources to finance it. Economic history is replete with examples
of public capital, and infrastructure in particular, that had significant impacts on long-
run GDP and/or welfare. For example, Gordon (2017) highlights the contributions of
publicly provided sanitation, clean water, and electrical infrastructure to both the rise
in life expectancy and increase in productivity in the U.S. during the first part of the
20th Century. In the post-WWII period, the U.S. interstate highway program has been
linked to significant increases in productivity and output (e.g. Aschauer (1989), Fernald
(1999), Leff Yaffe (2020)).
    More recently, government infrastructure spending has also figured prominently in
policy discussions regarding short-run stimulus. Government infrastructure spending
is viewed by many policymakers as having advantages over government consumption
spending for stimulating the economy during a recession. In a traditional Keynesian
model, both productive and wasteful government spending stimulate the economy in
the short run through standard income and multiplier effects and help push output back
to potential output. Government investment spending such as infrastructure spending,
however, has the additional advantage that it can change the path of potential output.
In particular, if a short-run increase in government spending also raises the stock of
productive public capital or long-run total factor productivity (TFP), then government
spending provides two benefits: Keynesian demand stimulus in the short run and neo-
classical supply stimulus in the long run. These lasting effects are particularly welcome
since typically stimulus packages must be financed with an increase in distortionary
taxes after the recession is over. If output remains higher because of the long-run ef-
fects of more public capital, then the tax base expands and the necessary increases in
tax rates are less.
    In this paper, I examine the macroeconomic theory and empirical evidence on the
benefits of infrastructure spending, both in the long run and the short run. Much of the
theory and the empirical work suggests that even when there are substantial long-run
benefits of infrastructure investment, the short-run benefits are probably lower than for


                                       Page 2 of 64
non-productive government spending. In the last few years, the macroeconomic theory
literature has discovered that realistic features of infrastructure investment, such as the
importance of time to build and sector-specific demand effects, can work to reduce the
short-run aggregate stimulus effects, even when the long-run supply-side benefits are
present. Moreover, much of the existing macroeconomic empirical evidence is consis-
tent with the predictions of these theories. I conclude that infrastructure investment
may not be the most powerful short-run stimulus.
   On the other hand, theory and empirical estimates suggests that public capital and
infrastructure spending in particular have had significant positive effects on long-run
output and productivity. Whether current levels of infrastructure spending are above
or below the optimal level depends on estimates of the production function output
elasticity to public capital, as well as considerations of distortionary taxation and het-
erogeneity in the returns to different types of infrastructure.
   The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 uses insights from both neoclassical and
New Keynesian models to study the effects of government investment. The first few sub-
sections present and calibrate both a stylized neoclassical model and a medium-scale
New Keynesian model with lump-sum taxation. These sections discuss the economic
mechanisms and intuition for how government investment can affect the macroecon-
omy. Section 2.4 simulates the models and compares the effects of increases in govern-
ment consumption versus government investment and presents short-run multipliers.
It shows that government investment and consumption have similar effects on output
in the New Keynesian model, in contrast to the neoclassical model in which government
investment has weaker short-run effects. Section 2.5 amends both models to include
realistic time-to-spend and time-to-build delays. The simulations from these versions
of the model show that these delays dramatically reduce the short-run multipliers, so
much so in the New Keynesian model that government investment offers no stimulus
for the first few years.
   Section 2.6 delves further into the multipliers at longer horizons. Both the neoclas-
sical model and the New Keynesian model produce significantly higher multipliers at
longer horizons. The size of these multipliers depends crucially on three key features:
(i) the productivity of public capital in the aggregate production function; (ii) whether
the increase in public capital moves the economy towards the social optimum or away
from it; (iii) and how the public capital is financed.



                                       Page 3 of 64
    Section 2.7 summarizes some of the models from the literature that analyzes the
effects of government capital, and infrastructure in particular. Several of these models
highlight other important features for the short-run effects of government investment,
including the behavior of monetary policy.
    Section 3 then moves on to the empirical evidence on the long-run effects of public
investment in the U.S. After a brief overview of the empirical literature studying the
elasticity of output to public capital, I use the stylized neoclassical model of Section 2.1
to demonstrate the types of biases that can arise in estimation the output elasticity to
public capital and discuss ways to reduce the bias.
    Section 4 surveys the empirical estimates of the short-run effects of government
investment spending. Much of the focus is on the ARRA studies, and in particular on
the infrastructure part of the ARRA. I offer new estimates of the effects of the ARRA on
employment in highway construction.
    Section 5 asks the question "is the U.S. underinvesting in public capital?" The analy-
sis compares past and current levels of government capital to the optimal levels implied
by the stylized neoclassical model to shed light on this question. Section 6 summarizes
some of the key results that emerge from the paper and concludes.



2    Government Investment in Dynamic Macroeconomic
     Models
    This section analyzes the short-run and long-run effects of government investment
and public capital in both a stylized neoclassical model as well as a medium scale New
Keynesian model. The neoclassical model forms the underlying basis of the New Keyne-
sian model, so the economic mechanisms of the neoclassical model continue to be key
drivers of short-run results in New Keynesian models unless they are specifically shut
down. The neoclassical mechanisms are the drivers of the long-run benefits of public
capital since the New Keynesian elements affect the economy only in the short run.
    I use simulations of the models to illustrate several important insights from the re-
cent literature studying the short-run effects of government investment. The first two
are from the Leeper, Walker, and Yang (2010) analysis of government investment in
an estimated medium-scale neoclassical model. First, if government investment is pro-
ductive, then the negative wealth effect of increased taxation is muted by the positive


                                       Page 4 of 64
wealth effect of future productive public capital. As a result, in the short run output
may respond less to an increase in government investment than to government con-
sumption. Second, government investment in public capital, and particularly infras-
tructure, typically involves implementation delays and these delays severely mute the
short run multiplier. The third insight is from Boehm (2019) who notes that the long
service life of private capital leads to a very high intertemporal elasticity of substitution
in investment demand. Because investment rates are typically small relative to the cap-
ital stock, agents are very willing to intertemporally substitute investment, much more
so than for consumption. The fourth insight is about the importance of the initial level
of public capital relative to the socially optimal level. Long-run multipliers are higher
if the economy is starting below the optimal level of public capital.
      The models I study in this section treat all public capital the same, and do not in-
corporate features that are unique to infrastructure. However, the basic mechanisms at
work in the models apply to any type of public capital that appears in the production
function. In Section 2.7, I discuss some of the models that specifically incorporate the
benefits of transportation infrastructure.


2.1      A Stylized Neoclassical Model
      Most of the macroeconomic analysis of government investment builds on the pio-
neering work of Baxter and King (1993), who were the first to analyze both the short-
run and long-run effects of government investment in a fully dynamic general equilib-
rium neoclassical macroeconomic model.1 In the typical neoclassical model, govern-
ment purchases have direct impacts on the economy in several ways. Let G tC denote
government consumption goods purchases in period t and let G tI denote government
investment goods purchases. The sum of government purchases has a direct impact
through the economy-wide resource constraint:



(1)                                   C t + I t + G tC + G tI  Yt




  1. Baxter and King's (1993) model considers only effects on steady-state levels, not on growth rates.
Other strands of the literature have studied the growth consequences of public capital in endogenous
growth models. See for example the important papers by Glomm and Ravikumar (1994, 1997)


                                            Page 5 of 64
C t is private consumption, I t is private investment, and Yt is output. This resource con-
straint is key to the wealth effects that drive the labor and output response in neoclas-
sical and benchmark sticky price New Keynesian models. A government that purchases
goods and services extracts resources from the economy. Financing through current or
future lump sum taxes adds no additional effects, so the resource constraint captures
the key impacts. If there is no direct effect of government spending on the produc-
tion possibilities of the economy, a rise in government purchases leaves the private
sector with fewer resources. Households respond by lowering their own consumption
and leisure and raising their labor supply. Employment rises not because the demand
for labor has risen (since government spending does not directly affect the aggregate
marginal product of labor) but because labor supply has risen. The rise in labor supply
induced by the wealth effect is the key mechanism by which an increase in government
purchases raises output in the neoclassical model and the benchmark New Keynesian
sticky price model. In fact, as Broer et al. (2020) show, the benchmark New Keynesian
model achieves higher multipliers than the neoclassical model by adding an additional
negative wealth effect that stems from countercyclical markups and profits.
      While government consumption and government investment enter symmetrically in
the resource constraint in equation 1, they play different roles in the rest of the eco-
nomic structure. Most modelers assume that government consumption enters house-
hold utility, but in a separable way, so that it has no impact on the marginal utility of
consumption.2 In this case, there is no additional impact of government consumption
on the economy, other than raising household welfare.
      To be concrete, suppose that a representative household maximizes lifetime utility
U:


                                                                    1+
                                                               Nt
(2)                           U = E0             t
                                                     ln C t -     +  (G tC )
                                       t =0
                                                               1+




   2. Important recent exceptions include Ercolani and Valle e Azevedo (2014) and Sims and Wolff
(2018). Both papers incorporate public capital and also allow government consumption to affect the
marginal utility of private consumption. Gallen and Winston (2019) argue that government investment in
transportation infrastructure can also affect utility because a higher stock of transportation infrastructure
leads to time savings for the household by reducing time spent commuting to work and time spent
traveling to shop.


                                                     Page 6 of 64
 is the discount factor. This functional form is now widely used in macroeconomic
models. Utility depends on the logarithm of consumption, C t , and a CES function of
hours worked, Nt .  is the inverse of the Frisch elasticity of labor supply.
      Government investment, on the other hand, can have direct effects on the produc-
tion function. Baxter and King (1993) specify a stylized Cobb-Douglas aggregate pro-
duction function:


                                                             G
(3)                              Yt = A t K t  N 1- K tG
                                             -1 t      -1


A t is the level of total factor productivity (TFP), K t is the private capital stock at the end
of period t, K tG is the public capital stock at the end of period t, and Nt is the quantity of
labor. Typical analyses assume constant returns to private inputs, which is also assumed
here. The size of G , the exponent on public capital, plays an important role in the long-
run impact of government investment, which can have consequences for its short-run
impact as well. If G is greater than zero, then in this calibration there are increasing
returns to scale.
      Note that virtually all of the short-run effect of government spending on output must
operate through labor input for the following reason. Both private and public capital
are relatively fixed in the short run, so if government spending does not affect TFP (A t )
in the short run, government spending can raise GDP in the short run only to the extent
that it raises labor input.
      Finally, government investment and public capital are linked since government in-
vestment this period adds to the public capital stock available at the beginning of next
period:



(4)                               K tG = G tI + (1 - G )K tG
                                                           -1
                                                              .

G is the depreciation rate on public capital. Since government investment is typically
a small fraction of the steady state stock of public capital, it takes numerous periods of
elevated government investment to raise the public capital stock a noticeable amount.
The capital accumulation equation for private capital is similar:




                                         Page 7 of 64
(5)                                  K t = I t + (1 - )K t -1 ,

where  is the depreciation rate on private capital.
      Equation 3 and 4 capture the distinguishing characteristics of government invest-
ment relative to government consumption. A dollar increase in government investment
raises the stock of public capital through equation 4, which has multiple effects on the
production function in equation 3. First, for given TFP, private capital, and labor, the
higher public capital stock leads to higher output. Second, because the higher public
capital stock raises the marginal products of both private capital and labor, it incen-
tivizes firms to invest in more capital and hire more labor. In the neoclassical model,
the only type of government spending that raises the demand for labor is government
spending that directly raises TFP or public capital.
      How the government spending is financed has first-order effects on the response of
output and labor. The simplest assumption, and the one that gives the highest multipli-
ers, is that the government uses lump sum taxes. The government budget constraint is
given by:



(6)                                       G tC + G tI = Tt

where Tt is lump sum taxes. In the representative household, perfect financial markets,
and rational expectations case, the timing of the lump sum taxes has no effect: deficit
spending with later increases in lump sum taxes is equivalent to balanced budget lump
sum taxes. In this case, the social planner solution is equivalent to the decentralized
competitive equilibrium. In the more realistic case that the government must raise dis-
tortionary taxes, the timing of those taxes matter and the positive effects of government
spending on output can be severely muted.
      In this benchmark economy, the social planner chooses sequences C t , Nt , I t , Yt , and
K t to maximize the lifetime utility of the representative household given in equation 2,
subject to the economy-wide resource constraint in equation 1, the production function
in equation 3, the capital accumulation equations in equations 4 and 5, as well as
exogenous processes for the two types of government spending. In principle, the social
planner can also choose the level of public capital to maximize social welfare. Since

                                           Page 8 of 64
the simulations involve exogenously varying public investment, public capital is taken
as exogenous for now. As I will show below in Section 2.6, the multiplier depends on
where public capital starts relative to the optimal level.
   The first order conditions and steady-state conditions for this model are presented
in the appendix.


2.2    A Medium-Scale New Keynesian Model
   Many policymakers have advocated infrastructure spending to jumpstart an econ-
omy during a downturn, so it is important also to consider the effects of public in-
vestment in a model that captures traditional Keynesian notions of slack resources and
income multipliers in the short run. Therefore, I also construct and simulate a model
that incorporates some key Keynesian mechanisms.
   I do not use the benchmark New Keynesian model, which features sticky prices but
flexible wages, because recent work on heterogeneous agent New Keynesian models has
revealed that the sticky price assumption raises multipliers through a very implausible
mechanism. Broer et al. (2020) demonstrate that labor supply rises more in response
to demand shocks in a benchmark NK model than in a neoclassical model because of
an additional negative wealth effect. In particular, sticky prices lead to countercyclical
markups and countercyclical profits, causing households to raise their labor supply in
response to the additional negative wealth effect. Adding noncompetitive labor markets
and sticky wages causes labor to be demand-determined so this implausible mechanism
is shut down or at least muted even when the model also includes sticky prices.
   The model I use expands on the influential Galí, López-Salido, and Vallés (2007)
study of the response of consumption and output to government consumption spending
in a NK model. Their model includes capital adjustment costs, sticky prices, noncompet-
itive labor markets, rule-of-thumb consumers, monetary policy rules, and government
debt feedback rules featuring lump-sum taxes.
   I extend their model by (i) adding government investment spending and public
capital; (ii) adding sticky wages (following Colciago's (2011) extension of Galí et al.
(2007)); (iii) replacing private capital adjustment costs with investment adjustment
costs; and (iv) allowing variable private capital utilization. These last two features are
now widely used in medium-scale NK models.




                                       Page 9 of 64
    To be specific, the NK model used here superimposes the following features on the
simple stylized neoclassical model presented in the last section.

    · Adjustment costs on investment. This feature appears in many medium-scale
       NK models, but it can also be added to a neoclassical model.3 For the typical
       government spending process used in most simulated models, adjustment costs on
       investment severely mute the short-run crowding-out effect on private investment
       and raise multipliers, an effect that has been overlooked by much of the literature.

    · Variable utilization of capital. This feature allows firms to vary their utilization
       of capital (at a cost), so that capital services are more cyclical than the capital
       stock. The result is more elastic output supply since it mutes the diminishing re-
       turns to labor and prevents real marginal cost from increasing much when output
       rises. There is ample evidence that capital utilization varies significantly over the
       business cycle (e.g. Shapiro (1993)). This feature is not uniquely NK since it can
       also be added to a neoclassical model. It is a way to capture the more elastic
       supply curves that might characterize an economy with slack resources.

    · Sticky prices and noncompetitive product markets. This feature character-
       izes even the simplest textbook New Keynesian model. In the simplest version of
       the NK model, this assumption is the only deviation from the neoclassical model
       (along with the accompanying monetary policy rule). It is assumed that firms are
       monopolistically competitive and a face a Calvo-style (1983) adjustment cost on
       prices.

    · Sticky wages and noncompetitive labor markets. Following Colciago (2011),
       I assume that households mark up wages over the marginal rate of substitution
       and that they face Calvo-type (1983) adjustment costs. Most medium-scale NK
       models include both sticky wages and sticky prices.

    · Rule-of-Thumb Consumers. In order to generate larger Keynesian effects of tem-
       porary income on consumption, I adopt Galí et al.'s (2007) assumption that a
       certain fraction of consumers neither borrow nor save and simply consume all


  3. See, for example, Leeper et al.'s (2010) study which I will discuss in more detail below. For various
reasons, investment adjustment costs are generally favored over capital adjustment costs, though in many
instances the two types of adjustment costs produce similar results.


                                             Page 10 of 64
       of their current income. More recent heterogeneous agent models use more so-
       phisticated modeling and call the behavior "hand to mouth" but the effects are
       similar in many instances. The other consumers are assumed to be fully optimiz-
       ing, forward-looking, and owners of all of the capital in the economy.

    · Elastic Labor Supply. This feature is based not on an addition to the neoclassical
       model but rather on the calibration of a particular parameter. As I will discuss in
       more detail below, in both the neoclassical model and the NK model, I will allow
       the Frisch elasticity and the Hicks elasticity of labor supply to be significantly
       greater than implied by the micro estimates. This assumption facilitates a higher
       elasticity of supply, roughly mimicking the situation of an economy with slack and
       leading to higher multipliers for government spending.

    · Monetary policy and fiscal policy rules. The monetary and fiscal policy rules fol-
       low Galí et al. (2007). The monetary authority follows a Taylor rule that responds
       only to inflation. Lump-sum taxes respond to both the deviation of government
       debt and government spending from their steady-state values.

    The appendix shows more details of this NK model.


2.3     Calibration of the Models
    Even the simple neoclassical model presented earlier cannot be solved analytically
unless the depreciation rate on capital is set at 100 percent, so we must analyze the
models quantitatively.
    Both the neoclassical and New Keynesian (NK) models are calibrated to be quarterly.
The calibrated parameters with their descriptions is shown in table 1. Consider first the
shared parameters. For utility in equation 2, the discount factor  is set to 0.99, which
implies an annual real interest rate of 4 percent.  is set to 0.25, which implies a
relatively high Frisch intertemporal elasticity of labor supply of 4. This high value is
set both to match Baxter and King's (1993) calibration in the neoclassical model and
to generate a high elasticity of labor supply for the NK model.4 As I will show, a lower
value of the Frisch elasticity implies a lower value of the multiplier.

  4. Baxter and King (1993) specify a utility function with the log of leisure rather than the direct hours
term included above. Their calibration of the parameter on log leisure implies a Frisch elasticity of 4.
See footnote 2 of Shimer (2009) for a demonstration.


                                             Page 11 of 64
      In the production function equation 3, the capital share  is set to 0.36. I follow
Baxter and King (1993) and Leeper et al. (2010) and set the parameter on public capital
at G = 0.05. I will also consider higher values in the range produced by the meta-
analysis by Bom and Ligthart (2014), who find a mean estimate of 0.08 in the short run
and 0.12 in the long run. I set the depreciation rates to those implied by BEA data in
2018, calculated as the ratio of current cost depreciation of fixed assets to the stock of
fixed assets at the end of the previous year.5 The ratio yields an estimate of quarterly
depreciation rates of G = 0.01 and  = 0.015.
      For the medium-scale model, I set the investment adjustment cost parameter and the
utilization cost parameters similar to the values estimated by Leeper et al. (2010). The
steady-state wage and price gross markups are set to 1.2 and the Calvo probability of
not being able to adjust prices or wages is set to 0.75, which corresponds to an average
price and wage duration of one year. Following Galí et al. (2007), I assume a high
fraction of rule-of-thumb consumers, 50 percent of the population. More details on the
calibration of the medium-scale model are provided in the appendix.
      In the simulations, the economy starts from an initial steady state in which total
government spending is 17.5 percent of GDP, the value in 2019. Of that, government
investment spending is 3.5 percent of GDP, similar to the actual ratio in 2019.
      Government spending is driven by appropriations shocks. As in Leeper et al. (2010),
I assume that appropriations, AP, follow a standard first-order autoregressive (AR(1))
process:

(7)                             APt = constant +  · APt -1 +  t

Like Leeper et al. (2010), I assume an AR(1) process for government spending with
a serial correlation parameter 0.95, which involves a very persistent increase. Since
multipliers are higher the more persistent the change in government spending, the mul-
tipliers I report below are higher than the ones that I would find for a less persistent
increase in government spending.
      The experiments are designed to compare the effects of government investment
shocks to government consumption in both the stylized neoclassical model as well as
the New Keynesian model and variations on those models. Most important, the exper-



 5. The data are from the fixed asset tables at bea.gov.


                                            Page 12 of 64
iments highlight the significant dampening of multipliers when there are implementa-
tion delays.


2.4      Experiments with No Implementation Delays
      In this section, I compare the effects of an increase in government investment to an
increase in government consumption in both the neoclassical and the New Keynesian
models. With no implementation delays, government spending is equal to appropria-
tions, i.e.:

(8)                               G tJ = APt for   J = C, I

      Figure 1 compares the effect of an increase in government consumption to an in-
crease in government investment in the stylized neoclassical model. For both experi-
ments, the path of government spending is the same, with only the type varying across
experiments, so the two lines lie on top of each other in the upper left graph. The rest
of the graphs show the endogenous response of key variables to an unanticipated in-
crease in government consumption or government investment that is autocorrelated.
Government spending, output, consumption, private investment, and public capital are
expressed in deviations from their own steady state values as a percent of steady-state
output. Labor input and wages are percent deviations from their own steady state val-
ues. The real interest rate is annualized percentage points deviations from its own
steady state.
      Consider first an increase in government consumption, whose effects are depicted
by the solid line. As discussed above, the direct effect is a negative wealth effect on
consumption and leisure. The government is extracting resources from the economy,
so consumption falls and labor supply rises. This rise in the labor supply boosts output,
with an impact multiplier of 0.47. Private investment spending is crowded out. There
is no change to public capital. All values eventually return to their original steady-state
levels since the government spending increase is not permanent.
      The effect of an increase in government investment is shown by the dashed line. In
this case, the impact effect on labor, consumption, and output is somewhat less than
for a government consumption increase. A muted negative wealth effect is key to this
difference: the government is still extracting the same amount from current output, but
it is now using it to build up wealth in the form of productive capital.

                                       Page 13 of 64
    Private investment falls more during the first two years than in the government
consumption case. The weaker wealth effect on labor means that output rises less in the
short-run, so more private spending must be crowded out by the government spending.
The same weaker wealth effect means that households do not reduce their consumption
as much, so the brunt of the crowd-out falls on private investment. The differential
short-run response of consumption and investment is a key theme in Boehm's (2019)
analysis of the short-run multipliers on government consumption versus government
investment. The long service life of private capital leads to a very high intertemporal
elasticity of substitution in investment demand.6
    As the public capital stock is built up, output remains high. Labor input remains
high and private investment recovers since the higher level of public capital raises the
marginal products of both labor and private capital. Not shown in the figure are the
results when the exponent on public capital, G , is 0.1 rather than 0.05. These effects
are similar, though the muted wealth effect is a little more evident in the short-run and
the positive stimulus is more evident in the intermediate run.
    Table 2 shows the undiscounted cumulative multipliers for the first year, since this
horizon is relevant for stimulus spending. Following Mountford and Uhlig (2009), these
multipliers are the integral of the impulse response of output divided by the integral of
the impulse response of appropriations up to four quarters.7
    The top panel of Table 2 shows the short-run cumulative multipliers for this styl-
ized neoclassical model ("baseline") as well as for two permutations. The first year
multiplier for government consumption in the baseline neoclassical model is 0.5 and
for government investment is 0.4. Thus, the short-run multiplier is lower for govern-
ment investment in the baseline neoclassical model. The lower multiplier owes to the
smaller negative wealth effect because households anticipate that their public capital
will increase. I will discuss the last column later.
    The second and third rows show multipliers for two variations on the stylized neo-
classical model. The second row of the table shows that both the government con-
sumption and investment multipliers fall dramatically when the Frisch elasticity is set
to value equal to the micro estimates of 0.5 rather than the baseline calibration of 4.
On the other hand, the third row shows that adding investment adjustment costs and

  6. In Boehm's model there is even more crowding out because consumption goods and investment
goods are produced in different sectors and there is imperfect labor mobility between sectors.
  7. Because of the short horizon, discounting has only a small effect. In a later section that looks at
longer horizon multipliers, I present both integral and discounted multipliers.


                                            Page 14 of 64
variable capital utilization to the baseline model raises the multiplier. The main effect
comes from the investment adjustment cost, which hinders the crowding out effect on
investment. In this version of the model, there is no difference in the first-year multi-
pliers for government consumption and government investment.
   Figure 2 shows the same experiments in the New Keynesian model. The solid lines
show the effects of government consumption and the dashed lines show the effects of
government investment. As discussed earlier, I included features and calibrated the
model specifically to mimic slack in order to raise the short-run multiplier significantly.
   The impact effect on output is almost 1.3 percent for an increase in government
consumption. The combination of a high fraction of rule-of-thumb consumers with im-
perfect labor markets counteracts the negative wealth effect on the consumption of op-
timizing consumers and creates a rise in aggregate consumption, as first demonstrated
by Galí et al. (2007). Private investment is not crowded out because of the adjustment
costs on investment. Labor input rises robustly since it is demand-determined. The rise
in labor earnings increases the consumption of the rule-of-thumb consumers.
   Labor input rises by the same amount when the shock is to government investment,
as shown by the dashed line. The wealth effect mechanisms in the neoclassical model
that dampened the labor supply response to government investment shocks relative to
government consumption in the short run are absent in this model. The other variables
have a slightly more positive response to government investment than to government
consumption. Output, consumption, and capital utilization all have slightly higher im-
pact responses. As public capital is built up, private investment rises and real wages
recover.
   The bottom panel of Table 2 shows the first year multipliers for the New Keynesian
model with G = 0.05. In the baseline NK model, the first-year multiplier for govern-
ment consumption is 1.06 and for government investment is 1.12. The remaining rows
show the multipliers for variations on the baseline NK model. Eliminating adjustment
costs on investment and variable utilization significantly reduces both the government
consumption and investment multipliers, so that they are even smaller than the baseline
neoclassical model. I will summarize the mechanism since I have not included graphs
for these alternative parameterizations. Without adjustment costs on investment, in-
vestment is significantly crowded out on impact, much more so than even the baseline
neoclassical model. As a result, labor demand responds little on impact and only slowly
rises thereafter. Real wages are approximately constant, so there is no increase in earn-


                                      Page 15 of 64
ings to spur the consumption of the rule-of-thumb consumers. The multiplier ends up
being less than in the neoclassical case because the NK model mutes the negative wealth
effect on labor supply from the expected future taxes. The remaining rows show that
using a lower Frisch elasticity or assuming no rule-of-thumb households also reduce the
multiplier relative to the baseline case. All of the variations shown reduce the multiplier
below unity.
   There are three main findings from this analysis. First, in the neoclassical model the
short-run government consumption multiplier is somewhat higher than the government
investment multiplier. Second, in the New Keynesian model, government investment
multipliers are slightly above government consumption multipliers. Third, both models
are sensitive to the calibration of the Frisch labor supply elasticity and the presence
of investment adjustment costs and variable capital utilization. The size of multipliers
depends crucially on these features of the model.


2.5    Experiments with Time to Spend and Time to Build
   Leeper et al. (2010) highlight two important limitations to the stimulus effects of
government investment: implementation delays and future fiscal financing adjustments
involving distortionary taxation. They estimate a more elaborate neoclassical model
and consider the effects of these two additions. Each serves to diminish the multipliers.
Since the negative effects of distortionary taxation are already well-known, I will focus
on the more novel feature of implementation delays.
   As Leeper et al. (2010) point out, typically there are delays between appropriations
and actual outlays. In addition, many infrastructure projects do not become part of
productive capital stock until the project is completed (e.g. a bridge). While routine
maintenance of roads may involve delays of a year between appropriations and com-
pletion, new highways, roads and bridges can involve delays of four years.
   The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) illustrates how difficult it
is to fast-track infrastructure project investment. The ARRA stimulus package specif-
ically targeted "shovel-ready" projects because of the urgency for immediate govern-
ment spending. Even then, there were significant delays between the appropriations,
the outlays and the actual use of the new infrastructure.
   Figure 3 shows the cumulative spending as a percent of Federal Highway Adminis-
tration appropriations in the ARRA. These data are aggregated from Leduc and Wilson's


                                      Page 16 of 64
(2017) state-level annual fiscal year data.8 The ARRA was passed in February 2009, but
by the end of June 2009 only 11 percent had been spent. By the end of June 2010, just
over half had been spent. The cumulative spending did not approach 100 percent of
appropriations until the end of June 2012. The mean (and median) duration of reces-
sions in the U.S. postwar period is 11 months, so most infrastructure stimulus would
not be spent by the end of the recession. On the other hand, the unemployment rate
often remains elevated for several years after a recession; for example, the unemploy-
ment rate was still 8.2 percent in mid-2012. Thus, it is possible that delayed spending
might still be useful as a stimulus in a severe recession.
      I now illustrate Leeper et al.'s (2010) insight about implementation delays in the
context of my models. I allow for both of Leeper et al. (2010) delays: a delay between
appropriations and outlays, which I call time to spend, as well as a time-to-build delay.
The time-to-spend delay is captured by lags between appropriations and government
investment spending as follows:


                                                     N
(9)                                       G tI   =         n APt -n
                                                     n=1


Note that because the summation begins at n=1, there is a one-quarter delay between
the appropriation and the start of spending. When the appropriation is passed, house-
holds and firms have perfect foresight about the future path of government spending.
Thus, these delays create "news" effects that can show up in behavior before government
spending actually changes.
      The time-to-spend feature is modeled in the following replacement equation to
equation 4:



(4')                                 K tG = APt -N + (1 - )K tG
                                                              -1




   8. All but four states have fiscal years that end on June 30th. The remaining four states, which
accounted for 18 percent of the appropriations, have fiscal years that end on September 30th. Since the
data are not available at higher frequency, I follow Leduc and Wilson and simply aggregate across the
states and show dates on the graph that are the ending quarters for the fiscal years of the majority of the
states.


                                                 Page 17 of 64
   I set N = 6 quarters and assume that n = 1/6 for each n = 1, ..., 6 to roughly match
the peak and cumulative spending of the ARRA on government grants.9
   Figure 4 shows the impact of government investment both with and without time
to spend and time to build in the NK model. The dashed line repeats the no-delay case
shown in Figure 2. The dashed line with circles shows the responses when there are
implementation delays. The impact of delays is dramatic. Rather than jumping 1.3 per-
cent on impact, output now falls slightly for a quarter before rising to a peak of around
0.9 after almost two years. Rather than rising, private investment falls slightly during
the first year because of the slower buildup of the public capital stock. Without the
short-run increase in employment or real wages, rule-of-thumb households do not raise
their consumption. As a result the negative wealth effect on the optimizing households
dominates and pushes down aggregate consumption. Thus, the time-to-spend delay
knocks out the initial positive response seen in the no-delay case and the time-to-build
delay slows down the positive effects of the eventual rises in public capital.
   The last column of table 2 shows the multipliers for the case of delays. Recall that all
of the multipliers are calculated relative to the integral of the appropriations response,
which is identical to the no-delay government investment response but different from
government investment spending when there are time-to-spend delays. In all varia-
tions of the neoclassical models and the NK models, the delay reduces the multiplier,
dramatically in most cases. With delays, the neoclassical model produces greater mul-
tipliers than the NK model, though they are all still below 0.4. The features that helped
the NK model produce high multipliers in the case of no delays produces 0 or negative
multipliers in the case of delays.
   In short, in the presence of implementation lags multipliers fall to zero or even
negative values.


2.6    More on Multipliers
   This section covers three important additions to the discussion of multipliers from
the last section. First, it presents the multipliers for longer horizons for the various
models. Second, it discusses how multipliers depend crucially on the government
investment-to-output ratio relative to the social optimum. Third, it adds a reminder
of the importance of how public capital is financed.
  9. BEA NIPA series show quarterly ARRA capital grants-in-aid to states peaking in in 2010Q3 and
cumulative spending at 50 percent of the total.


                                         Page 18 of 64
   Figure 5 shows the present discounted value cumulative multipliers for the first 20
quarters for government consumption, government investment when G = 0.05 (short
dashed line) and when G = 0.1 (long dashed line). As before, the denominator is
appropriations not spending. The top panel shows results for the neoclassical model.
With no delays, the government investment multipliers are lower than the government
consumption multipliers for the first ten quarters, but then exceed them by increasing
amounts as time goes on. The government investment multiplier is lower in the short
run when capital is more productive (e.g. G is higher), since the negative wealth effect
that raises labor supply is even more muted when that capital is more productive. With
6-quarter time-to-spend and time-to-build delays in government infrastructure invest-
ment, the output multiplier for government investment is less than the multipliers for
the government consumption for longer. Thus, evaluated only by the short-run mul-
tiplier, government infrastructure investment is inferior to government consumption
investment in its potential to stimulate the economy.
   The New Keynesian model results are reversed relative to the neoclassical model
in the short run for the case in which there are no delays. Government investment
multipliers are higher and more productive public capital leads to higher multipliers.
However, delays work against the NK mechanisms and make the multipliers on gov-
ernment investment much lower than for government consumption for the first several
years.
   Table 3 shows the long-run multipliers for each of the cases. Here is where govern-
ment investment spending has its great advantages. Consider only the top half of the
table for now. While the present value long-run multiplier for government consumption
ranges from 0.4 in the neoclassical model to 0.9 in the New Keynesian model, it ranges
from 1.3 to almost 2 when G = 0.05 and from 2 to almost 3 when G = 0.1. Time-
to-spend and time-to-build delays do not have much effect on the long-run multipliers.
Discounting has noticeable effects, as illustrated in the last columns showing undis-
counted integral multipliers. In those cases, the government investment multiplier is
higher and the neoclassical multiplier is not as far below the New Keynesian multiplier.
   All of the multipliers I have shown, however, are based on raising government in-
vestment spending relative to a steady state with the government investment-to-output
ratio of 3.5 percent, which was calibrated to the value for the U.S. in 2019. Leeper
et al. (2010) calibrated their values similarly. It turns out that the multiplier depends



                                      Page 19 of 64
significantly on whether the steady state value of the government investment to GDP
ratio is above or below the socially optimal value of public investment.10
   The expression for the optimal steady-state ratio of government capital and invest-
ment to GDP in the neoclassical model are:11


                                      KG      1
(10)                                     = -1      · G
                                      Y    - 1 + G


                                      GI      G
(11)                                     = -1      · G
                                      Y    - 1 + G

Recall that KG is public capital, G I is government investment, Y is output,  is the dis-
count rate of the representative household, G is the depreciation rate on public capi-
tal, and G is the exponent on public capital in the aggregate production function. The
economic intuition is straightforward: the higher is the intrinsic productivity of public
capital, the greater should be the ratio of public capital to output and hence the higher
the steady-state ratio of public investment to output to maintain that level. Using the
calibration from the stylized model, the fraction multiplying G in the capital ratio equa-
tion is equal to 49 (if output is measured quarterly) or 12.5 (if output is annualized),
and in the investment ratio equation is 0.49. If G = 0.05, as in the baseline calibration
of the model, the optimal public investment to output ratio is 2.5 percent; if G = 0.1,
it is 5 percent. Thus, the simulations of the previous sections are all based on starting
from a point at which the steady-state government investment-to-GDP ratio is above
the social optimum if G = 0.05 but below the social optimum if G = 0.1.
   The bottom half of table 3 illustrates the impact on the multipliers if the simulations
are re-run starting from a steady state in which the government investment to GDP
ratio is much lower, 1.5 percent rather than the 3.5 percent of the top half of the table.
Consider first the simulations for G = 0.05. The present discounted value multipliers
in the bottom half of the panel are 60 to 80 percent greater, depending on the model.
For example, with no delays the NK multiplier is 1.8 when the economy starts out at the
higher government investment to output ratio, but 3.2 when it starts out at the lower
ratio. The undiscounted multipliers are 90 to 110 percent higher.

 10. I am indebted to Chris House for suggesting I explore this possibility.
 11. See the appendix for the derivation of these equations.


                                            Page 20 of 64
   The changes are even more dramatic when G = 0.1. The optimal ratio of govern-
ment investment to GDP is 5 percent, so the starting point of the economy at 1.5 percent
is very far below the optimum. In this case, present discounted value multipliers and
undiscounted multipliers roughly double.
   In sum, these results illustrate the importance of considering where the economy
starts relative to the socially optimal amount of public capital in evaluating multipliers.
In the long run, multipliers will be substantially higher if the economy starts from a
steady state in which the government investment ratio to GDP is below the social op-
timum. In the short run, the effects are smaller and can be flipped if there is a wealth
effect on labor supply.
   Finally, it is important to remember that all of the simulations are based on the as-
sumption of non-distortionary lump sum taxes to pay off the government debt. This
assumption was made in part to capture short-run multipliers relevant for stimulus
programs that are financed by deficits in the short run. Adding more realistic distor-
tionary taxation at longer horizons, however, dramatically lowers the multipliers. For
example, Leeper et al. (2010) show that in the baseline no-delay case with G = 0.05 of
their model, the present-value cumulative multiplier for government investment is 0.39
when taxes are distortionary but 0.93 when they assume counterfactually that taxes are
lump sum.


2.7    Comparison to the Literature
   This section overviews some of the results from models in the literature. I first
discuss reasons for any differences relative to the results of my simulations. I then briefly
discuss the rich models from the transportation and trade literatures that incorporate
more of the details of transportation infrastructure. Finally, I discuss the importance
of monetary accommodation and the zero lower bound on interest rates for the size of
short-run multipliers.
   Table 4 summarizes multipliers from four neoclassical analyses of the effects of gov-
ernment spending. Baxter and King's (1993) long-run multipliers illustrate the ampli-
fying effects of permanent increases in government spending and higher productivity
of capital on multipliers. Leeper et al.'s (2010) multipliers illustrate the dampening ef-
fect of distortionary taxation and lower Frisch elasticities on multipliers. Nevertheless,




                                       Page 21 of 64
the result that the long-run multiplier for government investment is greater than for
government consumption in a neoclassical model is robust to these details.
   The third panel of table 4 shows details of the work of Ercolani and Valle e Azevedo
(2014), who estimate a medium scale model that has many features similar to a New
Keynesian model (such as price and wage markups) but no nominal rigidities. Their
paper is unique in its estimation (rather than calibration) of G . They estimate a value
of G = 0.09, though they favor results from an alternative model in which they set G
to be 0, implying that public capital is unproductive.
   The final panel of table 4 shows details of recent work by Gallen and Winston (2019),
which represents an important step forward in the way it incorporates features unique
to transportation infrastructure into a dynamic macroeconomic model. They include
time-to-build delays, short-run disruptions of construction to the utilization of existing
infrastructure, and the beneficial effects of improved transportation infrastructure on
household time savings. Their model implies that infrastructure spending is not a good
short-run stimulus, even when the long-run benefits are very positive.
   Not shown in the table are the important models from the geography of trade liter-
ature, which takes transportation costs and spatial features seriously in modeling the
potential benefits of transportation infrastructure. The quantitative analyses in these
models directly model and measure the extent to which transportation infrastructure
reduces trade costs between two points, opens access to markets, and allows for a va-
riety of spillovers, agglomeration effects, and congestion effects. This literature, which
is also known as "Quantitative Spatial Economics," has been surveyed recently by Red-
ding and Turner (2015) and Redding and Rossi-Hansberg (2017). Recent contributions
include those by Donalson and Hornbeck (2016), who revisit Fogel's (1964) classic anal-
yses of the contributions of railroads to U.S. economic growth; Donalson (2018), who
studies the impact of railroads in India during the Raj; and Allen and Arkolakis (2019),
who develop a new geographic framework and use it to study the welfare effects of
improving each segment of the U.S. highway system.
   Table 5 summarizes several analyses from the New Keynesian literature. Many of
these studies were conducted in response to the financial crisis and the stimulus pro-
grams adopted in response. I now highlight a key result from this literature that was
not part of my experiments: the importance of monetary accommodation.
   In New Keynesian models, the degree of monetary accommodation has important
effects on short-run multipliers. As the Coenen et al. (2012) experiments show, the


                                      Page 22 of 64
instantaneous multiplier for a 2-year government investment stimulus is 0.9 for a stan-
dard Taylor rule but 1.6 if the stimulus is accompanied by monetary accommodation.
When monetary policy is accommodative, the central bank does not raise nominal in-
terest rates to combat inflation. As a result, real interest rates decrease.
   The result that government spending multipliers are higher when monetary policy is
accommodative is closely linked to the effects of government spending at the zero lower
bound (ZLB) of interest rates. When interest rates are at their zero lower bound, the
monetary authority cannot lower nominal interest rates. However, carefully timed fiscal
spending stimulus that lasts no longer than the zero lower bound period can generate
higher expected future inflation. These expectations lower the ex ante real interest rate
and spur economic activity during the ZLB period. It is this mechanism, identified by
Woodford (2011), and others, that can lead to high government spending multipliers
at the ZLB.
   This same mechanism leads to an unusual additional result, first highlighted by
Eggertsson (2011). A negative supply shock, which in normal times would result in a
fall in output, is predicted to stimulate output during a ZLB period. The negative supply
shock generates higher expected inflation, which lowers the real interest rate and spurs
demand.
   Bouakez, Guillard, and Roulleau-Pasdeloup (2017, 2019) demonstrate that this mech-
anism can lead to a further reversal of NK results when the economy is at the ZLB. Recall
from the earlier simulations that introducing time-to-build delays in public capital dras-
tically lowered the short-run multiplier on government investment spending in the New
Keynesian model during normal times. They show, however, that when the economy
is at the ZLB, longer time-to-build delays lead to higher short-run multipliers. Time-to-
build delays prevent increases in the public capital stock (which are a positive supply
shock) from occurring during the ZLB period, which helps counter any deflationary
pressures. Their impact multipliers are 1.8 for government investment with no time-to-
build delay, and 4 for government investment when there is a four-year time-to-build
delay.
   The possible expansionary effects of negative supply shocks at the ZLB are not just
a side show with respect to implications for optimal fiscal policy. The same mechanism
also predicts that raising distortionary income taxes (a negative supply shock) at the
ZLB is expansionary, as Eggertsson (2011), Woodford (2011), and Drautzburg and Uh-
lig (2015) demonstrate in both simple calibrated NK models and estimated medium


                                       Page 23 of 64
scale NK models. Thus, if ZLB effects generate higher government investment multipli-
ers when there are time-to-build delays, they raise them even more if the spending is
financed by increases in current distortionary taxation rather than by deficits. This un-
comfortable prediction is probably not understood by many who believe that spending
multipliers are higher at the ZLB.
    Some recent work has questioned this ZLB mechanism, however. First, Dupor and
Li (2015) do not find evidence of the generated inflation effect and Bachmann et al.
(2015) do not find an impact of individual consumer inflation expectations on their
spending propensities in the Michigan Survey of Consumers. Second, evidence contra-
dicts the prediction that negative supply shocks are expansionary at the ZLB. For ex-
ample, Wieland (2019) tests this prediction by studying the impacts of the earthquake
and tsunami as well as the effect of oil price shocks in Japan, a country which has been
at the ZLB for decades. He finds that these negative supply shocks were contractionary,
contradicting the prediction of NK theory.
    That said, there is some empirical support for higher multipliers being higher during
ZLB periods. In Ramey and Zubairy (2018) we estimate multipliers around 1.4 at the
ZLB in historical data if we exclude periods of WWII rationing. Miyamoto, Wataru and
Sergeyev (2018) apply Ramey and Zubairy's methods to Japan and find higher multi-
pliers at the ZLB, around 1.5 on impact. Further, as discussed below, Boehm (2019)
finds some evidence for higher multipliers for government investment spending at the
ZLB. Thus, whatever the mechanism, multipliers may be higher at the ZLB.



3    Empirical Evidence on the Long-Run Effects of Public
     Capital and Infrastructure
    This section begins by reviewing some of the leading estimates of the elasticity of
output to public capital, with a focus on the long run. It then uses the stylized neoclas-
sical model to illustrate the two leading methodological challenges: (i) the distinction
between production function elasticities and general equlibrium steady-state elastici-
ties and (ii) the endogeneity of public capital. I illustrate the econometric problems by
estimating the effects of public capital on artificial data generated by a simple extension
of the model in Section 2.1. Finally, I discuss a promising way to address the challenges
and present some initial estimates that emerge.


                                      Page 24 of 64
3.1    An Overview of Existing Estimates
   There is a long literature that seeks to measure the returns to infrastructure in-
vestment. An early example is Fogel's (1964) pioneering analysis of the contributions
of railroads to U.S. economic development. Several decades later, Aschauer (1988,
1989) famous hypothesis that the productivity slowdown in industrialized countries
was caused by reductions in infrastructure investment led to renewed research in this
area. He estimated an aggregate production function and found an elasticity of output
to public capital of 0.39 in U.S. data. Munnell's (1990) extension of his work found
similar results, with elasticities between 0.31 and 0.39. Bom and Ligthart's (2014) ex-
cellent literature review discusses the variety of estimates of the production function
elasticity of output to public capital and conducts an insightful meta-analysis. Their
meta-analysis settles on a mean production function elasticity of output to public cap-
ital of 0.08 in the short run and 0.12 in the long-run. They find that the elasticity is
higher for public capital installed by local or regional governments and for core infras-
tructure. The mean estimate of the output elasticity for these latter types of public
capital is 0.19 in the long-run. Ercolani and Valle e Azevedo (2014) is perhaps the
only paper to estimate the production function elasticity of output to public capital in
a medium-scale dynamic general equilibrium macroeconomics model. They find that
when they incorporate both public capital and allow government consumption to be a
substitute or complement to private consumption, the estimate of the production func-
tion elasticity to public capital is 0.09. Owing to significant uncertainty surrounding
that estimate and other indications of model fit, however, their preferred specification
is one in which the elasticity is constrained to 0.
   The empirical macroeconomics literature tends to focus on estimates of output mul-
tipliers. Much of the recent macroeconomics literature has focused on short-run effects
of general government spending, but several papers also provide estimates for long-run
multipliers on government investment spending. For example, Ilzetzki et al. (2013) use
structural vector autoregressions on a panel of OECD countries to study the effects of
government spending in a wide range of circumstances. They use standard Cholesky
decompositions to identify shocks and when they focus on government investment they
find multipliers for public investment that ranged between 0.4 in the short-run to 1.6 in
the long run. Boehm (2019) specifically compares multipliers for government invest-
ment and consumption spending in a panel of OECD countries. He also uses Cholesky



                                       Page 25 of 64
decompositions, but also controls for forecasts in order to mitigate possible anticipation
biases. He also finds a long-run multiplier of 1.6 for government investment spending.
   Some of the most convincing evidence of the productivity of public capital has used
regional or industry variation in the U.S. to estimate the output effects of road con-
struction in the U.S. It is important to note that these estimates give only relative ef-
fects because aggregate effects are typically taken out by constant terms or time-fixed
effects. Fernald (1999) exploits the differences in benefits of the U.S. interstate high-
way system across industries. He specifically models transportation services as an input
into the production function, taking into account the complementarity between vehicles
owned by the industries and roads and the difference uses across industries. He finds
that industries that rely more heavily on transportation experienced greater increases
in productivity than other industries as a result of the building of the U.S. interstate
highway system. Using additional identifying assumptions, he translates his relative
estimates into a production function elasticity of output to roads of 0.35, an estimate
similar to Aschauer's (1989) estimate. However, he argues that the effects are not large
enough to be the principal explanation of the productivity slowdown.
   Leff Yaffe (2020) uses state panel data and narrative evidence to estimate the output
effects of the building of the U.S. interstate highway system, accounting for anticipation
effects and crowding-in of state and local spending on roads. His multiplier estimates
are significantly affected by the estimated "crowd-in" of state highway spending. In
particular, an infusion of funds to a state (instrumented using Bartik-style instruments)
typically led to additional road building to connect to the interstate highway system.
When he includes the additional state and local spending in the government spending
measure, Leff Yaffe's long-run relative multiplier estimate is 1.8.
   Leduc and Wilson (2013) estimate the effects of Federal highway grants to states
during more recent times using annual state-level data starting in the 1990s. They
report various long-run (i.e. 10 year) multipliers. Their favored ones are just under 2.
   The estimates are less optimistic for emerging economies. Perhaps because of less
efficient governments, many of the estimated returns are surprisingly low. Henry and
Gardner (2019) survey the evidence in numerous countries and conclude that in only
a minority do infrastructure projects, such as paved roads and electricity, clear the re-
quired hurdles.




                                      Page 26 of 64
3.2     Production Function vs. General Equilibrium Output Elastici-
        ties
    Earlier sections illustrated the importance of the production function elasticity of
output to public capital for the effects of government investment. In this section and
the next, I highlight two major challenges associated with estimating this key production
function parameter. The first is associated with the difference between the production
function elasticity and the steady-state general equilibrium elasticity. The second is the
problem of the endogeneity of public capital spending. I illustrate the challenges by
comparing the approaches used in three leading sets of papers: (1) Aschauer (1989)
and Munnell's (1990) static production function estimates; (2) Pereira and Frutos's
(1999) and Pereira's (2000) structural vector autoregression (SVAR) estimates; and
(3) Bouakez et al. (2017) TFP and cointegrating relation estimates.
    Aschauer (1989) and Munnell (1990) and much of the literature that followed esti-
mated their production elasticities using log levels of contemporaneous variables. They
regressed the logarithm of aggregate output on the logarithms of contemporaneous val-
ues of labor, private capital, and public capital, or transformed the equation to regress
productivity measures on public capital. Thus, temporarily leaving aside the endogene-
ity issues that I will discuss in the next section, they were estimating the production
function elasticity, G from the production function in equation 3 from Section 2.1. In
log form, that equation becomes:



(12)           ln(Yt ) = ln(A t ) +  · ln(K t -1 ) + (1 - ) · ln(Nt ) + G · ln(K tG
                                                                                  -1
                                                                                     )

G is the partial derivative of the log of output with respect to the log of public capital.
To estimate the partial derivative, the regression must control for the contemporanous
values of the private inputs.12
    Let us now compare their method and results to the analysis by Pereira and Frutos
(1999), denoted "PF" in the following exposition, who used structural vector autore-
gression (SVAR) to estimate the output elasticity to public capital.13 PF noted several

  12. See Bom and Ligthart (2014) for a more detailed discussion.
  13. Bom and Ligthart (2014) briefly survey the SVAR studies, but exclude them from their meta-
analysis of output elasticity estimates. As I will demonstrate shortly, this was the correct decision given
their focus on production function estimates. See Bom and Ligthart (2014) footnote 15 for a list of papers
that use SVAR methods.


                                             Page 27 of 64
possible problems with the estimation method of Aschauer and Munnell, including is-
sues of possible spurious regression (e.g. because the macroeconomic variables are non-
stationary), omission of dynamic feedbacks, and possible simultaneous equation bias.
They sought to address all three of these issues by using a structural vector autoregres-
sion (SVAR) to estimate the elasticity of output to public capital. First, they tested and
found unit roots in the logs of output, labor, and the two capital stocks. They could find
no evidence of cointegration, so they estimated their system in first differences to avoid
spurious regression. Second, their use of the SVAR allowed complete dynamics. Third,
they allowed for reverse causality from output and the other variables to public capital
and identified exogenous movements in public capital as the innovation to public capi-
tal not explained by lagged values of the other endogenous variables, i.e., they used a
Cholesky decomposition to identify the exogenous shock.
    Pereira and Frutos (1999) fully recognized that they were estimating a different
elasticity from the one estimated by Aschauer and Munnell. PF's headline number is a
long-run elasticity of private output to public capital of 0.63.14 This elasticity of out-
put to public capital estimated by PF is not, however, the production function elasticity
G . The production function elasticity of output to public capital, G , is the elasticity of
output to an increase in public capital, holding TFP, labor, and capital constant. There
is another elasticity of output to public capital, however, that includes the endogenous
response of the private inputs to public capital in general equilibrium. The increase in
public capital raises the marginal products of private inputs, which leads to incentives
to accumulate more private capital. It is this elasticity that PF estimate. PF's impulse
response function estimates show that private capital also rises permanently. (Employ-
ment bounces around in the short run, but then returns to a level slightly above its
former value.) Because private capital is allowed to respond, PF's elasticity is not the
production function elasticity.
    The relationship between the production function elasticity and the steady-state
output elasticity can be derived from the neoclassical model presented in Section 2.1.15
In particular, the steady-state output elasticity to government capital, SS
                                                                         Y KG
                                                                              , is:

   14. To obtain this number, PF first estimate the impulse responses of all the endogenous variables,
including public capital, to their identified exogenous shock to public capital. They then calculate the
long-run elasticity (shown in their Table 6) as the ratio of the impulse response of log output at 5 to 10
years to the impulse response of log public capital at 5 to 10 years, since both impulse responses have
stabilized at their new levels by that time. Those impulse responses are shown in their Figure 1.
   15. This expression incorporates the assumption that the social planner also raises government con-
sumption to maintain a constant steady state government consumption-to-output ratio.


                                             Page 28 of 64
                       1      1                 1   G · KG
(13)         SS   =      · +    · G , where  =    ·        .
             Y KG
                      1+     1-                1+    C


1/(1 +  ) is the Hicks elasticity of labor supply, G is the depreciation rate on public
capital, and KG /C is the ratio of public capital to consumption.
   If we use the calibration of the baseline neoclassical model from Section 2.1, the
relationship is given by:



(14)                            SS
                                Y KG
                                     = 0.043 + 1.49 · G .



The constant term is positive because, even when public capital is not productive (i.e.
G = 0) labor supply increases and consumption falls relative to output because of the
negative wealth effects. Thus, the steady-state elasticity of output to steady-state public
capital is always greater than the elasticity of output to public capital in the production
function. Most of this difference is due to the negative wealth effect raising labor supply
and part is due to the induced investment in private capital, which grows as G rises.
   We can use this relationship to calculate what PF's estimated elasticity would im-
ply for the value of G . Their long-run elasticity of 0.63 which allows private inputs
to respond is the general equilibrium steady-state elasticity. Equation 14 implies that
G is 0.39, exactly equal to Aschauer's estimate! Thus, Aschauer's (1989) production
function output elasticity maps exactly to Pereira and Frutos (1999) long-run general
equilibrium elasticity of output. According to the stylized model, the latter estimate
should be larger because private inputs are also responding.


3.3    The Econometric Problem of Endogenous Capital
   The endogeneity of public capital is a potentially serious problem, recognized by
many researchers. Aschauer (1989) used OLS for his main estimates, but attempted
to deal with possible reverse causality by using lagged endogenous variables as instru-
ments. Using lagged endogenous variables as instruments was a common practice in



                                      Page 29 of 64
the late 1980s, but is now known to require implausible exclusion restrictions in most
macroeconomic applications.
    The simultaneity problem occurs because larger and more wealthy economies invest
in more public capital. In fact, since a benevolent social planner should choose a level
of public capital that maximizes the discounted utility of the representative household,
it should respond to technological progress by increasing the amount of public capital.
    We can make this point concrete by using what I have called a "DSGE Monte Carlo"
(Ramey (2016) ). The idea is to simulate artificial data from a DSGE model for which
we know the "true" parameters, and then apply an estimation method to the artificial
data to see if it can recover the true parameters.
    To be specific, I generalize the calibrated neoclassical model to allow the social plan-
ner to choose the optimal level of public capital, based on maximizing the discounted
utility of the representative household.16 I use the baseline calibration with G = 0.05.
I then allow technology, A in equation 3, to vary. Because an increase in A raises the
marginal product of public capital, a social planner will respond by raising public capi-
tal. Since I am interested in long-run effects, I calculate how steady-state values of the
key variables change with changes in technology.
    I estimate a regression similar to the one used by Bouakez et al. (2017). In particular,
rather than regressing output itself on the inputs, they use Fernald's (2014) measure of
TFP as the dependent variable. Fernald makes very general assumptions and carefully
measures TFP at the industry level using factor shares and then aggregates them to get
aggregate TFP. He also adjusts it for cyclical utilization. In the context of the simple
aggregate production function in my model, Fernald's measure is defined as follows:



(15)                     ln( T F P ) = ln(Yt ) - ln(K t ) - (1 - )ln(Nt )




   16. Note that the social planner problem is not concave, since I assume constant returns in the private
inputs, so existence and uniqueness are not guaranteed. See Glomm and Ravikumar (1994, 1997) for
a thorough analysis of model in which the government chooses the public capital optimally. My explo-
rations with the simple model suggest that there exists a unique maximum of the social planner problem,
as long as G is not too large.


                                             Page 30 of 64
Log TFP is defined as log output less share-weighted log private capital and labor.17
This definition and the production function from equation 3 above implies the following
relationship between Fernald's measure of TFP and public capital:



(16)                             ln( T F P ) = ln(A t ) + G · ln(K tG )

Thus, Fernald's (2014) TFP measure consists of both true level of technology, ln(A), and
the effects of public capital.
      Suppose we regress Fernald's log TFP measure on the log of public capital. Since
true technology is not observed, it shows up in the error term of the regression, i.e., the
 t   in



(17)                               ln( T F P ) = G · ln(K tG ) +   t


Bouakez et al. (2017) estimate the regression as a cointegrating equation.18 I will de-
scribe more details of their procedure below.
      In the artificial data I generate from my model, I calculate the measure of TFP as the
log of output minus the share-weighted logs of private capital and labor, just as Fernald
does. I set the weights equal to the actual shares from the model. I then regress the log
of TFP measure on the log of public capital using the artificial data generated by the
model. Recall that I am focusing only on steady-state equilibrium values.
      This regression produces an estimate of G equal to 0.64, which is severely biased
upward relative to the true value of 0.05. The reason for the upward bias is intuitive.
When there is an increase in technology, A, the marginal product of all inputs increases.
As a result, private agents increase private capital and the social planner increases pub-
lic capital. Thus, the error term        t   in equation 17 is positively correlated with public
capital.
      One could in principle solve the problem by using instrumental variables, but it is
difficult to find instruments for public capital in aggregate data. Bouakez et al. (2017),
however, employ a method that reduces the upward bias significantly. Although they
   17. Fernald (1999) performs the calculation in growth rates, as is standard for Solow residuals. How-
ever, these can be integrated to obtain log levels.
   18. As surveyed by Bom and Ligthart (2014), several researchers have estimated cointegrating equa-
tions, but the applications were for other countries or panel data across sectors.


                                              Page 31 of 64
do not discuss endogeneity issues, their method goes far to reduce this type of bias. I
now describe their method.
    In a short discussion section at the end of their mostly-quantitative New Keynesian
model effects at the zero lower bound paper, Bouakez et al. (2017) review the literature
on the productivity of public capital and then present some independent evidence using
U.S. aggregate data. They use Fernald's (2014) TFP measure to avoid estimating a
complete production function. They then add "it is still important to account for the
additional factors that may affect TFP in the long run" (Bouakez et al. (2017), p. 75),
but do not explain why it is important. The DSGE Monte Carlo analysis I developed
above provides the perfect motivation: any changes in measured TFP (apart from public
capital) are likely to lead the government to change public capital endogenously. Thus,
in order to reduce the bias in the regression in equation 17, one should control for
as many sources of TFP as possible in order to remove them from the error term, .
Bouakez et al. (2017) construct measures of the stock of research and development
spending and the stock of human capital. Their finding of cointegration between the
log level of Fernald's TFP, log public capital, log R&D stock and log human capital is
strong evidence that they have identified the key drivers of TFP.
    Pereira and Frutos (1999) estimated their model in first-differences because they
could not find cointegration. Bouakez et al. (2017) analysis shows that more key vari-
ables needed to be included. By estimating the cointegration equation, Bouakez et al.
(2017) are picking up the long-run, presumably steady-state, relationships because the
estimates are driven by the stochastic trends.19 Bouakez et al.'s main estimates, shown
in their Table 2, imply a production function elasticity of output to public capital of
0.065.
    We can shed light on the extent to which Bouakez et al.'s procedure reduces the
upward bias in actual data. In particular, we can re-estimate their equation, omitting
the other determinants of TFP (i.e. the R&D stock and human capital stock), and see
how the estimated coefficient on log public capital changes.
    Using their replication files, I estimate their equation on their data, but omit their
controls for TFP. The result is an estimate of the coefficient on the log of public capital
of 0.33, in contrast to their estimate of 0.065. My estimate is much higher and is closer
to the original estimates of Aschauer and Munnell. The difference between these two

  19. See King et al. (1987) for a discussion of the role of stochastic trends in long-run growth. The
1987 NBER working paper version is much more complete than the 1991 AER version.


                                           Page 32 of 64
estimates is perfectly explained by the type of bias I just demonstrated in my DSGE
Monte Carlo. Bouakez et al.'s controls for other factors affecting TFP go far to reduce
the bias.
    Using these variables as controls, however, may lead Bouakez et al.'s estimates to
be downward biased. Government investment is likely a key driver of both the R&D
stock and human capital, i.e. public capital affects A in the stylized model, so it is not
appropriate to simply include these two variables as controls. Thus, their estimate is
very likely a lower bound on the value of G .
    These exercises have illustrated the difficulties in estimating the production function
output elasticity to public capital. Obtaining unbiased estimates is difficult because
almost everything is endogenous.



4     Empirical Evidence on the Short-Run Effects of Gov-
      ernment Investment in Public Capital
    During the Great Recession, government infrastructure spending received much at-
tention because of its possible role in stimulating the economy. The American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act (ARRA), enacted in early 2009 in the depths of the Great Reces-
sion, used both transfers and government purchases to try to stimulate the economy.
Infrastructure spending was an important component of the purchases. The stimulus
package specifically targeted "shovel-ready" projects because of the urgency for imme-
diate government spending. As shown earlier in Figure 3, the delays in spending were
nevertheless substantial.
    As I discussed in Section 2.5, the theoretical evidence suggests that, dollar for dol-
lar spent, government investment spending has lower short-run stimulus effects than
government consumption. The next sections review the empirical evidence.


4.1    Aggregate Evidence
    Pereira and Frutos (1999), reviewed in detail in the discussion of long-run estimates
in Section 3, also studied the short-run effects. They found negative short-run effects
of infrastructure spending on employment in all of their specifications. This fact, cou-
pled with the recognition of the delays in investment, led them to recommend against



                                       Page 33 of 64
using public investment for short-run stimulus. They argued that it could actually be
counterproductive.
    As discussed earlier, Ilzetzki et al. (2013) used structural vector autoregressions on
a panel of OECD countries to study the effects of government spending in a wide range
of circumstances. When they focused on government investment they found multipliers
for public investment around 0.4 in the short-run.
    The work of Boehm (2019), which I discussed in the last section for its quantitative
model predictions, tests those predictions using a panel of OECD countries. Recall that
his key economic insight is that government investment should have a lower short-run
multiplier than government consumption because the elasticity of intertemporal sub-
stitution for investment is much higher than for consumption. This feature means that
government investment spending crowds out much more private investment spending
than government consumption spending crowds out private consumption. He tests this
prediction of his model using a panel of OECD countries from 2003 to 2016. He iden-
tifies exogenous shocks to government consumption and investment using a Choleski
identification, controlling for forecasts to avoid anticipation effects. He estimates mul-
tipliers near zero for government investment and around 0.8 for government consump-
tion. He also finds evidence supporting the mechanisms he highlights in his theory.
In particular, he finds that a government consumption shock does not crowd out pri-
vate consumption, but a government investment shocks significantly crowds out private
investment. Consistent with this evidence, he also finds little change in the real inter-
est rate in the consumption goods sector after a consumption shock, but a significant
increase in the real interest rate in the investment goods sector.
    Boehm also offers some final evidence that provides some support to the models
predicting higher multipliers at the zero lower bound. When he estimates his model
separately over zero lower bound periods and normal periods, he finds evidence of
a slightly higher multiplier for government investment than government consumption
during zero lower bound periods. Recall that Bouakez et al. (2017, 2019) showed that
at the ZLB, the NK model predicted a flipping of the ranking of multipliers, with gov-
ernment investment multipliers higher at the ZLB. Boehm's point estimates qualitatively
support this prediction. The standard errors of the estimates are higher, though, so the
estimates are not statistically different from each other.20

  20. In the smaller ZLB sample, the government investment multiplier estimate is 1.2 with a standard
error of 0.66 for the first four quarters and 0.95 with a standard error of 0.72 for the first eight quarters.


                                               Page 34 of 64
4.2    Cross-State Evidence
   Many of the recent studies have estimated the effects of infrastructure by exploiting
variation across states. This is especially true of the studies of the effects of the ARRA.
These studies can estimate only relative effects because they exploit subnational data;
that is, they answer the question "how much more employment or output occurs in State
A when it receives $1 more in spending than the average state?" Thus, the estimates do
not provide direct evidence on aggregate effects because, by construction, they net out
financing effects and they do not measure the net effects of positive spillovers versus
business-stealing effects. Moreover, most do not account for induced state and local
spending, so the multiplier estimate may undercount the total government spending
required to produce the result. Nevertheless, they provide valuable insight into the
underlying mechanisms.
   The state employment data is typically much better than gross state product data.
As a result, most studies focus on employment effects rather than gross state product
effects. This focus is reasonable for short-run studies that are interested in the stimulus
effects of government investment.
   Leduc and Wilson (2013) estimate the effects of Federal highway grants to states
during using annual state-level panel data from 1993 to 2010. Their long-run multi-
pliers were discussed in a previous section. As noted by Ramey (2018), however, their
short-run estimated effects do not suggest much stimulus effect. Their Figure 4 shows
the effects of state highway spending on state total employment. The impulse response
shows little effect on impact or at year 1, but then a significantly negative effect on state
employment at years 2 through 5. Thus, their results suggest that highway spending is
counterproductive as a short-run stimulus. These results echo those found by Pereira
and Frutos (1999) in aggregate data. Gallen and Winston (2019) provide a possible ex-
planation for the short-run negative effects on total employment: highway construction
can be very disruptive to the local economy.
   Studies that focused all or in part on the infrastructure elements of the ARRA in-
clude Wilson (2012), Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel and Woolston (2012), Leduc and Wil-
son (2017), Dupor (2017), and Garin (2019). Chodorow-Reich (2019) synthesizes and
standardizes the various studies of the ARRA for all types of spending and finds very
similar employment multiplier estimates once they are standardized to calculate mul-
tipliers the same way. He finds that all of the leading instruments, whether they be
Medicaid formulae, Department of Transportation factors, or a mixture of many fac-

                                       Page 35 of 64
tors, produce similar results. In particular, he estimates that two job-years were created
for each $100,000 spent. As I point out in Ramey (2019), however, these estimates
are based on unweighted data and do not take into account crowd-in of state and local
spending. Once I make those adjustments, I find that each $100,000 spent led to 0.8
job-years created. These estimates are based on weak instruments, though, since the
literature's instruments that are so strong for the ARRA grants are unfortunately weak
for spending including additional state and local spending.
   Leduc and Wilson (2017) used cross-state variation in ARRA appropriations for high-
ways to study flypaper effects, i.e., whether federal grants for highway construction
crowd in or crowd out state and local spending on highways and roads. They found
significant crowd in, with each dollar in federal aid resulting in a total of $2.30 in state
highway spending. The focus of their paper was the response of state and local spending
and how that interacted with rent seeking, but in the appendix they showed regressions
of the change in employment in the highway, street and bridge construction industry on
the instrumented appropriations. They were able to find a significant positive results
in only one case of several. The failure to find positive results echoes my point that the
earlier Leduc and Wilson (2013) analysis of highway spending before the ARRA did not
find positive effects on total employment in the short run.
   As Garin (2019) argues, a positive effect of highway spending on construction em-
ployment is a necessary condition for any further effects, such as local spillovers and
Keynesian multipliers. Therefore, I examine in more detail the impacts of the ARRA
highway grants on employment in highway, street and bridge construction, which I
will call "highway construction" for short. I use Leduc and Wilson's (2017) data and a
similar specification, which they describe in the text associated with Table B1. In par-
ticular, the regressions, which use cross-state variation for identification, estimate the
effect of ARRA highway apportionments per capita in 2009 on the variables of interest
in the succeeding years. I use the baseline sample of 48 states of Leduc and Wilson,
and instrument for apportionments with their two road factors. I include their political
variables as controls, though I lag them in my local projection specification so that all
right-hand side variables are dated 2009 or earlier. I include the change in per capital
employment in highway construction between 2007 and 2008 as an additional control
for pretrends. I estimate the impulse response in each year using a series of local pro-
jection regressions in which the left-hand side variable is the change in the variable of
interest from 2008 and year h, where h ranges from 2009 to 2013.


                                       Page 36 of 64
   Figure 6 shows the impulse responses for the specification just described. The upper
left graph accurately estimates that all of the ARRA obligations occurred in 2009. The
upper right graph shows that the outlays occurred mostly in 2009 and 2010. The lower
left graph supports the main result of Leduc and Wilson (2017), which is that total
highway spending rose by more than the outlays. My new result is the impulse response
for highway construction employment, shown in the lower right graph. According to
the estimated impulse response function, highway employment barely responds in 2009
and 2010, but then falls significantly after that. These effects are clearly contrary to the
intended effects of the ARRA.
   Dupor (2017) in "So, Why Didn't the 2009 Recovery Act Improve the Nation's High-
ways and Bridges" argues that the ARRA did not improve the highways and bridges be-
cause the federal grants completely crowded out state and local spending. Thus, Dupor
argues for the opposite result of Leduc and Wilson (2017), who find significant crowd-
ing in. Dupor notes that the difference might be due to his addition of the logarithm
of state population as a control. He does not, however, make clear the econometric
motivation for adding this control.
   To determine how the results change when log population is included as a control,
I add Dupor's log population control in the model I used to estimate the impulse re-
sponses shown in Figure 6. The results when the population control is included are
shown in Figure 7. The top two graphs are similar to those from the previous spec-
ification, but the bottom left graph showing the impact on total highway spending is
very different. In contrast to the analogous graph in Panel A, there is no change in total
highway spending in Panel B. This result suggests complete crowd out. The highway
construction employment effects, however, are similar, with virtually no change in 2009
and 2010 but a significant negative effect in 2011 through 2013. The results obtained
by adding Dupor's control variable no longer imply that increases in highway spending
lower highway construction employment, but they imply that no change in highway
spending lowers highway construction employment.
   Neither of the implied stories by Leduc and Wilson (2017) or Dupor (2017) is en-
couraging for highway grants as a stimulus. In the Leduc and Wilson results, total
highway spending rises significantly as a result of the federal grants, but it results in a
decrease in employment in highway construction. In the Dupor results, federal grants
are ineffective in raising total highway spending, and still highway construction em-
ployment falls.


                                       Page 37 of 64
    One possible explanation for the puzzling decline in highway construction employ-
ment might be a problem with the instruments. However, Chodorow-Reich (2019)
tested the overidentifying assumptions using those instruments along with other lead-
ing ones from the literature and could not reject the overidentifying assumptions. Thus,
this explanation seems less likely.
    Garin (2019) finds slightly more positive results. He uses a database on almost
3,000 counties and ARRA spending on highways to estimate the direct effects on overall
construction (not just highways) employment, as well as total employment. The biggest
effect he finds is in total construction employment in 2010, with six jobs created per
$1 million. He finds that each dollar of stimulus spent in a county led construction
payrolls to increase by 30 cents over the next five years, an increase that is consistent
with the labor share in the construction industry. However, when he tests for general
equilibrium effects on local employment and payroll, he estimates effects that are close
to zero. He finds no evidence of a local multiplier effect.
    In sum, there is scant empirical evidence that infrastructure investment, or public
investment in general, has a short-run stimulus effect. There are more papers that find
negative effects on employment than positive effects on employment. The ARRA results
are particularly negative, since the ARRA spending occurred at a time when interest
rates were at the zero lower bound and the unemployment rate was 9 to 10 percent.
Despite the slack in the economy and the accommodative monetary policy, the effects
on construction employment were either small positive or negative.



5    Is the U.S. Underinvesting in Public Capital?
    Numerous commentators have argued that the U.S. is underinvesting in public cap-
ital, and particularly in infrastructure. In this section, I shed light on this question with
data on trends and insights from the models presented earlier.
    Figure 8 shows government capital as a percent of GDP from 1929 to 2018. The data
are current-cost net stock data on government capital and nominal GDP from the BEA.
The figure shows long-run trends for all government capital, nondefense government
capital, and transportation capital relative to GDP. All show significant swings over time.
The total government capital ratio hit peaks in the 1940s and the mid-1970s. Both the
nondefense and transportation government capital ratios hit peaks in the 1930s, the
mid-1970s, and in the early 2010s. The ratios have fallen only slight since the early

                                       Page 38 of 64
2010s. Thus, current levels of public capital are comparable to those of some of the
past high points.
   Of course, this comparability does not mean that the level is optimal or that the allo-
cation of government capital across types is optimal. We can shed light on this question
by returning to the extension of the neoclassical model that allows the social planner to
choose the optimal steady-state public capital, discussed in Section 2.6. For reference,
I repeat the equations for the optimal level of government capital and investment:

                    KG      1                     GI      G
                       = -1      · G ,               = -1      · G
                    Y    - 1 + G                  Y    - 1 + G


where KG is public capital, G I is government investment, Y is output,  is the discount
rate of the representative household, G is the depreciation rate on public capital, and
G is the exponent on public capital in the aggregate production function. Recall from
Section 2.6 that the calibration of the stylized model, converted to an annual basis to
match the BEA data, implies that the fraction multiplying G in the capital ratio equation
is equal to 12.5 and in the investment ratio equation is 0.49.
   With these formulas, we can compare the current state of public capital investment
in the U.S. to the optimal ratios implied by the stylized model. Table 6 shows the ratios
of government capital and investment to GDP 2018 using BEA data, along with the
model-implied optimal ratios for three values of G : the simulation baseline calibration
of 0.05, Bouakez et al. (2017) estimate of 0.065, and the upper bound of Bom and
Ligthart's (2014) range of 0.12.
   The first two rows of table 6 show the ratios for the U.S. in 2018, for both total
government capital and nondefense government capital. Excluding defense capital,
government capital is currently 64 percent of GDP and government investment in non-
defense capital is 2.6 percent of GDP.
   The next three rows of table 6 show the model-implied optimal ratios. If G is equal
to 0.05, then the socially optimal government capital-output ratio is 63 percent and
the socially optimal government investment-output ratio is 2.5 percent. These model-
implied ratios match the BEA data almost exactly. However, if the true G is higher,
then the socially optimal ratios are higher. For example, G = 0.065 implies a socially
optimal capital ratio of 81 percent and G = 0.12 implies a socially optimal capital ratio
of 150 percent. Thus, viewed through the lens of this simple model, the current U.S.



                                         Page 39 of 64
levels of government investment are socially optimal only if G is as low as 0.05. If G
is higher, then the U.S. is underinvesting in public capital.
    Clearly, the value of G is crucial to the calculation. Obtaining more definitive es-
timates of this parameter is important for assessing whether U.S. levels of government
investment are too low.
    Other assumptions of the model affect the optimal ratio calculation as well. The
stylized model makes strong assumptions about elasticities of substitution between fac-
tors of production and returns to scale, both of which can affect the calculation. The
model also incorporates the unrealistic assumption that public capital is homogeneous.
If public capital is heterogeneous, then marginal products are not proportional to av-
erage products. For example, even if the overall level of transportation infrastructure
is near the optimum, it may be misallocated: the current amount of transportation
infrastructure might be too high in Detroit but too low in Seattle.
    The stylized neoclassical model also assumes no distortions in the economy. The
need to finance government spending with distortionary taxes might reduce the im-
plied optimal government investment rate since a unit of government capital would
cost more than a unit of output because of the depressing effect of distortionary taxes
on output. On the other hand, the New Keynesian-style product market and labor mar-
ket distortions might lead to second-best results implying higher public capital.
    In sum, the current range of plausible estimates of G is too wide and the model
used in this paper is too stylized to give a definite answer to the question of whether
the U.S. is underinvesting in public capital. Nevertheless, the simple calculation offers
a starting point for thinking about the issue in more general models and serves as an
impetus to more research aimed at narrowing the range of plausible estimates of G .



6    Summary and Conclusions
    This paper has studied both the short-run and long-run macroeconomic effects of
government investment. The theoretical analysis has considered both neoclassical and
New Keynesian models. The empirical analysis has surveyed estimates at the aggregate
and regional levels, illustrated the econometric challenges, and extended some existing
empirical work. The following points summarize some of the key findings.
    First, even when government investment has significant long-run effects, the short-
run stimulus multipliers are less than those from government consumption in most

                                      Page 40 of 64
situations. The two key reasons are (i) the effects of time-to-build delays and (ii) the
propensity of government investment to crowd out private spending more than govern-
ment consumption does. These results are supported by quantitative models, empirical
panel studies across OECD countries, time series analysis in the U.S., and cross-state
studies. The effects of time-to-spend and time-to-build delays, which appear to be in-
herent in infrastructure projects, work against the standard New Keynesian mechanisms
and lower short-run multipliers.
   Second, the long-run multipliers on government investment depend critically on
both the production function elasticity of output to public capital and on where the
economy begins relative to the socially optimal level of public capital. Higher produc-
tion function elasticity raises multipliers and starting far below the socially optimal level
of public capital also raises multipliers.
   Second, my review and small extension of the empirical literature on the long-run
estimates suggests that the aggregate production function elasticity of output to public
capital is probably between 0.065 and 0.12, similar to the range found by Bom and
Ligthart's (2014) meta-analysis. However, this elasticity is very stylized and does not
take into account possible differences in the marginal products of different types of
government capital. Some studies find higher estimates for core infrastructure, while
others do not.
   Third, there is both theoretical support and some empirical support for the short-run
multiplier on government investment being higher when interest rates are constrained
by the zero lower bound (ZLB). The theoretical mechanisms that lead to this effect,
however, also imply that at the zero lower financing government spending with distor-
tionary income taxation rather than deficits leads to higher multipliers, a result contrary
to most economists' priors.
   Fourth, cross-section and panel evidence on U.S. states or counties that focuses on
bridge, highway, and road infrastructure spending suggests that the spending leads to
either no change or a decline in employment in the first several years, even during
ZLB periods. There is no obvious explanation for these puzzling results, though the
disruptive effects of construction on existing infrastructure might play a role.
   In sum, the macroeconomic approach to government investment provides strong
support for the long-run benefits of infrastructure spending. However, the same ap-
proach raises questions about the suitability of investment in infrastructure and other
public capital as a short-run stimulus.


                                       Page 41 of 64
References
Allen, Treb and Costas Arkolakis, 2019. "The Welfare Effects of Transportation In-
  frastructure Improvements." Technical Report 25487, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Aschauer, David Alan, 1988. "The equilibrium approach to fiscal policy." Journal of
  Money, Credit and Banking 20(1): 41­62.

Aschauer, David Alan, 1989. "Does public capital crowd out private capital?" Journal
  of monetary economics 24(2): 171­188.

Bachmann, Rüdiger, Tim O. Berg, and Eric R. Sims, 2015. "Inflation expectations and
  readiness to spend: Cross-sectional evidence." American Economic Journal: Economic
  Policy 7(1): 1­35.

Baxter, Marianne and Robert G. King, 1993. "Fiscal Policy in General Equilibrium."
  American Economic Review 83(3): 315­334.

Boehm, Christoph E., 2019. "Government consumption and investment: Does the
  composition of purchases affect the multiplier?" Journal of Monetary Economics .

Bom, Pedro R.D. and Jenny E. Ligthart, 2014. "What have we learned from three
  decades of research on the productivity of public capital?" Journal of economic surveys
  28(5): 889­916.

Bouakez, Hafedh, Michel Guillard, and Jordan Roulleau-Pasdeloup, 2017. "Public
  investment, time to build, and the zero lower bound." Review of Economic Dynamics
  23: 60­79.

Bouakez, Hafedh, Michel Guillard, and Jordan Roulleau-Pasdeloup, 2019. "The
  optimal composition of public spending in a deep recession." Journal of Monetary
  Economics .

Broer, Tobias, Niels-Jakob Harbo Hansen, Per Krusell, and Erik Öberg, 2020. "A
  Note on the Transmission Mechanism of Government Spending Shocks in the Basic
  Neoclassical Model." Stockholm University, IIES working paper .

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, 2019. "Geographic Cross-Sectional Fiscal Spending Multi-
  pliers: What Have We Learned?" American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 11(2):
  1­34.

Chodorow-Reich, Laura Feiveson Zachary Liscow, Gabriel and William Gui Wool-
  ston, 2012. "Does state fiscal relief during recessions increase employment? Evidence
  from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act." American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy 4(3): 118­145.

                                      Page 42 of 64
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans, 2005. "Nominal
  Rigidities and the Dynamic Effects of A Shock to Monetary Policy." Journal of Political
  Economy 113(1): 1­45.

Coenen, Günter, Christopher J. Erceg, Charles Freedman, Davide Furceri, Michael
  Kumhof, René Lalonde, Douglas Laxton, Jesper Lindé, Annabelle Mourougagne,
  Dirk Muir, Susanna Mursula, Carlos de Resende, John Roberts, Werner Roeger,
  Stephen Snudden, Mathias Trabandt, and Jan In't Veld, 2012. "Effects of Fiscal
  Stimulus in Structural Models." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics. 4(1):
  22­68.

Colciago, Andrea, 2011. "Rule-of-Thumb Consumers Meet Sticky Wages." Journal of
  Economic Dynamics and Control 343(2/3): 325­353.

Donalson, Dave, 2018. "Railroads of the Raj: Estimation the Impact of Transportation
 Infrastructure." American Economic Review 108(4/5): 899­934.

Donalson, Dave and Richard Hornbeck, 2016. "Railroads and American Economic
 Growth: A "Market Access" Approach." Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(2): 799­
 858.

Drautzburg, Thorsten and Harald Uhlig, 2015. "Fiscal stimulus and distortionary
  taxation." Review of Economic Dynamics 18(4): 894­920.

Dupor, Bill, 2017. "So, Why Didn't the 2009 Recovery Act Improve the Nation's High-
 ways and Bridges?" Second quarter 2017, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review.

Dupor, Bill and Rong Li, 2015. "The expected inflation channel of government spend-
 ing in the postwar US." European Economic Review 74: 36­56.

Eggertsson, Gauti B., 2011. "What fiscal policy is effective at zero interest rates?."
  NBER Macroeconomics Annual 25(1): 59­112.

Ercolani, Valerio and Joao Valle e Azevedo, 2014. "The Effects of Public Spending
  Externalities." Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 46: 173­199.

Fernald, John, 2014. "A quarterly, utilization-adjusted series on total factor productiv-
  ity." Technical report, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.

Fernald, John G., 1999. "Roads to prosperity? Assessing the link between public capital
  and productivity." American economic review 89(3): 619­638.

Fogel, Robert William, 1964. "Railroads and American economic growth." Baltimore:
  Johns Hopkins Press, .




                                      Page 43 of 64
Galí, Jordi, David López-Salido, and Javier Vallés, 2007. "Understanding the Ef-
  fects of Government Spending on Consumption." Journal of the European Economic
  Association 5(1): 227­270.

Gallen, Trevor and Clifford Winston, 2019. "Transportation and its Effects on the U.S.
  Economy: A General Equilibrium Approach." Technical report, Purdue University.

Garin, Andrew, 2019. "Putting America to work, where? Evidence on the effectiveness
  of infrastructure construction as a locally targeted employment policy." Journal of
  Urban Economics 111: 108­113.

Glomm, Gerhard and Balasubrahmanian Ravikumar, 1994. "Public investment in
  infrastructure in a simple growth model." Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control
  18(6): 1173­1187.

Glomm, Gerhard and Balasubrahmanian Ravikumar, 1997. "Productive government
  expenditures and long-run growth." Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 21(1):
  183­204.

Gordon, Robert J., 2017. The rise and fall of American growth: The US standard of living
  since the civil war. Princeton University Press.

Henry, Peter Blair and Camille Gardner, 2019. "Global Infrastructure: Potential Perils,
 and Framework for Distinction." Technical report, New York University.

Ilzetzki, Ethan, Enrique G. Mendoza, and Carlos A. Végh, 2013. "How Big (Small?)
   are Fiscal Multipliers?" Journal of Monetary Economics 60(2): 239­254.

King, Robert, Charles Plosser, James Stock, and Mark Watson, 1987. "Stochastic
  Trends and Economic Fluctuations." Technical Report 2229, National Bureau of Eco-
  nomic Research.

Leduc, Sylvain and Daniel Wilson, 2013. "Roads to Prosperity or Bridges to Nowhere?
  Theory and Evidence on the Impact of Public Infrastructure Investment." NBER
  Macroeconomics Annual 27(1): 89­142.

Leduc, Sylvain and Daniel Wilson, 2017. "Are State Governments Roadblocks to Fed-
  eral Stimulus? Evidence on the Flypaper Effect of Highway Grants in the 2009 Re-
  covery Act." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 9(2): 253­292.

Leeper, Eric M., Todd B. Walker, and Shu-Chun Susan Yang, 2010. "Government
  Investment and Fiscal Stimulus." Journal of Monetary Economics 57: 253­292.

Leff Yaffe, Daniel, 2020. "The Interstate Multiplier." UCSD manuscript. .




                                     Page 44 of 64
Miyamoto, Thuy Lan Nguyen, Wataru and Dmitriy Sergeyev, 2018. "Government
 Spending Multipliers Under the Zero Lower Bound." American Economic Journal:
 Macroeconomics 10(3): 247­277.

Mountford, Andrew and Harald Uhlig, 2009. "What are the Effects of Fiscal Policy
 Shocks?." Journal of Applied Econometrics 24(6): 960­992.

Munnell, Alicia H., 1990. "Why has productivity growth declined? Productivity and
 public investment." New England economic review January: 3­22.

Pereira, Alfredo M., 2000. "Is all public capital created equal?." Review of Economics
  and Statistics 82(3): 513­518.

Pereira, Alfredo M. and Rafael Flores De Frutos, 1999. "Public Capital Accumulation
  and Private Sector Performance." Journal of Urban Economics 46(2): 300­322.

Ramey, Valerie A., 2016. "Macroeconomic Shocks and their Propagation." In Handbook
  of Macroeconomics. Vol. 2, edited by John B. Taylor and Harald Uhlig., pp. 71­162.
  Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Ramey, Valerie A., 2018. "Fiscal Policy: Tax and Spending Multipliers in the U.S."
  In Evolution or Revolution: Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy After the Great Recession,
  edited by Olivier Blanchard and Lawrence H. Summers, pp. 71­162. Cambridge, MA:
  MIT Press.

Ramey, Valerie A., 2019. "Ten Years after the Financial Crisis: What Have We Learned
  from the Renaissance in Fiscal Research?" Journal of Economic Perspectives 33(2):
  89­114.

Ramey, Valerie A. and Sarah Zubairy, 2018. "Government spending multipliers in
  good times and in bad: evidence from US historical data." Journal of Political Economy
  126(2): 850­901.

Redding, Stephen J. and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, 2017. "Quantitative Spatial Eco-
  nomics." Annual Review of Economics 9: 21­58.

Redding, Stephen J. and Matthew A. Turner, 2015. "Transportation Costs and the
  Spatial Organization of Economic Activity." In Handbook of Regional and Urban Eco-
  nomics, edited by Vernon Henderson Henderson and Strange Strange, pp. 1339­
  1398. Elsevier.

Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie and Martín Uribe, 2005. "Optimal Fiscal and Monetary
  Policy in a Medium-Scale Macroeconomic Model: Expanded Version." Technical Re-
  port 11417, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Shapiro, Matthew D., 1993. "Cyclical Productivity and the Workweek of Capital."
  American Economic Review 83(2): 229­233.

                                     Page 45 of 64
Shimer, Robert, 2009. "Convergence in Macroeconomics: The Labor Wedge." American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1(1): 280­297.

Sims, Eric and Jonathan Wolff, 2018. "The Output and Welfare Effects of Government
  Spending Shocks Over the Business Cycle." International Economic Review 59(3):
  1403­1435.

Wieland, Johannes F., 2019. "Are negative supply shocks expansionary at the zero
 lower bound?." Journal of Political Economy 127(3): 973­1007.

Wilson, Daniel J., 2012. "Fiscal Spending Jobs Multipliers: Evidence from the 2009
 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act." American Economic Journal: Economic
 Policy 4(3): 251­282.

Woodford, Michael, 2011. "Simple analytics of the government expenditure multi-
 plier." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 3(1): 1­35.




                                   Page 46 of 64
                                         Appendix
The following provides the first-order conditions and steady state conditions for the
models presented in Section 2.

Stylized Neoclassical Model

The social planner chooses sequences {C t }, {Nt }, { I t }, {Yt }, and{K t } to maximize the life-
time utility of the representative household given in equation 2, subject to the economy-
wide resource constraint in equation 1, the production function in 3, the capital accu-
mulation equations in 4 and 5, as well as exogenous processes for the two types of
government spending. The first-order conditions for the perfect foresight solution are:


              (1 - )Yt     
(A-1)                  =  Nt          Marginal Rate of Substitution Condition
                  Ct



                C t +1     Yt +1
(A-2)                  = [       + 1 - ]         Consumption Euler Equation
                 Ct         Kt

If the social planner chooses government capital optimally, then we also have the first-
order condition for that choice:

                                  C t +1     Yt +1
                                         = [G G + 1 - G ]
                                   Ct        Kt

The steady-state conditions are:


                                        K      
(A-3)                                     = -1
                                        Y   -1+



                                C         K      K G GC
(A-4)                             = 1 -  · - G ·    -
                                Y         Y      Y    Y



                                                  1-
(A-5)                                    N 1+ =
                                                  C /Y

                                          Page 47 of 64
(A-6)                                   I =·K




(A-7)                                 G I = G · K G




                                 Y = AK  N 1- (K G )
                                                       G
(A-8)


   If the social planner chooses public capital optimally, then in steady state,

                                  KG      G
                                     = -1
                                  Y    - 1 + G




                                      Page 48 of 64
New Keynesian Model

    I construct the model by modifying Galí et al. (2007) to add government capital and
sticky wages (using Colciago's (2011) assumptions). I also add variable capital utiliza-
tion and replace capital adjustment costs with investment adjustment costs following
Christiano et al. (2005) and Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2005). My model shares many
similarities with Sims and Wolff's (2018) model extended with rule-of-thumb house-
holds.
    Here I will highlight a few key details and refer readers for now to Galí et al. (2007)
for more details concerning the parts of the model that overlap. The full model equa-
tions will be made available in an online appendix.
   Households
    The general specification of households closely follows Galí et al. (2007). There are
two types of households, optimizing households and rule-of-thumb households. Both
have the same utility function, identical to the one used for the neoclassical model,
equation 2. Optimizing households maximize their lifetime utility subject to an in-
tertemporal budget constraint. Sources of income include labor earnings, returns on
the holding of government bonds, rental income from capital, and dividends. Uses of
income are consumption, investment in physical capital, lump-sum taxes and purchases
of government bonds. Optimizing households own all of the capital in the economy and
receive all profits. They also make decisions on the utilization of capital. Rule-of-thumb
households consume their entire income each period, with their income consisting of
labor earnings less lump-sum taxes.
   Labor market
     Both types of households supply j types of labor, which firms use to create aggre-
gate labor input through a CES aggregator. The elasticity of substitution between the
different types of labor in this CES aggregator is w . A fictitious labor union sets wages
to maximize the weighted utility across the two types of households. The union can
only reoptimize the wages with probability 1 - w and takes this into account when
it is allowed to adjust the wage for type j labor. Because wages are marked up over
the marginal rate of substitution, households are willing to supply whatever labor is
demanded. The labor supply of both types of households is always equal.
   Investment adjustment costs and capital utilization
    The capital accumulation equation from the baseline neoclassical model is modified
as follow.
                                                              It
                       K t = (1 - (u t ))K t -1 + I t 1 - S
                                                            I t -1



                                      Page 49 of 64
where depreciation depends on utilization as follows

                          (u t ) = 0 + 1 (u t - 1) + 2 (u t - 1)2

and investment adjustment costs are
                                                                  2
                                    It               It
                               S              =              -1       .
                                   I t -1       2   I t -1

   Prices, production, and resource constraints
    The model follows Galí et al. (2007) regarding competitive final goods firms and mo-
nopolistically competitive intermediate goods firms, who mark up price over marginal
cost and face price adjustment costs. The elasticity of substitution parameter for the
CES aggregator of intermediate goods to final goods is given by p . The probability that
a firm can adjust prices is 1 -  p .
    The aggregate production function is modified in three ways relative to my neoclas-
sical model:
                                                          1-       G
                       s t · Yt = A t (u t · K t -1 ) Ntd    K tG
                                                                -1

In this version, output depends on capital services, which is the product of the utilization
rate u and the stock of capital. Wage stickiness leads to inefficient use of the types
of labor (outside of steady state), so there is a wedge between the amount of labor
supplied, Nt , and the effective amount of labor available for production, Ntd :

                                Nt = ~
                                     s t Ntd , where ~
                                                     s t  1.

Similarly, the distortions caused by price stickiness imply a wedge (outside of steady
state) between the amount of spending (Y = C + I + G) and the amount produced , so
s t  1.
   Monetary policy and fiscal policy
    The specification of the Taylor rule and the behavior of lump-sum taxes follows Galí
et al. (2007). According to notes by Martín Uribe, Galí et al. (2007) implicitly assume
that the deviation of lump-sum taxes from steady state is always equal for both types
of households.




                                            Page 50 of 64
Table 1. Baseline Calibration of the Models


 Parameter       Value           Description


 Parameters in both models
                  0.99           Subjective discount factor
                   1             Weight on disutility of labor
                  0.25           Inverse of the Frisch elasticity of labor supply
                  0.36           Exponent on private capital in production function
 G                0.05           Exponent on government capital in production function
                 0.015           Depreciation rate of private capital
 G                0.01           Depreciation rate of public capital
 gy              0.175           Steady-state share of total govt spending to GDP
 giy             0.035           Steady-state share of govt investment to GDP
 G                0.95           Autoregressive coefficient on appropriations process


 Additional parameters of the New Keynesian model
                  5.2            Investment adjustment cost parameter
 1               0.025           Parameter on linear term of capital utilization cost
 2                0.05           Parameter on quadratic term of capital utilization cost
 P                1.2            Steady-state price markup
 W                1.2            Steady-state wage markup
 P                0.75           Calvo parameter on price adjustment
 W                0.75           Calvo parameter on wage adjustment
 P                 6             Elasticity of substitution between types of goods
 W                 6             Elasticity of substitution between types of labor
                  0.5            Share of rule-of-thumb consumers
 b                0.33           Debt feedback coefficient in fiscal rule
 g                0.1            Spending feedback coefficient in fiscal rule
                  1.5            Monetary policy response to inflation




                                      Page 51 of 64
Table 2. Short-Run Multipliers from Simulated Models

           Model Version                Govt consumption     Govt investment    Govt investment
            ( = 0.05)                         AR(1)               AR(1)              delays
 Neoclassical Model
   Baseline                                   0.47                0.40                0.37
   Frisch elasticity = 0.5                    0.14                0.13                0.13
   Invest. adj. cost, capital utiliz.         0.63                0.63                0.15

 New Keynesian Model
   Baseline                                   1.06                1.12                 0.08
   No invest. adj. cost, no utiliz.           0.19                0.16                 0.06
   Frisch elasticity = 0.5                    0.76                0.82                -0.20
   No rule-of-thumb households                0.68                0.73                -0.05

Notes: These estimates are based on the calibrated models described in Section 2. The multipliers are
  equal to the ratio of the integrals of the impulse responses of output and appropriations.




                                             Page 52 of 64
Table 3. Long-Run Multipliers from Simulated Models

         Model Version               Present Discounted Value                    Undiscounted Integral

                                   Neoclassical      New Keynesian           Neoclassical    New Keynesian

 Govt consumption                       0.44              0.89                   0.43              0.90

                                               Initial Steady State: Govt Investment/GDP = 3.5%
           No delays
 Govt investment,  = 0.05               1.3                1.8                    2.4               3.0
 Govt investment,  = 0.10               2.2                2.8                    4.3               5.0

 6-qrt time to spend & build
 Govt investment,  = 0.05               1.3                1.7                    2.4               2.9
 Govt investment,  = 0.10               2.1                2.5                    4.3               4.9

                                               Initial Steady-State: Govt Investment/GDP = 1.5%
           No delays
 Govt investment,  = 0.05               2.4                3.2                    4.9               5.4
 Govt investment,  = 0.10               4.4                5.4                    9.3               9.8

 6-qrt time to spend & build
 Govt investment,  = 0.05               2.3                2.9                    4.9               5.3
 Govt investment,  = 0.10               4.1                5.0                    9.3               9.7



Notes: These estimates are based on the calibrated models described in Section 2. The multipliers are
  equal to the ratio of the integrals of the impulse responses of output and appropriations. PDV is present
  discounted value, integral is undiscounted. The top panel shows multipliers from simulations for which
  the steady-state government investment to GDP ratio is 3.5%, which matches the data. The bottom
  panel shows multipliers from simulations for which the steady-state ratio is 1.5%.




                                               Page 53 of 64
Table 4. Summary of Some Neoclassical Models from the Literature

 Paper feature summary                        Experiment                      Govt investment
                                                                              multiplier
 Baxter-King (1993)                           Permanent increase in G
   Calibrated                                 Long-run multipliers
   Lump-sum taxation                              =0                          1.2
                                                  = 0.05                      2.6
                                                  = 0.40                      13.0
 Leeper, Walker, Yang (2010)                  AR(1) parameter 0.95
   Estimated                                  Short run, no delays            0.5
   Investment adj. costs, utiliz.             Short run, 3 year delays        0.1 - 0.3
   Distortionary tax response                 Long run, across delay times
   Calibrated  = 0.05 or 0.10                     = 0.05                      0.3 - 0.4
                                                   = 0.1                      0.9 - 1.1
 Ercolani-Valle e Azevedo (2014)              AR(1) parameter 0.94
   Estimated                                  Preferred estimate         =0
   Features similar to medium NK               4-quarter                      0.8
     but no nominal rigidities                 Long run                       0.4
   Distortionary tax, balanced budget         Unconstrained estim.  = 0.09
   Nonseparable utility in C and G              4-quarter                     0.8
                                                Long run                      3.6
 Gallen and Winston (2019)                    Multipliers calibrated to CEA
   Calibrated, transport infrastructure       Long run U.S.                   1.5
   Time-to-build                              Long run Japan                  0.9
   Short-run disruption from construction
   Better transport saves household time
    = 0.038




                                            Page 54 of 64
Table 5. Summary of Some New Keynesian Models from the Literature

 Paper feature summary                                                                    Govt investment
                                                Experiment                                multiplier
 Coenen et al. (2012)                           2-year stimulus, deficits
   Large scale policy models                    Instantaneous multipliers
   + 2 academic models                             No monetary accommodation              0.9
   U.S.                                            1 year monetary accommodation          1.1
                                                   2 year monetary accommodation          1.6
 Drautzburg-Uhlig (2015)                        ARRA, distortionary taxation later
    Estimated medium scale model                  Short-run multiplier                    0.2 - 0.5
    Distortionary taxes, respond to debt          Long-run multiplier                     0.3
    Calibrated      = 0.023
 Bouakez, Guillard, Roulleau-Pasdeloup (2017)   AR(1) parameter 0.8
    Calibrated                                  Impact multipliers
    No private capital (in baseline model)        Normal times, across delays             0.8 - 0.9
    Lump-sum taxes                                ZLB, no delays                          1.8
    Time to build,      = 0.08                    ZLB, 4-year time-to-build delays        4
 Sims-Wolff (2018)
    Estimated medium-scale model                AR(1) parameter 0.93
    Distortionary taxes, respond to debt         1 to 2-year multipliers                  0.7 - 0.8
    Nonseparable utility in C and G
    Calibrated      = 0.05
 Boehm (forthcoming)                            AR(1) parameter 0.86
   Calibrated model, 2-sectors (C, I)           Short-run multiplier (0 to 20 quarters)   0.1 - 0.2
   Imperfect labor mobility                     Long-run multiplier                       1.6
   Lump-sum taxes
     = 0.05




                                        Page 55 of 64
Table 6. Comparison of Actual to Model Optimum Government Capital and
         Investment


                                          Government Capital       Government Investment
                                            Percent of GDP             Percent of GDP
 BEA data, 2018
  Total government capital                         73                         3.3
  Excluding defense                                64                         2.6

 Neoclassical Model Social Optimum
    = 0.05                                          63                        2.4
    = 0.065                                         81                        3.2
    = 0.12                                         150                        5.9


Notes: The data for government capital is current-cost net stock of government fixed assets from BEA
  fixed asset table 7.1. The data for investment and GDP is from BEA NIPA table 1.1.5. G is the expo-
  nent on government capital in the production function. The model optimum is based on an annual
  depreciation rate of 3.9% and an annual discount factor of 0.96.




                                           Page 56 of 64
Figure 1. Effect of Increases in Government Consumption or Investment
          Baseline Neoclassical Model


                           Government Spending                                      Output




                                                           .25 .5
               1
       percent




                                                         percent
         .5  0




                                                               0
                       0       5         10      15                       0     5         10       15
                                   quarter                                          quarter


                           Private Consumption                                Private Investment
       -.3 -.2 -.1 0




                                                         -.6 -.3 0
          percent




                                                            percent

                       0       5         10      15                       0     5         10       15
                                   quarter                                          quarter


                               Labor Input                                          Wage
               .8




                                                         -.3-.2-.1 0 .1
       percent




                                                            percent
         .4  0




                       0       5         10      15                       0     5         10       15
                                   quarter                                          quarter


                            Real Interest Rate                                  Public Capital
         .04 .08




                                                                 10
       percent




                                                         percent
                                                            5
             0




                                                               0




                       0       5         10      15                       0     5         10       15
                                   quarter                                          quarter


Notes. Solid: government consumption shock; dashed: government investment shock,
G = 0.05; Government spending, output, consumption, private investment, and public capital
are expressed in deviations from steady state as a percent of output in steady state. Labor
input and wages are percent deviations from their own steady state values. Real interest rate is
annualized percentage point deviations from its own steady state.


                                                 Page 57 of 64
Figure 2. Effect of Increases in Government Consumption or Investment
          New Keynesian Model


                        Government Spending                                      Output




                                                          .65 1.3
               1
       percent




                                                        percent
         .50




                                                             0
                    0       5         10        15                     0     5         10       15
                                quarter                                          quarter


                        Private Consumption                                Private Investment




                                                                .2
               .3
       percent




                                                        percent
                                                           .1
         0 -.3




                                                             0
                    0       5         10        15                     0     5         10       15
                                quarter                                          quarter


                             Labor Input                                         Wage
                                                        -.2 -.1 0 .1
         .8 1.6
       percent




                                                           percent
           0




                    0       5         10        15                     0     5         10       15
                                quarter                                          quarter


                          Capital Utilization                                Public Capital
                                                                10
               .8
       percent




                                                        percent
         .4




                                                           5
           0




                                                             0




                    0       5         10        15                     0     5         10       15
                                quarter                                          quarter


Notes. Solid: government consumption shock; dashed: government investment shock,
G = 0.05; Government spending, output, consumption, private investment, and public capital
are expressed in deviations from steady state value as a percent of output in steady state.
Labor input and wages are percent deviations from their own steady state values. Real interest
rate is annualized percentage point deviations from its own steady state.


                                                Page 58 of 64
Figure 3. Federal Highway Administration Outlays from the ARRA
          Cumulative Percent Spent of Total Appropriation
        100
        80 60
      percent
     40 20
        0




                2009q2         2010q2            2011q2            2012q2          2013q2

                                      quarter of fiscal year end

Notes. These data are from Leduc and Wilson's (2017) replication files. I aggregated their
state-level data to the national level.




                                        Page 59 of 64
Figure 4. Effect of Increases in Government Investment
          New Keynesian Model, with Time To Spend and Time To Build


                        Government Spending                                    Output




                                                        0 .65 1.3
               1
       percent




                                                         percent
         .50




                    0       5         10        15                   0     5         10       15
                                quarter                                        quarter


                        Private Consumption                              Private Investment




                                                        0 .1 .2
               .3
       percent




                                                        percent
         0 -.3




                    0       5         10        15                   0     5         10       15
                                quarter                                        quarter


                             Labor Input                                       Wage
                                                                .1
       0 .8 1.6
       percent




                                                        percent
                                                           0-.1




                    0       5         10        15                   0     5         10       15
                                quarter                                        quarter


                          Capital Utilization                              Public Capital
                                                                10
          .4 .8
       percent




                                                        percent
                                                           5
           0




                                                            0




                    0       5         10        15                   0     5         10       15
                                quarter                                        quarter


Notes.dashed line: government investment shock, no delays; dashed line with circles:
government investment with implementation delays. Government spending, output,
consumption, private investment, and public capital are expressed in deviations from steady
state value as a percent of output in steady state. Labor input, utilization, and wages are
percent deviations from their own steady state values.


                                                Page 60 of 64
Figure 5. Present Discounted Value Integral Multipliers


                               Neoclassical Model

                     No Delays                      Time to Spend and Build




                                              .5
         .6




                                              .4
         .4




                                              .3
         .2




                                              .2
               0     5     10 15 20                  0    5     10 15      20
                         quarter                              quarter


                             New Keynesian Model

                     No Delays                      Time to Spend and Build
         1.4




                                              1.5
         1.2




                                              1
                                              .5
         1




                                              0
         .8




               0     5     10 15 20                  0    5     10 15      20
                         quarter                              quarter


Notes. Solid: government consumption shock; short dashed: government investment shock,
G = 0.05; long dashed: government investment, is G = 0.1. These estimates are based on
the baseline neoclassical and NK models.




                                     Page 61 of 64
Figure 6. Estimated Impulse Responses to Instrumented ARRA Highway
          Apportionments: No Controls for Log State Population.


                     ARRA_Obligations                            ARRA_Outlays




                                                   .8
      1




                                                   .6
                                                   .4
      .5




                                                   .2
      0




                                                   0
            2009     2010   2011   2012     2013        2009   2010   2011   2012   2013
                            year                                      year


                   Total_Highway_Spending                      Highway_Employment
      1.5




                                                   4
                                                   2
      1




                                                   0
      .5




                                                   -2
                                                   -4
      0




                                                   -6
      -.5




            2009     2010   2011   2012     2013        2009   2010   2011   2012   2013
                            year                                      year


Notes: The three spending graphs show the dollar impact per dollar of ARRA highway
apportionments in 2009. The employment graph shows the employment impact in highway,
road, and bridge construction employment for each $1 million of ARRA highway
apportionments in 2009. In both cases, the ARRA apportionments are instrumented by Leduc
and Wilson's (2017) two road factors. The confidence bands are 90 percent bands.




                                          Page 62 of 64
Figure 7. Estimated Impulse Responses to Instrumented ARRA Highway
          Apportionments: Controls for Log State Population.


                      ARRA_Obligations                             ARRA_Outlays
      1.5




                                                    .8
                                                    .6
      1




                                                    .4
      .5




                                                    .2
      0




                                                    0
                                                    -.2
      -.5




             2009     2010   2011   2012     2013         2009   2010   2011   2012   2013
                             year                                       year


                    Total_Highway_Spending                       Highway_Employment


                                                    10
      .5




                                                    5
      0




                                                    0
      -.5




                                                    -5
      -1




                                                    -10
      -1.5




             2009     2010   2011   2012     2013         2009   2010   2011   2012   2013
                             year                                       year


Notes: The three spending graphs show the dollar impact per dollar of ARRA highway
apportionments in 2009. The employment graph shows the employment impact in highway,
road, and bridge construction employment for each $1 million of ARRA highway
apportionments in 2009. In both cases, the ARRA apportionments are instrumented by Leduc
and Wilson's (2017) two road factors. The confidence bands are 90 percent bands.




                                           Page 63 of 64
Figure 8. Government Capital as a Percent of GDP in the U.S.


          100
          80
         percent
      40  2060




                   1920    1940          1960           1980        2000          2020
                                                year

                                total                             nondefense
                                transportation

Notes: Government capital is current-cost net stock from BEA fixed asset Table 7.1. GDP is
current-dollar GDP from the BEA.




                                        Page 64 of 64
