                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                WINDOW DRESSING IN THE PUBLIC SECTOR:
  A CASE STUDY OF CHINA'S COMPULSORY EDUCATION PROMOTION PROGRAM

                                        Hanming Fang
                                         Chang Liu
                                         Li-An Zhou

                                      Working Paper 27628
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27628


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2020




We thank seminar participants at Princeton University, Penn-UCSD Conference on Chinese
Political Economy, and Peking University for valuable comments and suggestions. All errors
remain ours. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Hanming Fang, Chang Liu, and Li-An Zhou. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Window Dressing in the Public Sector: A Case Study of China's Compulsory Education Promotion
Program
Hanming Fang, Chang Liu, and Li-An Zhou
NBER Working Paper No. 27628
July 2020
JEL No. D73,H11,H41,P26

                                          ABSTRACT

We examine window dressing phenomenon in the public sector by studying the strategic
responses of Chinese local officials to the compulsory education promotion program launched by
the central government in the 1990s. According to this program, the Chinese counties should
receive inspections on whether the compulsory educational targets were achieved on pre-
scheduled time by provincial governments; and failing to pass the inspection would have severe
negative career consequences for the county leaders. We find that county-level educational
expenditures saw a sustained increase before the inspection, but a sharp drop immediately after
the inspection. Local officials who were more likely to be inspected within their tenures window-
dressed more aggressively. As a result, middle school enrollment rates declined significantly after
the inspection, and rural girls bore the blunt of the decline in school enrollment.


Hanming Fang                                             Li-An Zhou
Department of Economics                                  Guanghua School of Management
Ronald O. Perelman Center                                Peking University
for Political Science and Economics                      Beijing 100871
133 South 36th Street                                    CHINA
Suite 150                                                zhoula@gsm.pku.edu.cn
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
hanming.fang@econ.upenn.edu

Chang Liu
Renmin University of China
National Academy of Development and Strategy
CHINA
liuchanggsm@163.com
1. Introduction


      Window dressing is a common strategic reaction to incentive schemes observed in various
types of organizations. In the corporate world, firm accountants use creative ways, e.g.,
postponing paying suppliers to create a higher period-end cash balance, to improve the
appearance of financial statements; bond managers usually manipulate their portfolio holdings
to impress investors at certain high-stake time nodes. Window dressing is also widespread in
the public sector of both developed and developing countries. Bureaucrats strategically take
actions to appease voters and/or upper-level government officials. For example, in UK there
were accusations that the small business support was "nothing but window-dressing";1 in India
the Union Interim Budget in 2019 was accused of "fiscal window dressing" to appease the
electorate according to the policy observers. 2 In stark contrast with the well-documented
evidence in corporate finance and accounting literature (e.g., Lakonishok et al., 1991; Agarwal
et al., 2014), the window dressing phenomenon in the public sector, which may involve more
sizable resource misallocations, has received scant attention in the economic literature. A lack
of systematic analyses in this regard is mainly caused by the empirical challenge of finding an
appropriate setting to identify the government's window dressing behavior.
      In this paper, we provide an empirical analysis of the window dressing behavior in the
public sector by studying the strategic responses of local governments to China's compulsory
education promotion program in the 1990s. In 1993, the Chinese central government launched
a national goal of essentially achieving the nine-year compulsory education and eliminating
illiteracy among young and middle-aged adults by 2000. To fulfill this goal, each county should
reach specific targets on a number of key educational performance indicators, namely, the
primary and middle school enrollment and dropout rates, by pre-specified, county-specific
deadlines. Subsequently, each county should receive a one-time inspection from the provincial
government before the pre-specified deadline set by the provincial government. As will be

  1
      Business Link: Small business support is `nothing but window dressing', says former Government advisor,
by Stuart Pearcey, May 15, 2019. https://www.runagood.com/press/small-business-support-is-nothing-but-
window-dressing-says-former-government-advisor.
   2
     The Hindu Business Line: An exercise in fiscal window-dressing, by RK Pattnaik, February 5, 2019.
https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/opinion/fiscal-prudence-goes-for-a-toss/article26186225.ece. A similar
media report about window dressing phenomenon in Thailand's public sector can be found in
https://www.bangkokpost.com/thailand/politics/1702432/govt-reform-push-window-dressing.
                                                        2
detailed later, fulfilling the compulsory education targets posed a mounting financial challenge
for most counties in China during the 1990s; even worse, local leaders who had authority over
the allocation of fiscal resources typically lacked incentives to invest in compulsory education
since their career advancement had been closely linked with local economic growth (Li and
Zhou, 2005; Xu, 2011; Yao and Zhang, 2015) rather than local educational outcomes. To
incentivize the enforcement of compulsory education targets, the central government imposed
strict rules on the promotion of county leaders: if they failed to accomplish the compulsory
education targets before the deadlines, they would lose any chance of promotion for a period
of time, or could even be sacked from their current positions. However, once a county had
successfully passed the inspection, there was no extra reward for over-fulfillment, and there
were no further inspections from the upper-level governments. Such an institutional setting
generated strong incentives for county leaders to window dress by mobilizing all possible
resources to meet the targets before the deadline, but then slacking off after passing the
inspection.
    Exploiting the precise information on the pre-specified timing of inspections for all
counties during the period of 1993-2001, we apply an event study analysis of the county-level
educational expenditures of different types, the rural educational surcharges, and the school
enrollment rates before and after inspections. We find that county-level educational
expenditures saw a sustained increase before the inspection; but the educational expenditures
and middle school enrollment rates decreased significantly immediately after inspections. Our
estimates show that once a county passed the inspection, its once-increasing total educational
expenditures before the inspection quickly decreased by nine percent, and the reduction
appeared to be especially salient for those discretionary educational expenditure categories that
are mostly funded by surcharges on local firms and peasants. Further analysis suggests that the
drop of educational expenditures was mainly driven by the operating expenses of compulsory
schools which were relatively flexible for adjustments, while the inelastic personnel
expenditures per pupil exhibited no signs of significant changes. The educational surcharge
rate on peasants dropped considerably as well after the inspection. These pieces of evidence
together suggest that county leaders tried very hard to mobilize financial resources, even

                                               3
leveraging the surcharges on peasants, to reach the compulsory education targets; however,
they slacked off immediately after passing the inspections. These results lend support to the
window-dressing hypothesis.
    We further explore the role of political incentives in driving the window dressing
phenomenon among local government leaders. First, we show that a county's pre-specified
inspection time was orthogonal to the inauguration of its party secretary, who has the final
authority within his/her jurisdiction over the allocation of public resources. This evidence
confirms the pre-determined nature of the inspection time, which was set by the provincial
superiors, and alleviates the concern about the endogeneity of county leaders' tenures. Second,
we find that when the inauguration year drew closer to the inspection year, ceteris paribus, the
increase in county educational expenditures becomes significantly higher. Our estimate
indicates that if the party secretary took office just one year earlier than the inspection year, the
educational expenditure would increase by about 4% compared to the benchmark level of the
control group of local leaders who took their office after the inspection. This pattern is
consistent with our window dressing hypothesis because when the time interval between the
inauguration and the inspection is shorter, the pressure to meet the compulsory education target
is likely to be more intense, therefore the response from the party secretary to the pre-scheduled
inspection is more aggressive in the hope of avoiding the severe consequences of political
punishment.
    We also provide evidence that local governments' window-dressing behaviors have severe
consequences: after the inspection, there was a significant one-percentage-point decline in the
middle school enrollment rates; moreover, the deterioration in school enrollment generated
distributional consequences since rural girls bore the blunt of the decline in middle school
enrollment rates.
    This paper is related to several strands of literature. The first strand of literature examines
the window-dressing behaviors in corporations (e.g., Lakonishok et al., 1991; Allen and
Saunders, 1992; Agarwal et al., 2014). Compared to such a large body of literature
documenting window dressing behaviors of firms or fund managers, the analysis of the public



                                                 4
sector is still in its infancy.3 To the best of our knowledge, we are among the first empirical
attempts to systematically study the window dressing phenomenon in the public sector.
      This paper is also closely related to a burgeoning literature on how incentive schemes in
the form of pre-specified targets or deadlines distort agents' efforts across time in hierarchical
organizations. In a seminal paper, Oyer (1998) explores the consequences of sales targets on
the timing of revenues as well as contractual prices. Courty and Marschke (1997, 2004) study
how local job-training centers strategically reported their performance outcomes to maximize
the rewards in the context of the Job Training Partnership Act of 1982 in the United States.
Building on these initial efforts, several scholars studied the welfare implications of resource
misallocation across various contexts. For example, Liebman and Mahoney (2017) unpack the
fact that the budget expiration at the end of a fiscal year may incentivize the US federal
government to rush to spend money on low-quality projects. In a similar vein, Cao et al. (2018)
study the consequences of Chinese banks' end-of-month increase of loans and find that the
incremental loans made to hit the loan targets are 26% more likely to eventually turn into non-
performing loans.
      Our study also contributes to the political economy literature on upward accountability in
authoritarian countries (Smith, 1991), and local accountability in developing countries
(Bardhan and Mookherjee, 2000, 2005, 2006; Alatas et al., 2019; Ferraz and Finan, 2011; Finan
et al., 2017). In authoritarian countries, such as China, local governments allocate resources
guided by the administrative orders from their higher authorities. The distinct institutional
background of China's compulsory education promotion program provides a valuable setting
to examine the strategic reactions of China's local governments to the strict orders from the
upper-level government and their consequences.
      The evidence we document in this study suggests that using top-down inspections together
with political discipline in bureaucracies can backfire. In this regard, our study complements
the literature highlighting the distortionary consequences of using high-powered incentives in
the public sector (Banerjee et al., 2008; Fisman and Wang, 2017; Acemoglu et al., forthcoming).
Our study also sheds light on how Chinese county leaders' political incentives affect the

  3
    A rather small theoretical literature, which spans several social science disciplines, has conducted preliminary
analyses of the window dressing phenomenon in the public sector (e.g., Bischoff and Blaeschke, 2016).
                                                          5
provision of local public goods in education and thus relates to similar studies in other contexts
of China, such as environment protection (Jia, 2017; He et al., 2020; Greenstone et al., 2020)
and workplace safety (Fisman and Wang, 2015, 2017; Shi and Xi, 2018).4
      Finally, our paper relates to the growing literature on identifying short-termism in political
organizations. The theoretical literature on organizations has long recognized the existence of
short-termism of agents with career concerns facing the multitasking problem (Holmstrom and
Milgrom, 1991; Garicano and Rayo, 2016). Xiong (2018) incorporates Chinese local officials'
career concerns into a macro growth model and rationalizes how short-termism behavior (e.g.,
over-reporting of GDP and excessive leverage) arises. The insights provided by our study
highlight that top-down inspection aided by high-powered career incentives can introduce
short-termism behavior in hierarchical bureaucratic systems.
      The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the background of
China's compulsory education promotion and inspection policy. In Section 3, we describe our
data and lay out the empirical framework. In Section 4, we document local governments'
window dressing behavior on educational inputs. In Section 5, we examine the effects of the
local leaders' political career incentives. In Section 6, we look at the consequences of the policy
on school enrollment rates. In Section 7, we conclude.


2. China's Compulsory Education Promotion Program


2.1 The Enactment of Compulsory Education and its Enforcement

      The initial education level of the Chinese population was low. In 1982, only about one-
third of Chinese adults had a middle school or above literacy.5 To improve the educational
attainment of the population, China enacted its Compulsory Schooling Law in 1986. According
to this law, all Chinese citizens should fulfill nine-year compulsory education. However,
despite the backing of the national legislature, the mandatory compulsory schooling policy only
achieved limited progress in subsequent years. In 1990, for instance, the overall enrollment

  4
     A large strand of empirical literature emphasizes the critical role of China's tournament-style political
meritocracy (Li and Zhou, 2005; Jia et al., 2015; Yao and Zhang, 2015) as well as its distortionary effects on local
officials' behavior (e.g., Chen et al., 2017; Jia, 2017; Wang et al., 2019). See Xu (2011) for an extensive literature
review.
   5
     Data source: China's 1982 population census.
                                                           6
rates for primary school and middle school were 97.8% and less than 70%, respectively. Both
failed to live up to the requirements of the compulsory schooling mandate, and the gap was
especially large for middle school enrollment rates. There are at least two reasons for the slow
progress. First, counties bore an overwhelming share of the financial responsibility for
fulfilling the compulsory schooling mandates. In the later 1980s and early 1990s, a large
number of counties faced severe financial constraints due to their underdeveloped local
economies, especially for counties in China's interior regions. Second, local officials who held
the authority to allocate fiscal funds cared more about local economic development than
education since their promotion was closely linked to local economic performance, but not to
improvement in educational outcomes (Li and Zhou, 2005; Xu, 2011). Therefore, local officials
with limited tenure generally lacked incentives to allocate already limited financial resources
to compulsory education, which would bear fruit in the long run for the local economy but
contribute little to the local officials' promotion.6
      The Chinese central government realized the problem of the lack of local political
incentives and made an important move. In 1992, Jiang Zemin, the then General Secretary of
the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), proclaimed solemnly in the 14th National Congress of
the CCP that China would reach the goals of making nine-year compulsory education generally
available and eliminating illiteracy among young and middle-aged adults by 2000. 7 This
announcement sent two important messages to China's local officials: first, the
accomplishment of the compulsory schooling now turned into be a necessity for local
governments since the top leader of the CCP already made the commitment to both domestic
and international communities; second, the implementation of the compulsory education would
now have a binding timeline. Right after Jiang's speech, the CCP Central Committee and the
State Council jointly released a guideline titled Chinese Educational Reform and Development
Compendium in 1993, which was shortly followed by the detailed action plans drafted by the
Ministry of Education. The national goals were decomposed into specific targets for each
province, which were further decomposed into the ones for each county, together with a


  6
     According to the dataset we collected for county party secretaries in office in 1993-2000, their average
tenure was 3.54 years.
   7
     At the national level, "generally available" was defined as covering over 85% of the whole population.
                                                         7
detailed timeline for enforcement and inspection. The Ministry of Education also established a
clear-cut package of specific performance targets for the inspection. The key performance
indicators include four aspects:
   1. The enrollment rate for children of primary-school-age should be 100%. The
       enrollment rate for children of middle-school age should be above 95%;
   2. The dropout rate of primary school should be around 1%; the dropout rate of middle
       school should be below 2% in urban areas and below 3% in rural areas;
   3. The growth rate of fiscal education appropriations should exceed the growth rate of
       fiscal revenue. Personnel and operating education expenditures per-pupil should
       increase year by year and reach the minimum standard set by the provincial government;
   4. The educational facilities and teachers' quality should achieve the minimum standard
       set by the provincial government.
    Among the above requirements, the first two regarding school enrollment and dropout rates
were most crucial for inspection and evaluation. A county fulfilling these requirements would
be awarded the status of Certified Compulsory Education County (CCEC). To avoid potential
fraud and data manipulation by county governments, the central government mandated a
procedure of inspection and appraisal to monitor and check the target fulfillment. Notably, the
procedure took the following steps. First, the county government should make sure that the
specified targets for promoting compulsory education be satisfied and then "applied for"
superiors' inspection before the deadline pre-specified by the provincial government. Next, the
provincial government would send inspectors on-site to verify whether the county was
qualified for being awarded a certificate of CCEC. Upon verification, the provincial
government would report the results of inspection and verification to the Ministry of Education
for reexamination. When the Ministry of Education certified the report, this applicant county
would be awarded the CCEC title, and its certified status would be released to the public.
    The large regional disparity in economic conditions across China necessitated that the
central government allowed different regions to achieve the compulsory education targets at
different time. In 1993, the Ministry of Education drafted a multi-stage action plan in which
the timeline of fulfillment reflected the variations in regional development levels. The general

                                               8
principle was that cities and counties with better economic and educational endowments should
achieve their targets and receive inspections earlier. About 200 remote and poor counties were
explicitly granted a delay in their inspections and certifications beyond 2001. Each province
followed the guidance of the Ministry of Education to design a sequence of inspection and
certification in its jurisdiction in accordance with the characteristics of all applicable counties.
Once this sequence was finalized, every county could not renegotiate the deadline with its
provincial superior and had to "apply for" inspection before it.
      From 1993 to 1994, a total of 554 counties (or city districts) across 27 provinces received
inspections for their fulfillment of compulsory education targets. More and more counties
joined in as time went on. The list of the CCECs was announced on an annual basis. Figure 1
displays the fraction of approved CCECs by year. At the end of 2000, China's central
government claimed great success in the compulsory education promotion program.8 During
the entire process, every county applying for inspection received the CCEC title with no
exception. This is not hard to understand: only when it felt very sure about the achievement of
compulsory education targets would a county apply for inspection. Otherwise, a failed
evaluation amounted to a political "suicide" for county leaders.
                                            [Figure 1 About Here]
      Probably due to the change of top leadership from Jiang Zemin to Hu Jintao in 2002, and
a resulting shift of national priorities, the compulsory education promotion program was no
longer treated as a top priority from 2002 on. Therefore, our analysis focuses on the period
1993-2001. Another reason for imposing this restriction is that the data on county-level
educational expenditures and their subcategories are not available after 2001. Figure 2
illustrates the spatial distribution of counties passing the inspection and receiving the CCECs
status year by year from 1993 to 2001.
                                            [Figure 2 About Here]

2.2 The Financial Challenges of Compulsory Education for County Governments

      It is worth mentioning that the accomplishment of the nine-year compulsory schooling

  8
     Since the remaining non-CCECs were all located in the economically underdeveloped regions, the progress
became somewhat slower than before. It took China another eleven years to announce the final and complete
fulfillment of compulsory education goals in 2011.
                                                      9
posed severe financial challenges for a majority of counties in the 1990s and early 2000s,
especially in the interior regions of China. After the new initiative was launched in 1992, the
financial burden for compulsory schooling was born by the county governments. One particular
difficulty laid in how to raise the middle-school enrollment from around 78% in 1993 to 95%.
In the mid-1990s, a 17% increase of middle-school enrollment for a typical county implied that
it should accommodate nearly 2,800 more students into junior middle schools for each birth
cohort, or 8,400 more students for the entire junior middle schools with a 3-year curriculum.
Based on the data on the educational expenditure per-pupil (670 RMB) in the mid-1990s, such
an increase in enrollment would require that the county increase its education expenditures by
about 5.628 million RMB (2,800*670*3) every year, which accounted for about 4.7% of the
annual budgetary expenditure of an average county. This budgetary increase was not an easy
job for a typical county government; also note that above back-of-the-envelope calculations
are very conservative since we do not account for the additional expenditures on the
construction of school buildings needed to accommodate the large increases in enrollment.
    The total educational expenditures of a county consisted of two parts: fiscal educational
expenditures and non-fiscal expenditures. The fiscal educational expenditures were usually
financed by taxation and intergovernmental transfer payments from higher-level governments.
In China, the types of taxes, as well as their bases and rates, are all set up by the central
government. Since the tax-sharing reform in 1993, the central government had commanded 50-
60 percent of tax revenues. For instance, in our sample period of 1993-2001, seventy-five
percent of value-added tax, the largest source of tax revenues in China, went to the central
government, and local governments retained only twenty-five percent. Twenty-five percent of
value-added taxes would be shared further by provincial, prefectural, and county governments
(Lou and Wang, 2007). Since county governments took primary responsibility for compulsory
education, the earmarked transfer payments from higher-level governments were minimal.
Unless the counties enjoyed a vibrant and developed local economy, the fiscal expenditures on
education faced fairly tight constraints for most counties.
    The second part, the non-fiscal expenditures on education, came from funds collected from
fees and surcharges for educational purposes paid by local firms and peasants. To seek

                                               10
additional funding sources for educational expenditures, local governments introduced semi-
mandatory fees and surcharges in the 1990s, some of which received no authorization from the
central government. Local firms and peasants were urged to pay surcharges to raise local
educational funds. The surcharge rate was mostly determined in an ad hoc fashion by county
governments. 9 Due to the discretionary nature and lack of regulation from higher-level
governments, non-fiscal funds had become an important source of financing for the county
governments whenever they faced increasing fiscal pressures, but excessive extraction from
local firms and peasants would also result in complaints that could jeopardize the local leaders'
careers.

2.3 Political Discipline Imposed on Local Leaders and Their Strategic Reactions

      Local officials needed to compete against their political peers for better economic growth,
as a result they typically had poor incentives for improving education. In the absence of
additional pressure, local officials would squeeze educational expenditure and shift resources
to projects that could quickly boost economic growth to improve their chances of promotion.
      The lack of political incentives for local leaders in promoting compulsory education was
one of the key obstacles for the limited progress in fulfilling compulsory education during the
late 1980s and early 1990s. In 1993, the central government took new measures to remedy the
lack of political incentives. The most notable one was the explicit stipulation that county
leaders should take primary responsibility for policy enforcement and evaluation to fulfill the
compulsory education targets, and failing to reach the target on the pre-specified date would
disqualify the county leaders (both party secretary and mayor) from any chance of promotion
for a period of time regardless of how well they perform in other tasks. This is referred to as
"one-item-veto" (yi piao fou jue in Chinese), and it served as an important supplement to the
promotion tournament that had so far emphasized local economic growth.10 Under this scheme,
over-fulfilling the specified tasks would not help local leaders' career advancement, but an


  9
      Apart from paying fees and surcharges, peasants sometimes had to donate free labor for constructing school
facilities in rural areas, which did not show up in the non-fiscal expenditures.
   10
      Similar incentives were also applied to achieve goals in other social responsibilities of local governments,
such as birth control, social stability, and recently, environmental protection. Workplace safety was recently
added to the list of "one-item-veto" areas for local government officials. See Fisman and Wang (2016) for a
study of "death ceilings" in China's working place safety management.
                                                           11
under-fulfillment would cause severe career consequences.
       The imposition of the "one-item-veto" system placed local officials in a tough tradeoff
between the daunting task of fulfilling the compulsory education and the necessity of meeting
the deadline set up by the provincial superiors. A rational strategy for county leaders to react to
this tradeoff is to temporarily mobilize and reallocate resources across categories and over time
to reach the minimum targets. By resource mobilization and reallocation across categories, we
mean that county governments would manage to increase educational expenditures, especially
through leveraging discretionary non-fiscal resources (such as increased levies on fees and
surcharges) or even shifting expenditures from non-education purposes to educational purposes.
By resource reallocation over time, we mean that once the compulsory education targets are
achieved before the deadline, the resources temporarily reallocated to education would revert
to their original purposes, and the unpopular educational surcharges on local firms and peasants
would also be lifted. All these reallocations would result in a sharp decrease in education
expenditure immediately after the completion of the inspection, and the educational
performances (such as school enrollment) would also deteriorate immediately and even fall
below the original targets. We define these activities of resource mobilization/reallocation
across categories and over time as the window-dressing behaviors of local leaders in response
to their superiors' inspection. There is abundant anecdotal evidence that county leaders adopted
the "window-dressing" strategy to deal with the inspection and evaluation of compulsory
education.11 But so far, there has been no systematic investigation of the window-dressing
behaviors in China's compulsory education promotion program, which is the focus of our
subsequent analyses.


3. Empirical Methodology


3.1 Data

       We construct a comprehensive dataset for 2,060 Chinese counties, covering the main
period of the program from 1993 to 2001.12 In our analyses, we exclude all counties in Tibet

  11
     For example, International Herald Tribune: A Survey on the Fraud of Compulsory School Dropout Rate,
2005-1-25, Website: http://news.sina.com.cn/e/2005-01-25/12195662198.shtml.
  12
     Our empirical analysis focuses on the period 1993-2001 because detailed county-level educational
                                                      12
and four provincial-level municipalities (Beijing, Tianjin, Shanghai, and Chongqing) due to
their special status in China, as well as all city districts due to data availability constraints.13
Next, we describe our main variables and data sources in detail.
     County-level information. We collect the inspection year for each county from various
years of China's Education Yearbook to construct our main regressor. To aid our analyses, we
consider several crucial time-invariant county attributes. First, we calculate a county's average
elevation and average slope using the Digital Elevation Model (DEM). The county-level
geographic information used in this paper comes from China's National Geographic
Information System (CNGIS). Second, we assess the proportion of citizens with primary school
or above literacy, the proportion of citizens with middle school or above literacy, and the
illiteracy rate from China's 1990 population census. Third, we collect information on whether
a county was defined as a minority county or a National Poor County from China's National
Bureau of Statistics (NBS).
     Educational inputs. We collect a rich set of educational input measurements from various
years of China's Education Expenditure Yearbook, including total education expenditure, fiscal
education expenditure, non-fiscal education expenditure, rural educational surcharge rate
(measured by the proportion of rural educational surcharges in per capita rural income), and
per-pupil school expenditures, separately for primary and middle schools. It is noteworthy that
all of the educational input outcomes used in this paper exclude infrastructure construction
expenditures, which are funded through separate appropriations according to China's fiscal
system. The per-pupil school expenditures can be further divided into two categories: per-pupil
personnel expenditures and operating expenses, separately for primary and middle schools. The
largest component of the personnel expenditures is the salaries of teachers and staff, which are
inelastic by nature, while operating expenses are more discretionary.
     School enrollments. We construct several educational outcomes using China's population
mini-census in 2005.14 These outcomes include primary and middle school enrollment rates.

expenditure data are only available within this time range.
   13
      City districts generally have better economic conditions than counties to fulfill the compulsory education
targets, so our focus on counties home to over 98.6% of China's population in 1993 but facing heavier fiscal
pressure from compulsory education can be rationalized.
   14
      Our analysis data set is a 20% random sample of the original 2005 population mini-census (covering 0.2%
of China's total population), which is provided by China's National Bureau of Statistics. Note that an advantage
                                                        13
Since the population census contains no information about the starting and ending years of
schooling for each respondent, we define the middle school enrollment rate as the proportion
of 13-15 years old children for each year in a given county who had ever enrolled in middle
school. Similarly, the primary school enrollment rate is constructed using 7 to 12-year-old
children. Of course, a relatively small proportion of school-age children enrolled in but finally
dropped out of school. The enrollment rate measurements we constructed here, therefore,
represent conservative measures of compulsory school attendance.
     Budgetary and economic outcomes. To investigate the effects of the inspection on local
budgetary arrangements and economic performance, we collect a full battery of local budgetary
outcomes, including budgetary revenue, budgetary expenditure, administrative expenditure,
and agricultural expenditure, from various years of County Fiscal Statistical Yearbook, and
GDP from several provincial-, prefectural- and county-level statistical yearbooks and
chronicles.
     County party secretaries' tenure. To link local leaders' political incentives to county
governments' window dressing behavior on educational inputs, we manually collect county-
level party secretaries' tenure information from the Organizational History of the Chinese
Communist Party of several provinces and hundreds of provincial-, prefectural-, and county-
level chronicles.15 Note that the turnovers of county party secretaries could occur at any time
of a year. We assign a year to a given county party secretary if his or her tenure covered over
six months in the year.16
     All of the county-level data were adjusted to China's county-level administrative
boundaries in 2005 to accord with the 2005 population mini-census data. All time-varying
outcomes are adjusted to 1995 constant price using province-level CPI.17 Table 1 presents the
descriptive statistics for the main variables used in this paper, where Panels A and B are
respectively for time-varying outcomes and time-invariant county attributes.
                                               [Table 1 About Here]

of the population census is that it is immune to potential data manipulation by local governments.
   15
      Ideally, we can have access to detailed resume information of county party secretaries to delve deeper into
individual-level heterogeneity. However, such data is not readily available.
   16
      Our findings are robust to alternative ways to assign a county leader to the specific turnover year. The
results are available from the authors upon request.
   17
      The province-level CPI data comes from various years of China's Statistical Yearbook.
                                                         14
3.2 Empirical Strategy

       We implement a staggered difference-in-differences (DID) strategy in an event study
specification as follows:

  ",$,% =  + 3                                           
             +453 + ",%,+ × " + " + $,% + " ×  + (" × % )  + ",$,% ,                               (1)

where the subscripts c, p, and t represent county, province, and year, respectively. yc,p,t is the
outcome variable of our interest in county c in province p in year t. c denotes county fixed
effects, and p,t denotes the province-by-year fixed effects so that we focus on intra-provincial
comparison. Inspectc,t,k is a set of dummy variables indicating the different timings relative to
the pre-specified inspection year of county c; for example, Inspectc,t,k=-4 = 1 if year t is 4 years
before the pre-specified inspection year for county c; Inspectc,t,k=1 =1 if year t is 1 year after
county c's inspection year; Inspectc,t,0 =1 if year t is the exact year that county c received the
inspection, and it is omitted as the reference year, thus the parameters of interest k we estimate
can be interpreted as the effects relative to the inspection year. Also, Inspectc,t,k=-5 = 1
(respectively, Inspectc,t,k=5 = 1) if yeart t is 5 or more years before (respectively, after) the pre-
specified inspection year for county c. Treatc is a dummy that takes value 1 if county c received
the inspection before the year 2001 and 0 otherwise. Finally, Xc is a list of county characteristics
we detail below.
       As is standard in difference-in-differences estimations, interpreting our estimated
coefficient as a causal effect relies on the parallel pre-trend assumption to be meet between
treatment and control counties. However, as we have described, the inspection sequence is not
random, which puts us at risk of violating this assumption. To understand the determinants of
the scheduled inspection sequence, we estimate an ordered Probit model using a full battery of
pre-determined county characteristics (denoted Xc). The results are presented in Appendix
Table A1. Generally, counties with poor economic endowments (counties with higher average
elevation and slope, National Poor Counties, or minority counties) became CCECs later.18 We
also find that the inspection year tends to be later for counties with a smaller proportion of
residents with middle school literacy in 1990. These findings are consistent with the fact



  18
       In 1993, 592 counties were officially approved as National Poor Counties (NPCs) in China.
                                                        15
described in Section 2 that the poor counties with difficulties in fulfilling the targets were
inspected later.
    Motivated by these findings, we control for the interactions of a full set of year dummies
with these pre-determined time-invariant county attributes (Xc×t) to capture the differences in
the outcomes yc,p,t that may arise from the differences in these county attributes. As previously
explained, our sample only covers the period of 1993-2001. To further eliminate concerns on
non-parallel trends of outcomes arising from counties not receiving treatment within our
sample coverage, we control for the linear time trends for the treatment group counties (i.e.,
counties passing the inspection before 2001), which is denoted by Treatc×t. Standard errors
throughout all panel regressions in this paper are clustered at the county level to address
potential serial correlation and heteroscedasticity of the error terms.
    Apart from the dynamic patterns depicted in the event study specification, we are also
concerned about the average treatment effects of being approved as a CCEC, which can be
identified as  in the following DID specification in Equation (2):
      ",$,% =  + ",$,% × " + " + $,% + " ×  + (" × % )  + ",$,% ,                          (2)
where CCECc,p,t equals one if county c in province p received CCEC certification before year
t. Other variables are defined in the same way as those in Equation (1).


4. The Effects of Inspections on Educational Inputs


    In this section we examine our main hypothesis that the CCEC inspection will incentivize
county governments to increase educational inputs before the inspection, but decrease
education inputs significantly in the post-inspection period.

4.1 Effects on Educational Inputs

    We start by examining the impacts of the program on educational inputs. Figure 3 presents
the event study results with the specification in Equation (1). As shown in Panel A, total
educational expenditure gradually increased in pre-inspection years and reached its peak in the
inspection year or the year preceding the scheduled inspection. However, immediately after
passing the inspection, the total educational expenditure experienced a significant decrease of
about 8%. This sizable drop in educational expenditures lasted even five years after the
                                                16
inspection. This pattern documents clear evidence of window-dressing behavior in fulfilling
the compulsory education targets: to meet the target, county governments boosted educational
expenditures to increase the school enrollments, but once the inspection was finished and the
CCEC status was awarded, the education-promotion efforts slacked off immediately and
significant cuts in education expenditures occurred in the subsequent years.
                                       [Figure 3 About Here]
    Panels B and C of Figure 3 show the event study estimates of the fiscal and non-fiscal
education expenditures before and after the inspection. Both fiscal and non-fiscal expenditures
display a similar trend-break decrease after passing the inspection, but there is an interesting
difference in the pre-trend before the inspection. The fiscal educational expenditures had a
virtually flat pre-trend, while non-fiscal educational expenditures experienced a more salient
increase before the inspection. The post-inspection decrease of fiscal educational expenditures
is approximately 4-5% annually in the first three years, and that for the non-fiscal educational
expenditures experienced a much more striking decrease of about 17% annually, which is
consistent with our discussion in Section 2. When local leaders were confronted with the
challenge of meeting the educational targets, they had limited discretion to increase fiscal
expenditures. After the 1994 tax-sharing reform, the county governments retained a relatively
small fraction of tax revenues (Wong, 2000) and the fiscal educational expenditures were
mainly financed by intergovernmental transfer payments from the upper-level governments.
As a result, local governments had to turn to non-fiscal funding sources to meet with the
challenges of financing compulsory education.
    Our interpretation of Panels B and C of Figure 3 can be further supported by the evidence
uncovered in Panel D. As described in Section 2, local governments had discretionary power
in determining the rural educational surcharge rate, which became the lever through which the
county leaders shifted the financial burden from fiscal to non-fiscal categories to achieve the
compulsory educational targets; once passing the inspection, however, they significantly
lowered the rural educational surcharge rate for at least five years. In this sense, Panel D
provides evidence on the withdrawal of surcharges financing compulsory education, which
underlies the slack-off of non-fiscal education expenditures after the inspection, as shown in

                                              17
Panel C.
                                              [Table 2 About Here]
       To give a sense of the average treatment effect of inspection on educational inputs, Table
2 presents the DID results using the specification of Equation (2). In Column 1, we show that
the total educational expenditures saw a 9.1% reduction following the CCEC certification.
Columns 2-3 investigate, respectively, the impacts on the fiscal and non-fiscal components of
total educational expenditure. The point estimates are respectively 4.2% for fiscal educational
expenditure in Column 2 and 16.9% for non-fiscal educational expenditures in Column 3,
which are consistent with the dynamic effects illustrated in Figure 3. Column 4 suggests that
passing the CCEC inspection is associated with a 0.065 percentage point reduction in the rural
educational surcharge rate (the mean rural educational surcharge rate is 0.73 percentage point).
       So far, the different pieces of evidence presented in Figure 3 and Table 2 paint a consistent
picture that there were some efforts for the county governments to increase education
expenditures before the inspection, but these efforts were reversed significantly after the
inspection. We consider the salient drop of educational inputs immediately after the inspection
as the primary evidence of the window-dressing behavior. Our subsequent analysis will
document more evidence to lend support to the window dressing hypothesis.

4.2 Robustness checks

       We conduct several robustness checks to address potential concerns about our DID results.
The results are presented in Table 3. In Panel A, we exclude all counties not required to receive
inspection before 2001 (i.e., counties marked in a darker color in Appendix Figure A1) and re-
runs our baseline DID specification of Equation (2). 19 The findings are qualitatively and
quantitatively similar to our baseline results, suggesting that our results are not driven by the
differences between the control and treatment counties. In Panel B, we replace the province-
year fixed effects by more detailed prefecture-by-year fixed effects, in which all prefecture-
year-invariant confounding factors are eliminated. The estimates are robust. In Panel C, we
allow each county to have its own linear and quadratic time trends to address concerns on non-


  19
    When excluding counties that were not required to receive inspection before 2001 (i.e., Treatc = 0),
Equation (2) is reduced to a staggered simple difference estimation.
                                                       18
parallel trends. Again the results remain highly robust. Finally, to address the concern that our
findings might be driven by local political cycles, in Panel D we further control for county
party secretary fixed effects. Both the economic magnitude and the statistical significance of
each estimated coefficients change only slightly.
                                       [Table 3 About Here]

4.3 Effects on regional development and local budgetary arrangements

    This part examines the impact of the compulsory educational target policy on regional
development and local budgetary arrangements. The results are presented in Table 4. Columns
1-2 show that the program had no impacts on county GDP and budgetary revenue, thus the
abrupt reduction in educational expenditures after the inspection was not caused by negative
local economic shocks. Column 3 also reveals no significant impact on the county's overall
budgetary expenditures, which rules out a competing hypothesis that the results we reported in
Table 2 were driven by reductions in intergovernmental transfers. In Column 4, we examine
the program's impact on administrative expenditures and agricultural expenditures and find
that the CCEC certification had an insignificant effect on administrative expenditures. This
result serves as a placebo test as the CCEC inspection had nothing to do with other
governmental functions other than compulsory education promotion. Column 5 shows that the
budgetary agricultural expenditures increased by about 2.3% in post-inspection years, which is
suggestive of a reallocation of fiscal resources from the educational sector to the agricultural
production sector after the window dressing behavior to pass the inspection.
                                       [Table 4 About Here]

4.4 Mechanism

    One may argue that a sharp drop in educational expenditures after the inspection could be
a natural result of educational investment dynamics, and has nothing to do with window-
dressing incentives. For example, to achieve the educational target, local governments might
need to construct school facilities to accommodate more students. When all the school facilities
were built up and the school enrollment target was fulfilled, we would naturally see a drop in
educational investment. As mentioned in Section 3.1, we excluded school facility construction

                                               19
expenditures in the measure of educational inputs analyzed in this paper, and the school facility
constructions were funded through special-purpose appropriations in the Chinese fiscal system.
In other words, the education expenditures used in our analysis consist of primary expenditures
on the wage bills of teachers and staff (personnel expenditures), and school management and
operations (operating expenses). These expenditures should vary proportionally with the size
of school enrollment over the county. If the county government tried its utmost to maintain the
targeted level of student enrollment after the inspection, we should not see a sharp decline
immediately after the inspection.
    To further address this issue, we explore the effect of the CCEC inspection on per-pupil
total educational expenditures, and categorical expenditure for both primary and middle school
outcomes in Table 5. Consistent with our key findings on overall educational expenditure in
Table 2, Columns 1 and 4 in Table 5 suggest that passing the CCEC inspection caused per-pupil
expenditures on primary and middle schools to drop by 1.8% and 6.3%, respectively. As
alluded to in Section 2, achieving the target for compulsory middle school enrollment was
much harder than achieving the primary school enrollment, which was already over 97% in the
early 1990s. Thus, we observe a much larger decrease in per-pupil expenditures of middle
schools than that of primary schools.
                                        [Table 5 About Here]
    In what follows, we will examine the inspection's heterogeneous effect on personnel
expenditures and operating expenses of both primary and middle schools. The personnel
expenditures constitute a much larger share of educational expenditures, about 91.5% on
average for primary schools and 88.5% on average for middle schools during our sample period,
and they are mostly downward rigid. In contrast, operating expenses are subject to considerable
adjustment. In China, operating expenses on education include (i) expenditures on school
management, teacher training, experiments and practice, (ii) recreational and sports activities,
(iii) electricity, heat, and water supply, (iv) equipment and books acquisition, and (v) repairs
and maintenance for facilities.
    The different elasticities of personnel and operating expenditures in response to fiscal
pressures imposed by the inspection can shed some light on the mechanism of window dressing.

                                               20
The estimates in Columns 3 and 6 of Table 5 show that, after the inspection, the per-pupil
operating expenses shrunk by approximately 21% for primary schools and 39% for middle
schools on average. However, per-pupil personnel expenditures, both for primary and middle
schools, exhibited no significant changes after the inspection, as shown by the point estimates
in Columns 2 and 5, which are indistinguishable from zero. The evidence documented above
suggests that the county governments mainly reduced the educational expenses by cutting
down non-rigid operating expenses when there was no longer a need for window dressing after
passing the inspection. Since operating expenses are recurrent expenses, this finding also helps
to alleviate the concern that the main results in Table 2 were a result of a natural contraction of
one-off expenditures.


5. Evidence on the Effects of Political Incentives


    The underlying driving force for the window dressing behavior documented above is the
political incentive of county leaders in response to the superiors' inspection. As discussed in
Section 2.1, the Chinese central government explicitly announced that county party secretaries
should take primary responsibility for passing the CCEC inspection according to the pre-
specified timeline. In reality, county party secretaries often turn over every few years. Even
though a full term lasts five years, according to our calculation, the average tenure of China's
county party secretaries in office in 1993-2000 was only about 3.5 years. We first show that the
pre-specified inspection time for a county was independent of the tenure of the specific county
party secretary; thus, everything else equal, a county party secretary who took office close to
the pre-specified CCEC inspection time would have a higher incentive to maintain a high level
of educational inputs than a counterpart who was to leave the county leadership position soon
(for having served in the position for longer than the normal tenure of 3.5 years). The former
should face a much larger probability of receiving the inspection during his (or her) own term
than the latter who would expect to be leaving before the inspection.
    Before exploring the different responses to the inspection by county party secretaries with
different inauguration time, let us first check whether the timing of county party secretary
turnovers is indeed uncorrelated with the timing of inspections. Using our manually collected

                                                21
tenure information of county party secretaries, we run a regression as specified in Equation (1)
but replace the dependent variable with a dummy indicating whether there is a turnover of
county party secretary in a given year. Figure A2 in the appendix presents the results, which
show that the timing of a county receiving inspection is orthogonal to the turnover of county
party secretary since all of the estimated coefficients of the period dummies are statistically
indistinguishable from zero.
       This exercise also helps to address another potential concern that the fluctuations of
educational inputs we observed in Table 2 and Figure 3 may coincide with local political cycles.
There has been an intensive literature emphasizing the critical role of Chinese local government
officials in managing local economic development and allocating local resources (Li and Zhou,
2005; Xu, 2011; Xiong, 2018). Guo (2009) provides evidence on the effects of local political
cycles in China, namely the turnover of county party secretaries, on county fiscal expenditures.
Since Figure A2 shows that the timing of the political turnover of county party secretaries is
uncorrelated with the timing of inspections, we can reasonably reject the alternative
interpretation that the significant reduction of education expenditures after the inspection was
driven by local political cycles.
       In what follows, we investigate how the effects of the CCEC inspection are correlated with
the mismatch of the tenures of county party secretaries with the pre-specified inspection time
which we use to proxy for their window-dressing incentives. The fact that the inauguration year
of a county party secretary's tenure is independent of the compulsory education policy offers
us valuable quasi-exogenous variations to unveil the political incentive of local leaders.
Motivated by this hypothesis, we implement the following event study regression equation:
",$,% =  + I                                             
           +453 + H,",%,+ × " + " + $,% + " ×  + (" × % )  + ",$,%                                       (3)
where Gapi,c,t,k is a dummy denoting that the observation in year t of county c belongs to party
secretary i who took office k years from the pre-specified inspection year.20 For example,
Gapi,c,t,k1 = 1 if year t of county c was under the rule of party secretary i who took office one
or more years after the pre-specified inspection year for county c, which is omitted as the
reference group. Other variables are defined similarly to those for Equation (1). This strategy

  20
     Figure A3 plots the histogram of the distance between county party secretaries' inauguration year and the
inspection year in our regression sample.
                                                       22
compares the average outcomes of a county under the leadership of the party secretaries taking
office in a time very close to the inspection year with those of a county whose party secretary
took office after the pre-specified inspection.
                                     [Figure 4 About Here]
    Figure 4 plots the event study results on the effect of the inauguration time on the same set
of educational inputs as in Table 2. Panel A shows that as the inauguration year is closer to the
inspection year, other things being equal, the increase in county educational expenditures
becomes significantly larger. When the party secretary took office only one year away from the
inspection year, the educational budget increased by about 4% from the benchmark level of the
control group. We interpret this pattern as consistent with our window dressing hypothesis.
When the inauguration time approached the pre-specified inspection time, the pressure of
meeting the compulsory education target was more likely to be binding, and thereby the party
secretary should respond more aggressively to avoid the severe career consequences of "one-
item-veto." Panel A in Figure 4 exactly depicts such an empirical fact. We find that the major
effect of the Gap comes from the non-fiscal educational expenditures, which are more
discretionary and flexible. This finding is similar to what we found in Panels B and C of Figure
3. Panel D in Figure 4 provides further evidence to support the window dressing hypothesis:
when the Gap was smaller, the rural education surcharge rate became higher.
    The county party secretaries taking office exactly in the inspection year deserves special
consideration. In all four panels in Figure 4, we find that if the inauguration year coincided
with the inspection year, both education expenditures (including their subcategories) and rural
educational surcharge rate went down compared to those whose term started one year before
the inspection. This follows from the convention that the departing, rather than the incoming
county leader, should be responsible for whether or not the county passed the inspection.
    Taken together, the patterns shown in this subsection indicate that county party secretaries
who were more likely to bear potential political punishment if not meeting the target responded
more aggressively to the approaching inspections. These pieces of evidence lend support to the
underlying linkage between the window dressing phenomenon and the political incentives of
the local leaders.

                                                  23
6. The Impact of Inspections on School Enrollment


       So far, we documented the evidence of window dressing before the inspection, followed
by significant reductions of county-level educational expenses after passing the CCEC
inspections, and of its linkage to county leaders' political incentives. In this section, we explore
the effects of CCEC inspection on children's educational attainment, the key target of the
compulsory education campaign in China, and examine how these effects are distributed across
different groups of students (e.g., urban vs. rural, male vs. female).
       China's official statistical yearbooks contain data on the size of in-school students for both
primary and secondary schools. However, we do not use these data in our analysis for two
reasons. First, the official school statistics may be subject to data manipulation, as widely
documented in the literature (for example, Fisman and Wang, 2017; Xiong, 2018). Second, the
official data only reports the aggregated statistics for secondary schools. In China, secondary
schools consist of middle schools and high schools. China's Compulsory Schooling Law
concerns the middle school enrollment only, without making any requirement on high school
enrollment. Although middle school students generally accounted for over 80% of the
secondary school students in the 1990s,21 the mixture of middle schools and high schools in
the official school statistics could confound our analysis. We instead use China's 2005
population mini-census to back out the county-level enrollment rates of students at primary
school age (7-12 years old) and middle school age (13-15 years old). Another distinct advantage
of using population census data is that we can calculate the average enrollments for several
groups to examine the distributional effects of local governments' window dressing behaviors.
                                             [Table 6 About Here]
       Table 6 reports the DID regression results using the regression specification of Equation
(2), with dependent variables being the primary and middle school enrollments. Given that
primary school enrollment rate had reached a fairly high level (i.e., about 98%) at that time, it
is reasonable to observe in Column 1 that primary school enrollment rate remained virtually
unchanged after the inspection. In stark contrast, Column 2 reports a significant one percentage


  21
     According to China's Educational Statistical Yearbook in 2002, high school students accounted for about
17.9% of the secondary school students in 2001, the end year of our sample period.
                                                      24
point decline of middle school enrollment rate after the inspection. Panel A in Figure 5 shows
a dynamic pattern of middle school enrollment before and after the inspection, using the event-
study specification in Equation (1). We can observe an increase of middle school enrollment,
although statistically insignificant, before the inspection, but a significant and sustained drop
after the inspection. This pattern is consistent with the fact illustrated in Figure 3 on educational
inputs.
                                         [Figure 5 About Here]
    Although we do not know exactly the primary and middle school enrollment rates for those
counties at the time of inspection and evaluation, we can reasonably assume that most inspected
counties would hit the minimal targets mandated by the Compulsory Schooling Promotion
Program, due to the popular unwillingness among county leaders to invest in local elementary
education. Under this assumption, when we observe an average decline of 1% in enrollments
for middle schools, it is reasonable to argue that after the inspection, the once barely-achieved
target level of school enrollment would likely drop to a level below the target. This further
bolsters our interpretation of the documented behavior of the local government as window
dressing.
    Next, we further examine the heterogeneous effect of inspections on middle school
enrollment. We are concerned about how the decline of middle school enrollment was
distributed across urban-rural divisions and genders. Columns 2-4 of Table 6 demonstrate that
the adverse effects of the window addressing behavior are unevenly distributed. Particularly,
rural girls suffered more severely (with a highly significant point estimate of -1.19). This is
understandable: when the county governments attempted to fulfill the compulsory education
target (especially for middle school enrollment), expanding rural schools to accommodate a
large pool of rural children of school age was the largest fiscal challenge. Therefore, once the
target was accomplished, and knowing that there was no inspection anymore, the education
inputs in rural schools dropped immediately. The urban education would suffer much less since
it had better endowments and facilities than rural areas. Similarly, when access to schools
became harder, girls were more likely to be deprived of educational opportunities than boys,
especially in rural areas.

                                                 25
     There exists a possibility that our findings are driven by endogenous migration of children
from non-CCECs (generally poorer counties) to the CCECs. To address this concern, we
exclude immigrants from the sample, namely those individuals whose birthplaces were
different from their current residences and repeat the regressions of Table 6. All of the estimates,
as presented in Table A3, are quantitatively similar to the corresponding results in Table 6.
     Finally, to further rule out the possibility that the potential confounding factors correlated
with the inspection events and the middle school enrollment rate drive our findings, we use a
widely used machine learning method, the random forest model, to construct a counterfactual
for middle school enrollment rate in the absence of the program. Specifically, we use four input
variables, the logarithm of per capita rural income, average elevation, average slope, and the
minority county dummy, and the panel data in 1990-1992, to train our random forest model.22
From Figure B1 in the appendix, we can see that the predictions of the random forest model fit
the original data quite well (the estimated slope is 1.019, with an R-squared of 0.70). Next, we
use the random forest model to predict outcomes by plugging in the data of the covariates in
1993-2001. Figure B2 in the appendix compares the evolving trend of the predicted middle
school enrollment rate and the middle school enrollment rate constructed from the 2005
population mini-census in 1990-2001. There is an evident trend break from 1993 on, revealing
that the CCEC inspection might have a positive impact on middle school enrollments by
incentivizing local governments in pre-inspection years.
     We use the predicted middle school enrollment rate as an outcome to conduct a placebo
test, using the specification in Equation (1). The results are illustrated in Panel B of Figure 5.
We cannot observe any trend break after the inspection. This is in stark contrast with Panel A
of Figure 5, which shows the event study results using the constructed middle school
enrollment rates from the 2005 population mini-census as the dependent variable. The dynamic
patterns in Panels A and B support our interpretation that the discontinuous change of middle
school enrollment observed in the data is not due to any discrete changes in county-level
attributes and rural economic development.

  22
      We set the number of random forest trees to generate the model at 100, according to the well-accepted
practice in the literature. We also set the minimum number of observations in each tree leaf node at one, and do
not restrict the maximum depth of the random forest tree (the length of the longest path from the root to the leaf
node). Our results are robust to using alternative covariates and specifications to construct the random forest model.
                                                          26
    To summarize, the window dressing behavior trigged by the CCEC inspections was
detrimental to the middle school attainment for the affected cohorts. Given China's large
population, a one-percentage-point reduction in middle school enrollment implies that 346
thousand school-age children were out of school every year. Furthermore, the deterioration in
school enrollment generated distributional consequences since rural girls bore the blunt of the
decline in middle school enrollment.


7. Conclusion


    Window dressing is a common strategic reaction to incentive schemes observed in various
types of organizations. While the existing literature has focused on the window dressing
behavior in the private sector, we provide evidence of window dressing phenomenon in the
public sector by studying the strategic responses of Chinese local officials to the compulsory
education promotion program launched by the central government in the 1990s. According to
this program, the Chinese counties should receive inspections on whether the compulsory
educational targets were achieved on pre-scheduled time by provincial governments; and
failing to pass the inspection would have severe negative career consequences for the county
leaders. We find that county-level educational expenditures saw a sustained increase before the
inspection, but a sharp drop immediately after the inspection. Local officials who were more
likely to be inspected within their tenures window-dressed more aggressively. As a result,
middle school enrollment rates declined significantly after the inspection, and rural girls bore
the blunt of the decline in school enrollment.
    We believe that the window dressing incentives we uncover for government officials are
not specific to China, and apply to any authoritarian system with top-down political incentives.
More broadly, this paper is an application of, and provide empirical evidence for, the classic
incentive theory that emphasizes the potential pitfalls of high-powered incentives in the public
sector (Finan et al., 2017).


                                            References

Acemoglu, D., Fergusson, L., Robinson, J. A., Romero, D., & Vargas, J. F. (2018). The Perils of high-

                                                 27
   powered incentives: Evidence from Colombia's false positives. American Economic Journal:

   Economic Policy.

Agarwal, V., Gay, G. D. & Ling, L. (2014). Window dressing in mutual funds. The Review of Financial

   Studies, 27(11), 3133-3170.

Alatas, V., Banerjee, A., Hanna, R., Olken, B. A., Purnamasari, R., & Wai-Poi, M. (2019, May). Does

   elite capture matter? Local elites and targeted welfare programs in Indonesia. In AEA Papers and

   Proceedings (Vol. 109, pp. 334-39).

Allen, L. & Saunders, A. (1992). Bank window dressing: Theory and evidence. Journal of Banking &

   Finance, 16(3), 585-623.

Banerjee, A. V., Duflo, E., & Glennerster, R. (2008). Putting a band-aid on a corpse: Incentives for

   nurses in the Indian public health care system. Journal of the European Economic Association, 6

   (2-3): 487-500.

Bardhan, P. K. & Mookherjee, D. (2000). Capture and governance at local and national levels. American

   Economic Review, 90(2), 135-139.

Bardhan, P. & Mookherjee, D. (2005). Decentralizing antipoverty program delivery in developing

   countries. Journal of Public Economics, 89(4), 675-704.

Bardhan, P. & Mookherjee, D. (2006). Decentralisation and accountability in infrastructure delivery in

   developing countries. Economic Journal, 116(508), 101-127.

Bischoff, I. & Blaeschke, F. (2016). Performance budgeting: Incentives and social waste from window

   dressing. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 26(2), 344-358.

Cao, Y., Fisman, R.J., Lin, H., and Wang, Y. (2018). Target setting and allocative inefficiency in lending:

   Evidence from two Chinese banks. NBER Working Paper, (w24961).

Chen, Y. J., Li, P., & Lu, Y. (2018). Career concerns and multitasking local bureaucrats: Evidence of a

   target-based performance evaluation system in China. Journal of Development Economics, 133: 84-

   101.

Courty, P., & Marschke, G. (1997). Measuring government performance: Lessons from a federal job-

   training program. American Economic Review, 87(2), 383­388.

Courty, P., & Marschke, G. (2004). An empirical investigation of gaming responses to explicit

   performance incentives. Journal of Labor Economics, 22(1), 23-56.


                                                    28
Ferraz, C. & Finan, F. (2011). Electoral accountability and corruption: Evidence from the audits of local

   governments. American Economic Review, 101(4), 1274-1311.

Finan, F., Olken, B. A., & Pande, R. (2017). The Personnel economics of the developing state.

   Handbook of Economic Field Experiments, 2: 467-514.

Fisman, R., & Wang, Y. (2015). The Mortality cost of political connections. The Review of Economic

   Studies, 82(4), 1346-1382.

Fisman, R., & Wang, Y. (2017). The Distortionary effects of incentives in government: Evidence from

   China's `Death Ceiling' program. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 9(2), 202-18.

Garicano, L., & Rayo, L. (2016). Why organizations fail: models and cases. Journal of Economic

   Literature, 54(1), 137-92.

Greenstone, M., He, G., Jia, R., & Liu, T. (2020). Can technology solve the principal-agent problem?

   Evidence from China's War on Air Pollution (No. w27502). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Guo, Gang (2009). China's local political budget cycles. American Journal of Political Science 53(3),

   621-632.

He, G., Wang, S., & Zhang, B. (2020). Watering down environmental regulation in China. Quarterly

   Journal of Economics.

Holmstrom, B. & Milgrom, P. (1991). Multitask principal-agent analyses: Incentive contracts, asset

   ownership, and job design. Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization, 7: 24-52.

Jia R, Kudamatsu M, & Seim D. (2015). Political selection in China: The complementary roles of

   connections and performance. Journal of the European Economic Association, 13(4), 631-668.

Jia, R. (2017). Pollution for promotion. Working paper.

Lakonishok, J., Shleifer, A., Thaler, R. & Vishny, R. (1991). Window dressing by pension fund

   managers, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 81(2), 227-231.

Li, H., and Zhou, L. A. (2005). Political turnover and economic performance: The incentive Role of

   Personnel Control in China. Journal of Public Economics, 89(9-10), 1743-1762.

Liebman, J. B., & Mahoney, N. (2017). Do expiring budgets lead to wasteful year-end spending?

   Evidence from federal procurement. American Economic Review, 107(11), 3510-49.

Lou, J. and Wang, S. (2007). Public Finance in China: Reform and Growth for a Harmonious Society,

   Washington. D. C.: The World Bank.


                                                   29
Oyer, P. (1998). Fiscal year ends and nonlinear incentive contracts: The effect on business seasonality.

   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(1), 149-185.

Shi, X., & Xi, T. (2018). Race to safety: Political competition, neighborhood effects, and coal mine

   deaths in China. Journal of Development Economics, 131, 79-95.

Smith, T. B. (1991). The comparative analysis of bureaucratic accountability. Asian Journal of Public

   Administration, 13(1), 93-104.

Wang, Z., Zhang, Q., & Zhou, L. A. (2019). Career incentives of city leaders and urban spatial expansion

   in China. Review of Economics and Statistics, 1-45.

Wong, C. (2000). Central-local relations revisited: The 1994 Tax Sharing Reform and public

   expenditure management in China. Working Paper, World Bank.

Xiong, W. (2018). The Mandarin model of growth (No. w25296). National Bureau of Economic

   Research.

Xu, C. (2011). The fundamental institutions of China's reforms and development. Journal of Economic

   Literature, 49(4): 1076-1151.

Yao, Y., & Zhang, M. (2015). Subnational leaders and economic growth: Evidence from Chinese

   cities. Journal of Economic Growth, 20(4): 405-436.




                                                  30
Figures and Tables:
                                 Figure 1: Histogram of Inspection Time




Notes: This figure plots the distribution of inspection years in our analytical sample. Our analyses focus on the
period 1993-2001 as detailed county-level outcomes regarding educational input we used in this paper are not
available from 2002. The 1691 counties passing the CCEC inspection before 2002 covered about 89.1% of
China's population in 2001 in the full sample.


                     Figure 2: The Distribution of CCEC Inspections over Time




                       Notes: The counties passing the inspection are marked in red color.


                                                        31
                    Figure 3: Educational Inputs Before and After the Inspection




Notes: This figure presents the event study estimates for several county-level education inputs with the
specification of Equation (1). The solid circle represents the estimated coefficient for each year relative to the
inspection year, along with the 95% confidence intervals calculated by employing county-level clustered
standard errors.




                                                         32
       Figure 4: Effects of the Tenure of County Party Secretaries on Educational Inputs




Notes: This figure displays the regression results of Equation (3). County party secretaries who took office after
the inspection are omitted as the reference group. The solid circle represents the estimated coefficient for each
inauguration year, along with the 95% confidence intervals calculated by employing county-level clustered
standard errors.




                                                        33
                Figure 5: Event Study Results on Middle School Enrollment Rates

                           Panel A: Actual Data Constructed from Population Census




                     Panel B: Predicted Enrollment Rates Using the Random Forest Model




Notes: This figure presents the event study estimates for middle school enrollment rates. Panel A uses the middle
school enrollment rates constructed from the 2005 mini-census data. Panel B uses the predicted value of middle
school enrollment using the random forest model. See Section 6 for the technical details of our random forest
method. The solid circle represents the estimated coefficient for each year relative to the inspection, along with
the 95% confidence intervals calculated by employing county-level clustered standard errors.




                                                       34
                                       Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

Variable                                                                      Obs.     Mean    Std. Dev.
                                        Panel A: Time-varying outcomes
Log(Education expenditure)                                                    15,442   8.482    0.923
Log(Fiscal education appropriation)                                           15,561   8.032    0.850
Log(Non-fiscal education expenditure)                                         15,312   7.225    1.361
Rural educational surcharge rate (%)                                          14,326   0.730    0.514
Log(GDP)                                                                      17,653   11.61    1.132
Log(Budgetary revenue)                                                        18,166   8.376    1.077
Log(Budgetary expenditure)                                                    18,165   9.091    0.799
Log(Administrative expenditure)                                               18,166   7.587    0.701
Log(Agricultural expenditure)                                                 18,161   6.100    0.802
Log(Primary school expenditure, per pupil)                                    14,346   5.923    0.666
Log(Primary school personnel expenditure, per pupil)                          13,544   5.854    0.649
Log(Primary school operating expenses, per pupil)                             13,544   2.657    1.582
Log(Middle school expenditure, per pupil)                                     14,307   6.402    0.583
Log(Middle school personnel expenditure, per pupil)                           13,549   6.302    0.572
Log(Middle school operating expenses, per pupil)                              13,552   3.519    1.458
Primary school enrollment rate (%)                                            18,504   97.96    7.693
Middle school enrollment rate (%)                                             18,488   82.87    19.80
Middle school enrollment rate, urban male (%)                                 13,832   97.31    11.82
Middle school enrollment rate, urban female (%)                               14,303   97.00    11.94
Middle school enrollment rate, rural male (%)                                 18,173   83.40    21.88
Middle school enrollment rate, rural female (%)                               18,226   78.13    24.44
                                  Panel B: Pre-determined county attributes
Elevation (m)                                                                 2,060    778.9    897.9
Slope                                                                         2,060    2.550    2.400
Proportion of citizens with middle school literacy in 1990 (%)                2,060    32.59    10.84
Proportion of citizens with primary school literacy in 1990 (%)               2,060    75.77    12.85
Illiteracy rate in 1990 (%)                                                   2,060    26.37    13.17
National Poor County                                                          2,060    0.276    0.447
Minority county                                                               2,060    0.271    0.445




                                                      35
                          Table 2: Effects of Inspections on Education Inputs

                                    (1)                      (2)                (3)                   (4)
Dep. Var.                     Log(Education            Log(Fiscal         Log(Non-fiscal       Rural educational
                               expenditure)            education             education        surcharge rate (%)
                                                      expenditure)          expenditure)
CCEC×Treat                      -0.091***              -0.042***             -0.169***             -0.065***
                                  (0.007)                  (0.007)            (0.016)               (0.013)
Dep. Mean                          8.481                   8.032               7.225                 0.730
Observations                      15,428                   15,547             15,298                14,300
# of Counties                      2002                     2002               2002                  1985
County FE                          YES                      YES                 YES                  YES
Province-Year FE                   YES                      YES                 YES                  YES
Controls                           YES                      YES                 YES                  YES
Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses, clustered at the county level. *** Significant at the 1
percent level, ** Significant at the 5 percent level, * Significant at the 10 percent level. Constant terms and the
estimated coefficients of the controls are not reported.




                                                           36
                                              Table 3: Robustness Checks

                                      (1)                         (2)                        (3)                     (4)
 Dep. Var.                     Log(Education           Log(Fiscal education           Log(Non-fiscal                Rural
                                 expenditure)               expenditure)                 education              educational
                                                                                       expenditure)            surcharge rate
                                                                                                                     (%)
 Panel A:                                   Excluding counties not required for inspections before 2001
 CCEC×Treat                       -0.091***                   -0.041***                  -0.172***               -0.061***
                                    (0.007)                    (0.007)                    (0.016)                  (0.014)
 Dep. Mean                           8.540                      8.064                      7.354                   0.748
 Observations                       13,972                     14,067                     13,868                   13,118
 Number of Counties                  1804                        1804                       1804                    1797
 Panel B:                                           Controlling for prefecture-year fixed effects
 CCEC×Treat                       -0.088***                   -0.032***                  -0.143***               -0.072***
                                    (0.008)                    (0.007)                    (0.017)                  (0.014)
 Dep. Mean                           8.478                      8.028                      7.221                   0.735
 Observations                       15,100                     15,223                     14,970                   13,999
 Number of Counties                  1967                        1967                       1967                    1949
 Panel C:                                         Allowing for county-specific flexible time trend
 CCEC×Treat                       -0.094***                   -0.039***                  -0.162***               -0.082***
                                    (0.009)                    (0.008)                    (0.021)                  (0.016)
 Dep. Mean                           8.481                      8.032                      7.225                   0.730
 Observations                       15,428                     15,547                     15,298                   14,300
 Number of Counties                  2002                        2002                       2002                    1985
 Panel D:                                            Controlling for party secretary fixed effects
 CCEC×Treat                       -0.087***                   -0.040***                  -0.150***               -0.066***
                                    (0.008)                    (0.007)                    (0.018)                  (0.014)
 Dep. Mean                           8.463                      7.995                      7.266                   0.733
 Observations                       13,299                     13,403                     13,166                   12,301
 Number of Counties                  1947                        1948                       1946                    1927
Notes: In Panel A, we exclude counties not required to receive inspection until 2001 (as illustrated in Appendix Figure A1). In
Panel B, we exclude counties receiving inspection after 2000 (never-treated counties in our sample). In Panel C, we control
for county-specific linear and quadratic time trends. In Panel D, we control for county party secretary fixed effects. Robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses, clustered at the county level. *** Significant at the 1 percent level, ** Significant
at the 5 percent level, * Significant at the 10 percent level. Constant terms and the estimated coefficients of the controls
are not reported.




                                                               37
                Table 4: Regional Economic Development and Budgetary Outcomes

                         (1)                 (2)                     (3)                   (4)                    (5)
Dep. Var.            Log(GDP)          Log(Budgetary         Log(Budgetary         Log(Administrat Log(Agricultural
                                          revenue)              expenditure)       ive expenditure)           expenditure)
CCEC×Treat             0.003               -0.009                  -0.008                -0.005                0.023***
                      (0.005)              (0.007)                 (0.005)               (0.006)                (0.008)
Dep. Mean              11.61               8.376                    9.090                7.587                   6.100
Observations           17,641              18,163                  18,162                18,163                 18,158
# of Clusters           2005                2042                     2042                 2042                   2041
County FE               YES                 YES                      YES                  YES                    YES
Province-               YES                 YES                      YES                  YES                    YES
Year FE
Controls                YES                 YES                      YES                  YES                    YES
Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses, clustered at the county level. *** Significant at the 1
percent level, ** Significant at the 5 percent level, * Significant at the 10 percent level. Constant terms and the
estimated coefficients of the controls are not reported.




                                   Table 5: Effects on School Expenditures

                          (1)             (2)                (3)                 (4)                 (5)             (6)
Dep. Var.           Log(Primary      Log(Primary     Log(Primary             Log(Middle          Log(Middle Log(Middle
                        school          school             school              school              school          school
                     expenditure,      personnel       operating           expenditure, per      personnel       operating
                      per pupil)      expenditure,   expenditure,               pupil)        expenditure, expenditure,
                                       per pupil)      per pupil)                                per pupil)      per pupil)
CCEC×Treat            -0.018**          -0.005         -0.208***             -0.063***             -0.013        -0.391***
                       (0.007)          (0.007)            (0.039)             (0.009)             (0.009)        (0.040)
Dep. Mean               5.923            5.855             2.659                6.403              6.303           3.520
Observations            14,330          13,524             13,524              14,294              13,528          13,531
# of Counties            2002            1995               1995                2003                1992            1993
County FE                YES             YES                YES                 YES                 YES             YES
Province-Year            YES             YES                YES                 YES                 YES             YES
FE
Controls                 YES             YES                YES                 YES                 YES             YES
Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses, clustered at the county level. *** Significant at the 1
percent level, ** Significant at the 5 percent level, * Significant at the 10 percent level. Constant terms and the
estimated coefficients of the controls are not reported.




                                                           38
                      Table 6: Effects on Compulsory School Enrollment Rates

                         (1)              (2)              (3)          (4)              (5)             (6)
Dep. Var.         Primary School                                  Middle School (%)
                        (%)              Full       Urban males       Urban         Rural males    Rural females
                                       Sample                         females
CCEC×Treat              0.011         -1.009***        -0.346         -0.524           -0.359        -1.190***
                       (0.041)         (0.240)         (0.449)        (0.372)         (0.401)          (0.419)
Dep. Mean               97.96           82.87          97.31           97.00           83.40           78.13
Observations           18,504           18,488         13,798         14,278           18,171          18,224
# of Clusters           2056            2056               1904        1921            2046             2048
County FE               YES              YES               YES         YES              YES             YES
Province-Year           YES              YES               YES         YES              YES             YES
FE
Controls                YES              YES               YES         YES              YES             YES
Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses, clustered at the county level. *** Significant at the 1
percent level, ** Significant at the 5 percent level, * Significant at the 10 percent level. Constant terms and the
estimated coefficients of the controls are not reported.




                                                           39
                                               Online Appendix

                                    A. Additional Figures and Tables

    Figure A1: Spatial Distribution of Poor Counties Exempted for Inspection before 2001




             Figure A2: Correlation of Party Secretary's Tenure with Inspection Years




Notes: This figure presents the event study estimates for the dummy variable indicating party secretary turnover
with the specification of Equation (1). The solid circle represents the estimated coefficient for each year relative
to inspection year along with the 95% confidence intervals calculated by employing county-level clustered
standard errors.




                                                        A1
Figure A3: Histogram of Time Differences between County Party Secretary's Inauguration
                                    and Inspection




                                         A2
         Table A1: Determinants on the Scheduled Inspection Sequence: Ordered Probit

            Dep. Var.                                                                      Inspection Year
            Elevation                                                                       0.000224***
                                                                                              (7.06e-05)
            Slope                                                                              0.0316*
                                                                                              (0.0173)
            Proportion of citizens with middle school literacy, 1990                         -0.0537***
                                                                                              (0.00466)
            Proportion of citizens with primary school literacy, 1990                         -0.00828
                                                                                              (0.0181)
            Illiteracy rate, 1990                                                              0.0260
                                                                                              (0.0177)
            National Poor County                                                              0.663***
                                                                                              (0.0618)
            Minority County                                                                   0.488***
                                                                                              (0.0929)
            Province FE                                                                         YES
            Number of Counties                                                                  2,060
Notes: This table applies an ordered probit model to investigate the determinants of the scheduled inspection
sequence. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses, clustered at the county level. *** Significant at the
1 percent level, ** Significant at the 5 percent level, * Significant at the 10 percent level. Constant terms and the
estimates for the cutoffs are not reported.


                        Table A2: CCEC Inspections and Nonrandom Missing Values

                                         (1)                   (2)                 (3)                      (4)
 Dep. Var.                          1(Education       1(Fiscal education      1(Non-fiscal               1(Rural
                                    expenditure is      expenditure is         education           educational tax
                                      missing)             missing)          expenditure is        rate is missing)
                                                                                missing)
 CCEC×Treat                            -0.003               -0.006               -0.000                   -0.006
                                       (0.007)              (0.007)              (0.007)                 (0.009)
 Dep. Mean                              0.167                 0.161              0.174                     0.227
 Observations                          18,540               18,540               18,540                  18,540
 Number of Counties                     2060                  2060                2060                     2060
 County FE                              YES                   YES                 YES                      YES
 Province-Year FE                       YES                   YES                 YES                      YES
 Controls                               YES                   YES                 YES                      YES
Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses, clustered at the county level. *** Significant at the 1
percent level, ** Significant at the 5 percent level, * Significant at the 10 percent level. Constant terms are not
reported.



                                                         A3
                           Table A3: Controlling for Endogenous Migration

                               (1)             (2)                (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)
Dep. Var.                Primary school                         Middle school enrollment rate (%)
                         enrollment rate Full sample            Urban        Rural         Male        Female
                               (%)                              citizen      citizen
CCEC×Treat                    0.011         -0.937***           -0.165       -0.308        -0.203      -0.989*
                             (0.045)         (0.298)            (0.542)      (0.462)      (0.474)      (0.512)
Dep. Mean                     97.86           81.22             97.06        96.65         81.76        75.83
Observations                 18,498          18,467             12,288       12,617        17,949       18,061
# of Clusters                 2056            2056               1778         1801         2040          2046
County FE                     YES             YES                YES          YES           YES          YES
Province-Year FE              YES             YES                YES          YES           YES          YES
Controls                      YES             YES                YES          YES           YES          YES
Notes: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses, clustered at the county level. *** Significant at the 1
percent level, ** Significant at the 5 percent level, * Significant at the 10 percent level. Constant terms and the
estimated coefficients of the controls are not reported.




                                                           A4
                      Appendix B: Predictions using Random Forest Model

                                 Figure B1: Model Fitting in 1990-1992




Notes: This figure documents the correlation between the predicted value of middle school enrollment rate in
our random forest model and the middle school enrollment rate constructed using the 2005 population mini-
census.


           Figure B2: Actual and Predicted Middle School Enrollment Rates in 1990-2001




Notes: This figure plots the time patterns of China's national average middle school enrollment rate for the
cohorts born in 1990-2001. The blue curve marked with circles is calculated using the 2005 mini-census data
and the red curve marked with diamonds is the counterfactual prediction constructed from the random forest
model.

                                                       A5
