EFFICIENT REDISTRIBUTION


       Corina Boar
     Virgiliu Midrigan

  WORKING PAPER 27622
                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               EFFICIENT REDISTRIBUTION

                                         Corina Boar
                                       Virgiliu Midrigan

                                      Working Paper 27622
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27622


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2020




We thank Federico Kochen for superb research assistance and seminar participants at Berkeley
and the NBER Summer Institute for valuable comments. We gratefully acknowledge support
from the National Science Foundation, Grant SES-1948119. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Corina Boar and Virgiliu Midrigan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Efficient Redistribution
Corina Boar and Virgiliu Midrigan
NBER Working Paper No. 27622
July 2020
JEL No. E2,E6,H2

                                            ABSTRACT

We ask: what are the most efficient means of redistribution in an unequal society? We answer
this question by characterizing the optimal shape of non-linear income and wealth taxes in a
dynamic general equilibrium model with uninsurable idiosyncratic risk. Our analysis reproduces
the distribution of income and wealth in the United States and explicitly takes into account the
long-lived transition dynamics after policy reforms. We find that a uniform flat tax on capital and
labor income combined with a lump-sum transfer is nearly optimal. Though taxing wealth and
allowing for increasing marginal income tax schedules raises utilitarian welfare, the incremental
gains from doing so are small. This result is robust to changing household preferences, the
distribution of ability, the planner's preference for redistribution, as well as to explicitly modeling
private business ownership and the ensuing heterogeneity in rates of return across financially
constrained entrepreneurs.


Corina Boar
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
corina.boar@gmail.com

Virgiliu Midrigan
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th St.
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
virgiliu.midrigan@nyu.edu
1     Introduction
Increased income and wealth inequality is a pressing economic concern in the United States
and the rest of the world. This concern has led to numerous calls for redistribution using
more progressive income and wealth taxes. Since redistribution through taxes and transfers
entails deadweight losses, an important question that emerges is: what are the most efficient
means to redistribute in an unequal economy?
    Our paper revisits this classic question by characterizing the optimal shape of non-linear
income and wealth tax schedules. We do so using a dynamic general equilibrium model
with uninsurable idiosyncratic risk and incomplete markets that reproduces the distribution
of income and wealth in the United States and takes into account the long-lived transition
dynamics after policy reforms. The reforms we consider are once-and-for-all changes in the
income and wealth tax schedules. The revenue raised with these taxes is used to finance
universal lump-sum transfers to households.
    We find that a flat tax on income is nearly optimal in that the additional welfare gains
from non-linear income and wealth tax schedules are small. Though it is optimal to tax
wealth and to allow marginal income taxes to increase with income, a flat tax levied uni-
formly on both labor and capital income achieves almost all of the welfare gains attainable
using more complex instruments. This result is robust to perturbations of the preference pa-
rameters, the underlying distribution of household ability, as well as the planner's preference
for redistribution.
    To make our results as transparent as possible we start our analysis from the standard
incomplete markets framework, a Bewley-Aiyagari model in which households only differ in
their labor market ability. Because in the data wealth and income is highly concentrated in
the hands of private business owners, we also extend our analysis to allow for entrepreneurial
activity and find once again that a uniform flat tax on labor and capital income is nearly
optimal.
    The benchmark economy we study consists of a large number of households who work
and face idiosyncratic shocks to their labor market ability which they can partially insure by
saving in a risk-free asset. To facilitate comparison with our model with entrepreneurs we
assume that corporate firms operate a decreasing returns technology and that the mass of
producers is pinned down by a free entry condition.
    The government redistributes by taxing income and wealth and using the proceeds to
finance lump-sum transfers. We characterize the mix of instruments that maximize social

                                              1
welfare under different preferences for redistribution. As in the United States, we assume
that the tax base for the income tax includes both labor and capital income. We assume a
functional form for income taxes of the Benabou (2000) and Heathcote et al. (2017) type, as
well as a flexible two-parameter functional form for wealth taxes.
   We calibrate the parameters of the model to match moments of the wealth and income
distribution, as well as the extent of redistribution embedded in the current tax and transfer
system in the United States. Since the distribution of ability is critical in shaping optimal
tax policy (Saez, 2001), we follow Castaneda et al. (2003) in allowing for a fat-tailed ability
distribution that allows the model to match the top income and wealth shares.
   We measure welfare by calculating for each household the constant consumption stream
that delivers the same level of life-time utility as in the competitive equilibrium. We consider
several ways in which a planner aggregates the welfare of individual households. On one
end, we consider average welfare as do Benabou (2000) and Bakis et al. (2015). As pointed
out by Benabou (2000), who refers to it as risk-adjusted GDP, this objective captures pure
economic efficiency and disregards equity considerations in and of themselves. Nevertheless,
as we show, maximizing this criterion leads to more redistribution because pure economic
efficiency is increased by policies which improve risk sharing. On the other end, we consider
objectives that place increasingly higher weights on the welfare of the poor, such as utilitarian
welfare.
   We begin our analysis by providing some intuition about the relative benefits and costs
of income and wealth taxes. To that end, we first change the parameters of the income and
wealth tax schedules in isolation and trace out the implications for the welfare of households
in various parts of the distribution. Not surprisingly, we find that all instruments of redistri-
bution ­ higher average marginal tax rates, higher top marginal tax rates, as well as wealth
taxes ­ allow the planner to increase lump-sum transfers, thus increasing the welfare of the
poor. We find, however, that redistributing solely by increasing top marginal income taxes
or wealth taxes is inefficient compared to raising marginal income taxes on all households. In
particular, the efficiency cost of increasing the welfare of poor households by a given amount
is much higher if redistribution is financed by only increasing top marginal income tax rates
or wealth taxes.
   We then turn to the optimal tax experiments. We begin by studying the problem of a
planner that seeks to maximize utilitarian welfare using once-and-for-all tax reforms. We
assume that government debt is constant throughout the transitions and that lump-sum


                                               2
transfers adjust at every date to ensure that the government budget is balanced. The restric-
tion that government debt is constant is inconsequential because we find, as do Aiyagari and
McGrattan (1998), that the incremental gains from allowing the government to change its
debt are small. Since optimal tax reforms involve large and persistent changes in equilibrium
prices and macroeconomic aggregates, we explicitly compute welfare by taking transition
dynamics into account.
   We proceed incrementally, by first allowing the planner to only use a flat income tax and
then gradually augmenting the set of instruments with non-linear income taxes, as well as
linear and non-linear wealth taxes. We find that an optimally chosen flat income tax delivers
most of the welfare gains that the planner can possibly achieve with the more complex
instruments. Specifically, a utilitarian planner that can only use a flat income tax sets it
equal to 56%, which increases consumption-equivalent welfare by 7.8%, a sizable amount.
A planner that can use non-linear income taxes chooses an increasing marginal income tax
schedule, but the incremental gains from doing so are relatively small: utilitarian welfare
only increases by 0.7 percentage points relative to the optimally chosen flat income tax. A
planner that can also use a linear wealth tax, in addition to non-linear income taxes, would
set it equal to 0.6%. The incremental welfare gains from this additional instrument are,
however, only 0.2 percentage points. Finally, a planner that can also tax wealth non-linearly
would disproportionately tax wealthier households but once again achieve relatively small
additional gains. Overall, we find that an optimally chosen flat income tax delivers the bulk
(80%) of the welfare gains that can be achieved with more complex income and wealth taxes.
   The intuition for this result is that increasing taxes on wealth or the incomes of top earners
depresses the capital stock and output, reducing the tax base and therefore the amount of
lump-sum transfers. Since the welfare of the poor households is primarily determined by the
size of these transfers, a utilitarian planner chooses to avoid distorting the savings and labor
supply choices of high-ability households too much. Introducing more complex instruments
allows the planner to reduce marginal income taxes faced by the median household, at the
cost of lower lump-sum transfers, which implies that the poor gain less relative to the case of a
flat income tax. The gains from more complex instruments thus accrue mostly to households
in the middle of the distribution. Since a utilitarian planner places a high weight on the
consumption-equivalent welfare of the poor, the incremental welfare gains from increasing
top marginal income taxes or from taxing wealth are relatively small.
   It is important to note that our result that the incremental gains from taxing wealth


                                               3
are small does not imply that the gains from taxing capital income are low. To see this
point, we allow the planner to tax labor and capital income at different rates. We find
that if the planner can only tax labor income, it achieves much smaller welfare gains of
2.9% compared to the 7.8% attainable using a a flat tax applied to both labor and capital
income. This suggests that taxing capital income is important for efficient redistribution.
Indeed, the planner would find it optimal to tax capital income at a rate slightly higher than
labor income. However, the welfare gains from non-uniform taxation of capital and labor
income are small. Taxing capital in our economy is optimal for several reasons. First, as
pointed out by Aiyagari (1995), our economy features capital over-accumulation relative to
an economy with complete markets. Second, taxing capital prevents high ability households
from accumulating wealth and leads them to supply more labor. Third, since the stock of
wealth is inelastic in the short run, taxing it generates government revenue.
   As is well known, optimal tax policy is critically shaped by household preferences, the
underlying distribution of ability, as well as the planner's desire to redistribute. We show
that even though the optimal tax schedules indeed change as we vary the households' elas-
ticity of intertemporal substitution, the Frisch elasticity of labor supply, the distribution of
labor ability and the planner's taste for redistribution, our result that a flat income tax is
nearly optimal stands. In all the experiments we considered, an optimally chosen flat income
tax achieves between 80% and 90% of the welfare gains attainable with more complex tax
instruments.
   We next extend our analysis to allow for entrepreneurial activity. Our motivation for
doing so is that in the United States much of wealth and income is concentrated in the hands
of private business owners. Though entrepreneurs represent only 12% of households, they
hold nearly half of all wealth and a third of all income. An important characteristic of private
businesses (Dyrda and Pugsley, 2018) is that they disproportionately rely on collateralized
borrowing and internal savings. This generates heterogeneity in rates of return (Quadrini,
2000, Cagetti and De Nardi, 2006) which, as Guvenen et al. (2019) show, generates an
important distinction between capital income and wealth taxation. Taxing private business
income distorts entrepreneurs incentives to accumulate wealth, amplifying the production
inefficiencies induced by collateral constraints.
   We revisit the question of efficient redistribution in this richer setting and once again
find that a flat income tax is nearly optimal. Specifically, a utilitarian planner can increase
welfare by 9.1% by taxing labor, interest and business income at a uniform rate of 58%.


                                                4
Though the planner once again prefers taxing wealth and top incomes, the welfare gains
achieved with more complex instruments are only 10.6%, not much larger than the 9.1%
achieved with flat income taxes. Taxing interest income and entrepreneurial profits is critical
for achieving redistribution: with labor income taxes only, utilitarian welfare would actually
fall. Interestingly, we find that, unlike in Guvenen et al. (2019), in our setting the planner
prefers taxing capital income as opposed to wealth. Even though capital income taxes in-
deed increase misallocation and amplify the effects of financial distortions, these efficiency
considerations are swamped by the planner's desire to redistribute from relatively rich en-
trepreneurs towards workers. In fact, we find that the optimal tax on wealth in this economy
is equal to zero, provided the planner can tax capital income at a rate higher than labor
income. Intuitively, a wealth tax falls on both workers and entrepreneurs, while a capital
income tax disproportionately falls on the latter, who are much richer on average.


Related Work. Our paper builds on the quantitative literature on the optimal design of
income, wealth and capital taxes. We find that a flat income tax is nearly optimal, even
when the planner can use complex non-linear income and wealth taxes. In that sense, our
result is reminiscent of the findings of Conesa and Krueger (2006) and Conesa et al. (2009).
Relative to these papers, not only do we allow for a richer set of instruments, but also study
the problem of a planner who maximizes welfare taking transition dynamics into account, a
challenging task. In our framework a planner concerned only with long-run welfare would
subsidize wealth accumulation and eliminate lump-sum transfers in an effort to encourage
precautionary savings and capital accumulation.
   A related complementary paper that studies optimal capital and labor income taxation
and explicitly takes transition dynamics into account is Dyrda and Pedroni (2018). In con-
trast to our work, which allows for non-linear income and wealth tax schedules, they restrict
attention to linear but time-varying taxes and finds that the incremental welfare gain from
allowing tax instruments to vary over time is relatively small. In contrast to the papers
mentioned above, we also study a model of entrepreneurship in which there is a meaningful
distinction between wealth and capital income taxation.
   Our results also corroborate the observation in a number of recent papers which find
that redistributive policies such as wealth, capital or progressive labor income taxes can,
in isolation, increase utilitarian welfare. For example, Guvenen et al. (2019), Rotberg and
Steinberg (2020) and Kaymak and Poschke (2019) allow the planner to use wealth taxes and
find large gains from taxing wealth. Similarly, Kindermann and Krueger (2014), Bakis et al.

                                              5
(2015), Heathcote et al. (2017), Imrohoroglu et al. (2018), Br¨
                                                              uggemann (2019) and Ferriere
et al. (2020) allow the planner to only use income taxes and also find welfare gains from
non-linear income taxation. In contrast to these papers, we consider tax reforms that jointly
change all of these instruments in order to identify the most efficient means of redistribution.


2         Model
The economy is inhabited by a unit mass of households who are subject to idiosyncratic shocks
to their labor market ability. Household supply labor elastically to firms which produce a
homogenous good. We abstract from aggregate uncertainty, and study the steady state of
the model and transition dynamics after policy reforms.

2.1         Households
Households seek to maximize life-time utility given by
                                             
                                                       c1
                                                        t
                                                          -
                                                             h1+
                                        E0         t        - t         ,                           (1)
                                             t=0
                                                       1- 1+

where ct is consumption and ht is hours worked. Their income is derived from two sources.
Labor income Wt et ht depends on the wage rate Wt and the idiosyncratic ability et , which
follows a Markov process with transition probability Fe (et+1 |et ). Asset income rt-1 at depends
on household wealth at and the return to savings rt-1 . As we discuss below, at is the sum
of holdings of government bonds, stocks in firms and physical capital. Because there is no
aggregate uncertainty, the rates of return on all these assets are equalized so we only need
to record the total wealth of a given household. For notational convenience, we assume
that households deposit their wealth with financial intermediaries who invest on households'
behalf. We assume that households cannot borrow so at+1  0.
        The budget constraint is

                              (1 + s ) ct + at+1 = it - T i (it ) + at - T a (at ) ,                (2)

where s is a consumption tax. We assume, in line with the tax code in the United States,
that all household income it = Wt et ht + rt-1 at is subject to a non-linear personal income tax
                                                                                          -
                                                                                       i1
schedule T i (it ). We assume a modified HSV1 tax function T (it ) = it - (1 -  )       t
                                                                                       1-
                                                                                              - t where
t is a lump-sum transfer. Here  determines the average level of the marginal income tax and
    1
        Benabou (2002), Heathcote et al. (2017).


                                                        6
 determines the slope of the marginal income tax schedule. As we show below, a lump-sum
transfer is necessary to capture means-tested and other transfers to poorer households in the
United States.
   In our baseline calibration we assume that the wealth tax T a (at ) is zero as currently
in the United States. However, in computing optimal taxes, we allow for the possibility of
non-linear wealth taxes, which we parameterize as
                                                 a
                                   T a (at ) =      a1+a .
                                               1 + a t
Here a determines the average level of the wealth tax and a determines how fast the marginal
wealth tax increases with wealth.

2.2    Technology
We assume that all firms produce a homogeneous good with identical technology
                                                1-     
                                         yt = kt lt

where kt and lt are the amounts of capital and labor used in production. We assume that
the production technology is decreasing returns to scale, with span of control parameter
 . Assuming decreasing returns to scale is inconsequential for our results, but facilitates
comparison with the model with entrepreneurs which we study in a latter section. We
normalize the price of output to 1.
   Output is used for consumption, investment and government spending, so the aggregate
resource constraint is
                                       Yt = Ct + Xt + G,
where Yt = Nt yt is total output produced by the mass Nt of firms in the economy, G is the
exogenously-given government spending, Xt is investment in physical capital and in creating
a mass t of new firms
                              Xt = Kt+1 - (1 -  ) Kt + Ft t ,
and Ft is the cost of creating a new firm in period t. Firms exit with exogenous probability
, so their number evolves endogenously according to

                                    Nt+1 = (1 - ) (Nt + t ) .

   These firms are subject to a corporate profit tax c . There is free entry, so the mass of
new firms t is pinned down by the free-entry condition

                                            Ft  Qt ,

                                               7
where Qt is the price of a claim to a firm and is given by
                                     1-
                              Qt =          [Qt+1 + (1 - c ) t+1 ] ,
                                     1 + rt
and t+1 are the profits of the representative firm.
   We follow Gutierrez et al. (2019) in assuming that entry costs increase with the mass of
entrants, so that entry responds inelastically to changes in the environment. Specifically, we
assume that
                                                ¯  ,
                                           Ft = F t

                                                                                    ¯ deter-
where  determines the elasticity of firm entry to changes in firm profitability and F
mines the average level of the entry costs. The elasticity of firm entry  has implications
for the comovement of stock prices and entry rates. If  = 0, stock prices are constant, and
all adjustment is in the entry margin, as in Hopenhayn (1992). As  increases, entry rates
respond less, and the stock price responds more to a given shock.

2.3    Government
The government has an outstanding stock of debt Bt on which it pays the equilibrium interest
rate rt-1 . It finances an exogenous amount of government spending G and collects taxes Tt .
The budget constraint is
                                 (1 + rt-1 ) Bt + G = Bt+1 + Tt ,

where taxes derive from personal income taxes, net of lump-sum transfers, wealth taxes,
consumption taxes and corporate income taxes.

2.4    Financial Intermediaries
For notational convenience, we assume that households deposit their savings with financial
intermediaries who use these resources to purchase capital, government bonds and shares in
corporate firms. Since this is a closed economy, all of these must add up to the savings of
the households.
   The budget constraint of the financial intermediary is

Kt+1 +Bt+1 -At+1 +Qt St+1 = (Rt + 1 -  ) Kt +(1 + rt-1 ) (Bt - At )+[Qt + (1 - c ) t ] (1 - ) St ,

where St denotes the number of shares in firms held by the intermediary and Qt is the price
of such shares. In equilibrium
                                         St+1 = Nt + t

                                                8
and
                                        Nt = (1 - ) St .

Here At is the total assets of the households, Kt+1 is the capital stock in the economy and Bt+1
is the amount the debt issued by the government in period t. Since financial intermediaries
can choose Kt+1 freely, it must be that

                                          Rt+1 = rt + .

2.5     Equilibrium
A competitive equilibrium consists of: (i) aggregate prices Wt , Rt , rt , (ii) consumption, sav-
ing and labor supply decisions of households ct (a, e), at+1 (a, e), ht (a, e), (iii) employment,
capital and output choices of firms lt , kt , yt , (iv) measures of households over their idiosyn-
cratic states nt (a, e), (v) mass of entrants t and incumbents Nt , and (v) stock price Qt such
that

  1. Given prices, households and firms solve their optimization problems.

  2. Total output is equal to
                                              Yt = Nt yt .

  3. Markets clear. The labor market clearing condition is

                                    Nt lt =     eht (a, e) dnt (a, e) .

       The asset market clearing condition is

                        Kt+1 + Bt+1 + Qt (Nt + t ) =         at+1 (a, e) dnt (a, e) ,

       where Kt = Nt kt .

       The goods market clears by Walras' Law.

  4. The mass of new entrants is pinned down by the free-entry condition.

  5. The budget constraint of the government is satisfied period by period.

  6. The measure nt (a, e) evolves according to an equilibrium mapping dictated by the
       households' optimal choices and the stochastic process for labor market ability.


                                                 9
2.6      Tax Distortions
Redistributive policies have production consequences because they distort household saving
and labor supply choices. We briefly discuss the two distortions introduced by redistributive
policies.
   Consider first the labor supply choice of households and let

                                ~it = 1 - (1 -  ) [rt-1 ait + Wt eit hit ]-
                                

denote the marginal income tax rate faced by household i. The income tax and the con-
sumption tax distort household labor supply by reducing the marginal return to working. In
particular, the labor supply choice is given by
                                                 1-  ~it -
                                         hit =          c Wt eit .
                                                 1 + s it
For aggregation purposes, which we turn to next, it is convenient to rewrite this optimality
condition in terms of a labor wedge it which implicitly satisfies
                                                    1 -
                                            hit =     c Wt eit .
                                                    it it
                cit
Letting c
        ^it =   Ct
                      denote the consumption share of household i and aggregating across house-
holds (see Berger et al., 2019 for details) yields the optimality condition for aggregate labor
supply
                                                  1
                                             L          -
                                              t = ¯ Wt Ct ,
                                                  t
where the aggregate labor wedge ¯t is
                                                                       -
                                                    - 1 -  1+ 1
                                     ¯t =
                                                 it  c
                                                     ^it  eit     di                        (3)

and depends on individual labor wedges and the covariance between consumption shares and
labor market ability.
   Consider next the households savings choice and let

                                                  a
                                                 ~it =  a a a
                                                           it


denote the marginal wealth tax faced by an individual household. The marginal income and
wealth tax both distort the savings choice, by lowering the marginal benefit of saving. In
particular, the savings choice is given by

                           c-         -
                            it =  Et cit+1 1 - 
                                                a
                                               ~it +1 + (1 - ~it+1 ) rt + it ,

                                                      10
where it is the multiplier on the no-borrowing constraint. For notational convenience, we
can collapse the distortions into a single savings wedge it that satisfies
                                                            1 + rt
                                          c-         -
                                           it =  Et cit+1          .
                                                             it+1
As above, aggregating across households yields the aggregate Euler equation
                                                1
                                          Ct- = ¯ Ct- 
                                                    +1 (1 + rt )
                                                t
where the aggregate savings wedge ¯t is

                                                          -              -1
                                   ¯t =           c
                                                  ^it+1       -1
                                             Et               it +1 di                      (4)
                                                    c
                                                    ^it

and depends on individual savings wedges and the growth rates of consumption shares.
        As we show below, the production consequences of redistribution via various tax instru-
ments are entirely captured by their impact on the two aggregate wedges.


3         Quantifying the Model
In this section we outline our calibration strategy, and then evaluate the model's ability to
account for data features not targeted in the calibration. We assume the economy is in
a steady-state in 2013 and target statistics for this year. We then calculate a measure of
inequality in consumption-equivalent welfare and use this to define the measures of social
welfare used throughout the rest of the paper.

3.1        Calibration Strategy
We next describe how we choose parameters for our quantitative analysis.

3.1.1       Assigned Parameters

We assume that a period in the model is one year and set the depreciation rate of capital
 = 0.06. We set the stock of government debt B equal to 100% of GDP, its value in
2013. We set the elasticity of capital in production  = 1/3, the span-of-control parameter
 = 0.85, the relative risk aversion  = 1, and the inverse of the Frisch elasticity of labor
supply  = 2, all conventional choices in the literature. We set the exit rate of corporate
firms  = 0.04, to match that exiting firms account for approximately 4% of employment.2
    2
        https://www.census.gov/data/tables/2013/econ/susb/2013-susb-employment.html

                                                    11
We set the elasticity of entry rates equal to  = 1.5, the estimate of Gutierrez et al. (2019)
who exploit the comovement between industry-level entry rates and stock prices to pin down
this parameter.
   We set the wealth tax parameters a and a to zero in the initial steady state. We follow
Bhandari and McGrattan (2018) and set c = 0.36 and s = 0.065, consistent with the United
States tax code. We assume that the unexpected capital gains generated upon implementing
the tax reforms are taxed at a constant rate k = 0.20, consistent with the capital gains tax
in the United States in 2013. We summarize these parameter choices in Panel B of Table 1.

3.1.2   Calibrated Parameters

We parameterize the income tax function to replicate the degree of income redistribution in
the United States. Specifically, we estimate the parameters ,  and  to match the CBO
data on the shares of income before and after taxes and transfers for eight income groups: the
first four quintiles, the 81st to 90th percentile, the 91st to 95th percentile, the 96th to 99th
percentile, as well as the top 1 percent. The advantage of the CBO data is that it combines
information from the Current Population Survey and the IRS Statistics of Income to provide
detailed information about taxes and transfers. In addition, the CBO adjusts its estimates of
means-tested transfers for survey under-reporting and thus provides a more accurate account
of the transfers to low-income households.
   We use the CBO data on the pre- and post-tax income shares of the various income groups
to estimate the parameters of the tax function using non-linear least squares, weighting each
group by its population share. The left panel of Figure 1 depicts both the data and the fitted
values from our estimates. Clearly, the fit is almost perfect. The tax function accounts well
for the extent of redistribution to the poorest quintiles and the degree of tax progressivity at
the top. For comparison, we also estimated the standard HSV tax function without lump-sum
transfers. As the right panel of the figure shows, this function overstates the taxes paid by
the richest households and understates the amount redistributed to the poorest households,
a point also made by Daruich and Fern´
                                     andez (2020). Table 1 shows that our estimates of
the parameters of the tax function are  = 0.049,  = 0.216 of the mean household income
(or approximately $18,000) and  = 0.280. Since the value of  cannot be easily interpreted
on its own, we note that the marginal tax paid by the median household in our model is
equal to 26% and the marginal tax rate paid by the richest 5% of households is equal to 34%.
We note that our estimate of  is similar to that of Guner et al. (2014), but, owing to the


                                              12
presence of lump-sum transfers, lower than that of Heathcote et al. (2017).
   As is well known, matching the large degree of wealth and income inequality in a standard
incomplete markets economy like ours requires departures from a Gaussian distribution of
ability. Since the distribution of ability is critical in shaping optimal tax policy (Saez, 2001),
we follow Castaneda et al. (2003) in allowing for a super-star state that allows the model to
match the top income and wealth shares. Specifically, an agent can be in either a normal
state or a super-star state. In the normal state labor market ability follows an AR(1) process

                                   log et = e log et-1 + e ut ,

where e is the persistence and e is the volatility of the shocks ut which are drawn from a
standard normal distribution. In the super-star state, labor market ability is relatively high,
e
¯ times higher than the average. We assume that agents transit from the normal to the super-
star state with a constant probability p and remain in the super-star state with a constant
probability q . When agents return to the normal state, they draw a new labor market ability
from the ergodic distribution associated with the AR(1) process. In the sensitivity section
we derive optimal policies for an alternative calibration with Gaussian ability shocks.
   The discount factor and the parameters describing the labor ability process are jointly
chosen to minimize the distance between a number of moments in the model and in the data.
We report the parameter values in Panel B of Table 1 and the moments we target with these
parameters in Panel A of Table 1. We target the average wealth to average income ratio, the
wealth and income Gini coefficients, and the top 0.1% and 1% wealth and income shares. All
these statistics are computed using the 2013 SCF.
   We next discuss how our model matches these targets. The wealth to income ratio is
6.6 in both the data and the model. The model reproduces well aspects of the wealth and
income distribution. It matches the wealth Gini coefficient (0.85 in the data vs. 0.84 in the
model) and the income Gini coefficient (0.64 vs. 0.65), the share of wealth held by the top
0.1% (0.22 vs. 0.23) and top 1% (0.35 in both the data and the model), the share of income
held by the top 0.1% and top 1% (0.14 and 0.22 in both the data and the model).
   Panel B of Table 1 reports the values of the calibrated parameters. The discount factor is
 = 0.966. The process for labor market ability in the normal state has persistence e = 0.986
and standard deviation e = 0.171. The level of ability in the super-star state is e
                                                                                  ¯ = 15.1
times greater than the average. Households enter this state with probability p = 0.02% and
remain there with probability q = 0.975. These numbers imply that 0.02% of households are
in the super-star state at any point in time.

                                                13
                                                                          ¯ to ensure that the
   Finally, without loss of generality, we normalize the fixed entry cost F
mass of firms is equal to one in the steady state. Total entry costs amount to 4.8% of GDP.

3.1.3    Additional Moments Not Targeted in Calibration

In our calibration we only targeted the Gini coefficients of the wealth and income distributions
and the shares of wealth and income held by the top 0.1% and 1%. Panels A and B of Table 2
show that the model reproduces these distributions more broadly. For example, the wealthiest
10% of households hold 75% of wealth in the data and and 72% in the model. Similarly, the
richest 10% of households earn 51% of income in both the data and the model. The model
also reproduces well the wealth and income shares at the bottom of the distribution. For
example, households in the bottom half of the wealth distribution hold only 1% of the wealth
in the data and nearly no wealth in the model, while households in the bottom half of the
income distribution earn 10% of income in the data and 6% the model.


  In summary, our model does a good job at reproducing the high degree of inequality in
wealth and income in the United States, including the very low wealth and income shares of
the median household.

3.2     The Distribution of Household Welfare
We next evaluate the extent to which incomplete risk-sharing translates into welfare inequal-
ity. Clearly, measures of wealth or income inequality do not entirely capture the distribution
of household welfare. For example, as we show below, an increase in lump-sum transfers may
reduce poor households' incentives to save and work, increasing wealth and income inequality.
However, such policies would make these households better off, reducing welfare inequality.
   We therefore next report the model's implications for welfare inequality. To do so, we
construct a measure of household welfare using an approach similar to that of Benabou (2002)
and Bakis et al. (2015). Specifically, we convert a household's life-time utility Vi into more
interpretable units by calculating the constant consumption stream i a household would
need to receive every period in order to achieve life-time utility Vi . Formally, consider a
household i who has life-time utility
                                        
                                                  c1
                                                   it
                                                     -
                                                        h1+
                              Vi = E0         t        - it     ,
                                        t=0
                                                  1- 1+




                                                  14
where the paths for consumption cit and hours hit solve the household's optimization problem.
We define household welfare i as the solution to
                                                        1-
                                                       i
                                                       t
                                         Vi =              .
                                                t=0
                                                       1-

That is, i is the amount the household would have to consume each period, without work-
ing, to enjoy the same level of life-time utility as under the equilibrium allocations. This
measure of welfare adjusts for risk, intertemporal substitution and mean-reversion and, im-
portantly, allows us to make interpersonal comparisons, a feature that is particularly useful
when comparing the degree of redistribution that can be achieved by a particular policy.
   Table 3 shows that welfare inequality is substantially smaller compared to wealth and
income inequality. For example, the share of wealth held by the top 1% is 35% and their
share of pre-tax income is 22%. Since the existing tax and transfer system entails some degree
of redistribution, post-tax income is less concentrated, with the top 1% earning 15% of all
income. Welfare is slightly less concentrated than post-tax income, owing to mean-reversion
in labor ability, but is nevertheless unevenly distributed, with the top 1% receiving twice
more than the bottom 25% combined (12% vs. 6%, respectively). We thus conclude that
our economy is characterized by substantial inequality in welfare, motivating our analysis of
redistributive policies.
   In our optimal policy exercise below we need to take a stand on the objective of the
planner. A parsimonious way of capturing alternative preferences for redistribution is to
express the social welfare function as
                                                                    1
                                                                   1-
                                                           1-
                           social welfare function =       i  di        ,

where  is a parameter that captures the desire to redistribute. This specification captures
a wide range of social welfare functions commonly used in the literature. For example, if
 = 0 the objective of the planner is to maximize average welfare, as in Benabou (2002):

                                   average welfare =       i di.                           (5)

As pointed out by Benabou (2002), who refers to it as risk-adjusted GDP, this objective
captures pure economic efficiency and disregards equity considerations in and of themselves.
Nevertheless, maximizing this criterion leads to more redistribution because policies that
improve risk-sharing, thus reducing consumption fluctuations, increase efficiency.


                                                  15
    Alternatively, by setting  = , the household's coefficient of relative risk aversion, we
recover the preferences of a utilitarian planner:
                                                                          1
                                                                         1-
                                                        1-
                            utilitarian welfare =       i  di                 .               (6)

To see that this is indeed the case, notice that the utilitarian social welfare function is
                                                 1              1-
                                 Vi di =                        i  di,
                                           (1 -  )(1 - )

which follows from our definition of i . To convert this measure into a consumption equiva-
lent, we calculate the constant amount of consumption ¯ that each household would have to
receive so that society achieves the utilitarian level of welfare             Vi di:

                                       1
                                               ¯ 1- =
                                                                Vi di,
                                 (1 -  )(1 - )

which implies that
                                                            1
                                                           1-
                                                1-
                                     ¯=         i  di           .

Thus, utilitarian welfare is simply a weighted average of the welfare of individual households,
                                                         -
with weights given by each household's marginal utility, i . More generally, a higher 
implies a stronger preference for redistribution. In the limit, as   , this objective
reduces to that of a Rawlsian planner. We show below that our results are robust to the
planner's preference for redistribution.


4     Inspecting the Mechanism
We begin our analysis by providing some intuition about the relative benefits and costs of
income and wealth taxes. To that end, we first change the parameters of the income and
wealth tax schedules in isolation and trace out the implications for welfare in various parts
of the distribution. We then gauge the relative cost of each instrument by examining the
macroeconomic implications of financing a given amount of redistribution using each of them
in isolation.
    Specifically, we consider one-time, unanticipated and permanent changes in the three
parameters that determine the level of marginal income taxes  , the slope of the marginal
income tax schedule  and the wealth tax a . For each of these changes, the lump-sum
transfer t adjusts to ensure that the government budget constraint is satisfied at all dates


                                                16
during the transition. As we vary each instrument, we keep all the other tax parameters,
including the amount of government debt, unchanged at their initial steady-state values. We
calculate the transition dynamics following these reforms and report their implications for
welfare taking into account the long-lived nature of these transitions.

4.1    Welfare Implications
Consider first the welfare implications of varying the average level of the marginal income
tax schedule  . The top row of Figure 2 reports the change in the welfare of the poorest
and richest 20% of households. Since households differ along two dimensions, wealth and
ability, we rank them by their welfare i in the initial steady state. Because the value of  is
not interpretable on its own, the horizontal axis reports the implied median marginal income
tax rate. As income taxes increase, the welfare of the poorest 20% of households increases
because of the larger lump-sum transfers. For example, raising marginal income taxes from
25% to 55% increases the welfare of these households by 40% on average. Recall that we
measure welfare in consumption-equivalent units, so these households experience an increase
in welfare equivalent to that resulting from a 40% permanent increase in consumption, a
sizable amount. Wealthy households, in contrast, lose from higher income taxes. For example,
raising marginal income taxes from 25% to 55% reduces their welfare by 15% on average.
   We also report, in the bottom row of the figure, the impact of higher income taxes on
average and utilitarian welfare, defined in equations (5) and (6). Small increases in marginal
income tax rates allow the planner to raise lump-sum transfers and increase average welfare,
as the insurance value of the transfers outweighs the distortions induced by higher taxes.
For a larger increase in marginal income taxes the distortions dominate and average welfare
decreases. For example, an increase in marginal income taxes from 25% to 55% reduces
average welfare by 2%. In contrast, utilitarian welfare increases for a much wider range of
marginal tax increases, owing to the utilitarian planner's explicit preference for redistribution.
Utilitarian welfare increases by approximately 8% when the median marginal income tax
increases to 55%.
   Consider next the welfare implications of varying the slope of the marginal income tax
schedule  , reported in Figure 3. Since the slope parameter is not easily interpretable on
its own, the horizontal axis in the figure reports the marginal tax rate paid by households
at the 95th percentile of the income distribution. We note that the median income tax is
approximately constant at 26%, as in the initial steady state. Qualitatively, the patterns


                                               17
documented in the figure are similar to those resulting from changing the average level of
income taxes. Notably, the welfare of the poor increases, while that of the rich falls. The
utilitarian welfare increases and then falls. Quantitatively, however, increasing marginal tax
rates only at the top leads to substantially smaller gains for poor households. Intuitively,
high marginal income taxes at the top discourage labor supply by high-ability households
and greatly reduce aggregate labor supply, lowering output and the tax base and resulting
in much lower lump-sum transfers. Since the welfare of the poorest households is mostly
determined by the size of the lump-sum transfers, they gain much less if the tax burden only
falls on high-ability earners.
   Lastly, Figure 4 shows the implications of increasing wealth taxes from 0 to 5%. Once
again, the qualitative patterns we obtain are similar to those resulting from higher marginal
income taxes. Higher wealth taxes allow the planner to finance larger lump-sum transfers,
increasing the welfare of the poor at the expense of the wealthier households. Notice, however,
that the welfare losses at the top are larger than in the case of income taxes. For example,
increasing the welfare of the poorest households by 20% comes at the expense of a 10% drop
in the welfare of the richest households if redistribution is achieved through higher income
taxes. In contrast, increasing the welfare of the poor by the same amount requires a 15% drop
in the welfare of the richest households if redistribution is achieved through wealth taxes.
   The results above show that increasing either wealth or income taxes allows the planner
to increase the welfare of the poor, thus achieving redistribution. Previous work used this
observation to argue in favor of a particular tax reform as means to increase utilitarian
welfare. However, most of this work allows the planner to change a single instrument at a
time. For example, Guvenen et al. (2019), Rotberg and Steinberg (2020) and Kaymak and
Poschke (2019) allow the planner to use wealth taxes and find large gains from taxing wealth.
Similarly, Kindermann and Krueger (2014), Bakis et al. (2015), Imrohoroglu et al. (2018) and
Br¨
  uggemann (2019) allow the planner to only use income taxes and also find welfare gains
from progressive income taxation. In contrast to this research, the goal of our paper is to
consider tax reforms that jointly change all of these instruments in order to identify the most
efficient means of redistribution.
   We provide a preliminary account of the relative costs of these instruments by character-
izing the equity-efficiency trade-off they imply. We do this by tracing out in Figure 5 the
change in the average welfare, our measure of efficiency, against the change in the welfare of
the poorest 20% of the households, implied by varying each of the three instruments in iso-


                                              18
lation. As the figure shows, for small amounts of redistribution average welfare increases for
all tax instruments, indicating the absence of an equity-efficiency tradeoff. Large amounts of
redistribution eventually decrease average welfare, because the distortions induced by taxes
dominate the insurance gains from lump-sum transfers. The key difference between the in-
struments is the amount of redistribution they can achieve before distortions become too
costly and reduce average welfare. Clearly, increasing the slope of the marginal income tax
schedule  is the most costly and can only achieve a very limited amount of redistribution.
Increasing average income taxes  allows the most redistribution and is least costly. The
wealth tax a is in between. For example, consider a planner that would like to increase the
welfare of the poor households by 20% and can only use a single instrument. Clearly, the
planner can only achieve this goal by either increasing wealth taxes or the average level of
income taxes. For efficiency considerations, the planner would prefer redistribution via in-
come taxes because this would generate a nearly 1% increase in average welfare. In contrast,
a wealth tax that delivers the same amount of redistribution comes at the cost of a nearly
2% decline in average welfare.

4.2    Macroeconomic and Distributional Implications
To better understand why a wealth tax is more costly than increasing the average level of
income taxes, we next zoom in on the transition dynamics induced by two policy reforms,
each of which increases the welfare of the bottom 20% of households by the same amount,
namely 20%. The first reform delivers this amount of redistribution by increasing the median
marginal income tax from 26% to 37%. The second reform achieves this by increasing the
wealth tax from 0 to 2.5%.
   Figure 6 illustrates the costs and the benefits of the two tax reforms. On the benefit side,
the left panel of the figure shows that lump-sum transfers increase after both reforms. The
wealth tax front-loads these transfers, which increase sharply initially but then quickly decline
as households decumulate wealth and the tax base shrinks. On the cost side, the next two
panels show the response of the aggregate labor and savings wedges, calculated as in equations
(3) and (4). In response to an increase in income taxes both the labor and the savings wedge
increase, as this tax distorts both the hours and the savings choice of households. The wealth
tax, in contrast, reduces the labor wedge by lowering the consumption share of wealthier,
higher ability households. Because of wealth effects on the labor supply, these households
reduce hours worked less than lower ability households, resulting in a decline of the labor


                                               19
wedge. As shown in the right panel of the figure, the wealth tax distorts the savings choice
by much more.
    Figure 7 shows that output and the capital stock fall much more if redistribution is
financed with wealth taxes. In contrast, the supply of efficiency units of labor falls by
less under a wealth tax, because of the reallocation of hours worked towards high ability
households. Consumption increases sharply after an increase in wealth taxes, owing to the
increase in lump-sum transfers as well as wealth decumulation by richer households, but
eventually drops to more than 10% below its initial steady-state value. In contrast, the
decline in consumption is smaller and more gradual if redistribution is financed with income
taxes. Finally, notice that interest rates increase sharply in response to an increase in wealth
taxes, owing to the decline in the supply of assets by households. Because the wealth tax
depresses the capital stock by more, it reduces the marginal product of labor and therefore
lowers the equilibrium wage. To summarize, a wealth that redistributes as much as an income
tax does comes at the cost of much larger production distortions.
    In Figure 8 we zoom in on the distributional implications of the two tax reforms. The
wealth tax leads to a sharper increase and then decrease in the consumption of the bottom
20% of households, mirroring its impact on the lump-sum transfers. Richer households
initially increase their consumption in response to higher wealth taxes to shield their assets
from taxation, but eventually experience a large drop in consumption as they become poorer.
The poorest households sharply reduce hours worked due to wealth effects on labor supply
stemming from larger lump-sum transfers. Though general equilibrium effects depress hours
worked by wealthy households as well, this effect is offset by the decline in their consumption
and the ensuing wealth effects.
    Of course, the results above only offer a partial characterization of the relative costs and
benefits of the tax instruments we considered, because we only varied them in isolation. In
the next section, we characterize a more comprehensive tax reform in which we allow the
planner to vary all instruments jointly. We will also allow for the possibility that the planner
taxes separately labor and capital, in order to understand the role of taxing each margin in
isolation.


5     Optimal Policy
We ask: what is the most efficient means of redistribution? We answer this question by
considering alternative once-and-for-all tax reforms and computing the resulting household

                                               20
welfare taking the long-lived transition dynamics into account. The tax reforms we consider
involve a one-time, unanticipated, permanent change in the parameters  = (, , a , a ) that
describe the income and wealth tax schedules. We restrict the space of tax instruments
to these four parameters for computational reasons: a search over unrestricted income and
wealth tax schedules is computationally infeasible. Nevertheless, we conjecture that the tax
schedules we consider are flexible enough to capture most of the gains from richer non-linear
tax systems and provide useful insight regarding the relative merits of wealth and income
taxation. For example, as Heathcote and Tsujiyama (2019) show, the optimal income tax
function in the HSV class approximates well the optimal Mirrlees policy in a static economy.
   Throughout, we maintain the assumption that government debt and all instruments other
than wealth and income taxes are constant and require that the lump-sum transfers t adjusts
at every date to ensure that the government budget is balanced. We have experimented with
allowing the planner to also choose debt optimally and found that raising government debt has
similar implications to increasing the wealth tax. Both policies allow for a temporary increase
in lump-sum transfers at the expense of a depressed capital stock. We found, as in Aiyagari
and McGrattan (1998), that the marginal gains from allowing the government to change
its debt are small and therefore do not report these results for brevity. We also considered
allowing the government to change consumption taxes. As is well known, a time-invariant
consumption tax is equivalent to a tax on labor and an initial capital levy. Not surprisingly,
we found that an optimally chosen consumption tax can generate large welfare gains, provided
it is sufficiently large, in excess of 200%. Given our focus on wealth and income taxation,
we do not report these results either and refer the interested reader to Correia (2010) for an
analysis of redistribution using consumption taxes and to Boar and Midrigan (2019) for an
analysis of the effects of corporate profit tax reforms. Finally, we follow the large literature
that considers once-and-for-all tax reforms (Domeij and Heathcote, 2004, Conesa et al., 2009,
Guvenen et al., 2019) and note that Dyrda and Pedroni (2018) allow for time-varying linear
taxes but find relatively small welfare gains relative to time-invariant instruments, provided
one restricts the planner's ability to tax initial wealth.
   We assume that the planner's objective is
                                                               1
                                                              1-
                                                    1-
                                   max       i ( )       di
                                    


where i ( ) is the welfare of household i resulting from a particular reform  . As earlier,
we compute this consumption-equivalent measure of welfare taking into account the path

                                               21
of equilibrium prices during the transition. Recall that  is a parameter that captures the
policymaker's preference for redistribution. Throughout most of our analysis we assume that
the objective of the planner is to maximize utilitarian welfare ( =  = 1), but we show that
our conclusion is robust to alternative preferences for redistribution.

5.1    Maximizing Utilitarian Welfare
We proceed incrementally, by first allowing the planner to only use a flat income tax 
combined with a lump-sum transfer and then gradually augmenting the set of instruments
with non-linear income taxes, linear wealth taxes as well as non-linear wealth taxes. We find
that an optimally chosen flat income tax delivers most of the welfare gains that the planner
can possibly achieve. Specifically, the incremental welfare gains from non-linear income and
wealth taxes are small.


Flat Income Tax. The first column in Table 4 reports the effects of replacing the current
tax and transfer system with an optimally chosen flat income tax. Panel A of the table
reports the change in the tax schedule. We find that a flat tax of 56% on all earners is
optimal in this restricted class of instruments. Increasing the median marginal tax rate from
26% in the initial steady state to 56% allows the planner to increase lump-sum transfers across
steady states from 17% to 28% of the per-capita GDP in the initial steady state. Panel B
of the table shows that the welfare of the poorest 20% of households increases substantially,
by 42%. Households in the middle of the welfare distribution experience a welfare gain of
6% while the richest 20% of households lose the equivalent of 14% of life-time consumption.
Recall that we sort households by their welfare in the initial steady state when doing these
calculations. Overall, utilitarian welfare increases by 7.8%. That is, this reform is equivalent
to permanently increasing all households' consumption by 7.8%.
   Panels C and D report the macroeconomic and distributional consequences of implement-
ing the optimal flat income tax. All macroeconomic aggregates fall in the new steady state,
owing to the fact that the income tax depresses capital accumulation and labor supply. For
example, output falls by 19%, the capital stock falls by 36% and employment falls by 10%.
Interestingly, wealth and income inequality greatly increase across steady states, as poor
households no longer save for precautionary reasons and cut hours worked in response to the
higher lump-sum transfers. In contrast, the Gini coefficient of welfare i falls from 0.38 in
the initial steady state to 0.30, reflecting the redistributive nature of the policy reform.


                                               22
Non-linear Income Tax. In the second column of Table 4 we report results from allowing
the planner to optimally choose a non-linear income tax schedule. As Panel A shows, the
planner chooses marginal income taxes that increase with income, more so than in the status-
quo ( = 0.078 vs. 0.049). Because the value of  is not interpretable on its own, the table
reports the implied marginal income tax rate for earners at the 50th and 95th percentile of
the income distribution. We note that the median marginal income tax increases from 26%
to 50%, while the marginal income tax rate at the 95th percentile increases from 34% to
58%. Notice that the increase in the lump-sum transfer is smaller than that obtained under
an optimally chosen flat income tax. Consequently, as Panel B shows, the poorest 20%
of households experience somewhat smaller welfare gains (38%). In contrast, households
in the middle of the distribution experience larger welfare gains (7%), owing to the lower
marginal income tax. Overall, the utilitarian social welfare increases by 8.5%, a modest gain
relative to the one achieved with the flat income tax, mostly reflecting gains in the middle of
the distribution. As earlier, macroeconomic aggregates fall sharply and slightly more than
under a flat income tax. A non-linear income tax reduces the savings of wealthy households,
reducing wealth inequality as well as inequality in welfare.


Non-linear Income Tax and A Flat Wealth Tax. We next allow the planner to use
a linear wealth tax, in addition to a non-linear income tax schedule, and report the results
in the third column of Table 4. The planner finds it optimal to set the wealth tax to 0.6%,
which allows for a reduction in marginal income tax rates to 47% at the 50th percentile of
the income distribution and to 55% at the 95th . Though allowing for a wealth tax does not
change the welfare of the poor relative to an optimally chosen non-linear income tax schedule,
it increases the welfare of those in the middle of the welfare distribution from 7% to 8% and
decreases the welfare of those at the top from 14% to 15%. This results in a very modest
increase in utilitarian welfare, from 8.5% to 8.7%. The wealth tax further depresses the
capital stock and output, but has a modest impact on wealth, income and welfare inequality.


Non-linear Income and Wealth Tax. The last column of Table 4 reports the implica-
tions of allowing the planner to use both non-linear income and wealth taxes. The optimal
wealth tax is progressive, with the median household paying a 0.2% marginal wealth tax and
households at the 95th percentile of the wealth distribution facing a 0.7% marginal wealth
tax. Once again, enlarging the set of instruments that the planner can use mostly benefits
households in the middle of the distribution, at the expense of wealthy households. Even

                                              23
though a non-linear wealth tax greatly reduces wealth and income inequality, it comes at
the expense of larger declines in the capital stock and output. Overall, the planner is able
to increase utilitarian welfare by 9.5%. Since the planner is able to increase welfare by 7.8%
using flat income taxes alone, we conclude that a flat income tax can achieve 82% of the over-
all gains from redistribution attainable using non-linear wealth and income taxes. In this
precise sense, a flat income tax is nearly optimal, a result reminiscent of the static Mirrleesian
literature summarized by Mankiw et al. (2009).


Role of Taxing Capital. We emphasize that our result that the incremental gains from
taxing wealth are small does not imply that the gains from taxing capital income are low.
Rather, the gains from taxing capital income at a different rate than labor income are low.
To see this point, we next allow the planner to tax labor and capital income at different rates.
Specifically, we allow the planner to optimally choose among a mix of potentially non-linear
taxes levied on labor income Wt et ht and on wealth at . We note that in this economy taxing
wealth and asset income is nearly equivalent,3 and therefore do not allow for separate capital
income taxes.
       Table 5 reports the results from this experiment. As before, we proceed incrementally,
starting from a flat labor income tax and then enlarging the set of instruments to allow
for non-linear labor income and wealth taxes. The first column of the table shows that an
optimally chosen flat labor income tax only increases utilitarian welfare by 2.9%, much less
than the 7.8% attainable using a flat tax applied to both labor and asset income. This
suggests that taxing capital income is important for efficient redistribution. We then note
that the marginal gains from non-linear labor income taxes are small, in that the planner can
only increase welfare by 3.3%. Interestingly, despite the fact that labor income taxes alone
lead to relatively modest utilitarian welfare gains, note that poor households gain quite a
bit. An optimally chosen flat labor income tax of 63% increases the welfare of the poorest
20% of households by 30%, a sizable amount.
       The last two columns of Table 5 show that if the planner can also tax wealth in addition to
labor income, it chooses to tax wealth at a rate of approximately 4%, allowing it to increase
welfare to 9.3% or 10.7%, depending on whether wealth taxes are non-linear or not. These
gains are similar to those achieved using the set of instruments considered earlier. To see
   3
    They are not exactly equivalent because we calculate optimal policy including transition dynamics and
the return to savings varies over time. Therefore, one-time permanent changes in capital or wealth taxes
yield different paths for government revenue during the transitions.



                                                   24
why this is the case, consider for example the optimal flat income tax of 56% in Table 4.
Since this tax applies to both labor and capital income, and given the equilibrium interest of
6.6% implied by this policy, it amounts to a 3.7% (0.56 × 0.066) tax on wealth, only slightly
lower than that reported in Table 5.
   That taxing capital in this economy is welfare improving stems from several consid-
erations.   First, as pointed out by Aiyagari (1995), our economy features capital over-
accumulation relative to an economy with complete markets. Second, taxing capital prevents
high ability households from accumulating wealth and leads them to supply more labor.
Third, since the stock of wealth is inelastic in the short run, taxing it generates government
revenue. Overall, we note that in all the experiments we considered the long-run savings
wedge is greater than one, suggesting that the planner wants to tax capital at a rate that is
higher than that prescribed by the golden rule.

5.2    Maximizing Alternative Social Welfare Functions
We next show that our conclusion that flat income taxes are nearly optimal does not depend
on the planner's preference for redistribution. To that end, in Table 6 we report optimal policy
for two alternative social welfare functions. The top of the table reports results for a social
welfare function with  = 0. With such an objective the planner seeks to maximize average
welfare, that is, pure economic efficiency. The bottom of the table reports results for setting
 = 2 so the planner desires more redistribution than the utilitarian planner considered
above. As earlier, we gradually enlarge the set of tax instruments that the planner can use,
starting from a flat income tax and concluding with non-linear income and wealth taxes.
   As the top part of the table shows, a planner that is only concerned with efficiency and
can only use flat income taxes sets the marginal income tax rate equal to 43%, lower that
that chosen by a utilitarian planner. Nevertheless, such an income tax greatly increases the
size of the lump-sum transfers and the welfare of the poor households, by 24%. Notice that
average welfare increases by only 0.6%, suggesting that the status quo is nearly optimal for
a planner that desires to maximize pure economic efficiency. As before, the planner prefers
marginal income taxes that increase with income, but the additional gains from these are
small. Finally, the planner would find it optimal to subsidize wealth accumulation by setting
the linear wealth tax to -0.7%, which would increase social welfare to 1%, once again a small
amount. A non-linear wealth tax provides virtually no additional welfare gains.
   To summarize, even if the planner has no explicit concern for redistribution, it chooses a


                                              25
policy that greatly increases the welfare of the poor. Average welfare, our measure of effi-
ciency, increases due to additional insurance. We conclude that measures of macroeconomic
activity, such as output, which falls here, are poor indicators of how efficient a particular
redistributive tax reform is. Our argument is thus distinct from that of Bowles and Gintis
(1996) who argue that under certain circumstances more redistributive policies may increase
output. In contrast, the policies we consider here reduce output, but increase average welfare.
Nevertheless, the additional gains from departing from flat income taxes are small.
   The bottom panel of Table 6 reports the optimal policy chosen by a planner with strong
preference for redistribution. Not surprisingly, such a planner finds it optimal to set higher
income and wealth taxes which increases the welfare of poor households even more, at the
expense of larger welfare losses at the top. For example, the optimal flat income tax is equal
to 60%, 4 percentage points larger than that chosen by a utilitarian planner. The optimal
flat wealth tax is equal to 0.9%, also larger than that chosen by a utilitarian planner. Once
again, allowing for a richer set of instruments mostly benefits households in the middle of
the distribution rather than households at the bottom. Importantly, the incremental gains
from non-linear wealth and income taxes are small. For example, an optimally chosen flat
income tax delivers 92% (0.151/0.164) of the maximum welfare gains that the planner can
attain using non-linear wealth and income taxes.

5.3    Sensitivity Analysis
It is well known in the public finance literature that optimal tax policy is critically shaped by
household preferences and the distribution of household ability. We next show that though
the size of optimal taxes indeed depends on these details of the model, our conclusion that
a flat income tax is nearly optimal is robust. Specifically, we consider three perturbations
of the model. First, we reduce the intertemporal elasticity of substitution to 0.5 by setting
 = 2. Second, we double the Frisch elasticity of labor supply by setting  = 1. Lastly, we
assume a Gaussian distribution of ability by eliminating the super-star state. We recalibrate
each of these models and revisit the optimal tax experiments under the assumption that the
planner maximizes utilitarian social welfare.


Parameterization. Table 7 reports the parameter values under the three perturbations
of the model in Panel A and the implied moments in Panel B. The economies with a lower
elasticity of intertemporal substitution and a higher Frisch elasticity of labor supply suc-


                                                26
cessfully reproduce the wealth to income ratio, the Gini coefficients of wealth and income
inequality, the top 0.1% and top 1% wealth and income shares. In contrast, as is well known,
the economy in which labor ability is normally distributed cannot reproduce the top wealth
and income shares and the fact that wealth is more concentrated than income.


Optimal Policy. The three panels of Table 8 report the optimal policy chosen by the
planner in each of these alternative economies. As earlier, we gradually increase the set of
instruments that the planner can use. For brevity, we only report results from allowing the
planner to use a flat income tax, a non-linear income tax and a flat wealth tax. Consider first
Panel A, an economy characterized by a lower elasticity of intertemporal substitution. Since
under this parameterization a utilitarian planner desires more redistribution, the optimal
flat income tax is 72%, larger than the 56% in our benchmark model. As the second column
shows, the planner prefers positively-sloped marginal income taxes, reducing the median
marginal income tax to 67% and raising marginal income taxes at the 95th percentile to 75%.
However, the incremental welfare gains from doing so are small (29.8% vs. 28.9%). The third
column shows that when the planner can also use a wealth tax to redistribute, it chooses a
large wealth tax of 4.4%, much larger than the 0.6% in the benchmark model. Nevertheless,
the marginal welfare gains are, once again, small. Overall, an optimally chosen flat income
tax achieves 85% of the welfare gains that the planner can attain by using all tax instruments.
   Consider next the economy with a higher Frisch elasticity of labor supply, displayed in
Panel B. Since labor is more elastic, the optimal flat income tax is smaller than in our
benchmark and is equal to 51%. Once again, the planner prefers positively-sloped marginal
income taxes, but the gains from this flexibility are very small. Finally, the planner chooses
to tax wealth at a rate of 1.4%, allowing it to further reduce income taxes. Once again,
however, a flat income tax achieves most (80%) of the welfare gains attainable with a richer
set of tax instruments.
   Lastly, Panel C reports optimal policies in an economy with normally distributed labor
ability. As is well known (Saez, 2001, Mankiw et al., 2009), marginal income taxes decrease
with income in such an environment. We confirm this in the second column of the table
which shows that the marginal income tax falls from 79% at the median to 63% at the 95th
percentile. Once again, the incremental welfare gains of departing from a flat income tax
are very small. Similarly, even though the planner finds it optimal to set a 0.5% wealth tax,
the incremental gains from wealth taxation are minuscule because there is not much wealth
concentration at the top.

                                              27
6     Optimal Policy in an Economy with Entrepreneurs
Our motivation for studying an economy with entrepreneurs is that in the U.S. data much
of wealth and income is concentrated in the hands of private business owners. According to
the 2013 SCF, pass-through business owners represent 12% of households, but account for
46% of all wealth and 31% of all income.4 This group of households is especially prevalent
at the top of the income and wealth distribution: they account for 62% of households in the
top 1% income bracket and 70% of households in the top 1% wealth bracket. An important
characteristic of private businesses (see Dyrda and Pugsley, 2018) is that rigid ownership
rules make it difficult for them to issue equity. They therefore rely much more on internal
savings and collateralized borrowing, which generates heterogeneity in rates of return across
these households, as in Quadrini (2000) and Cagetti and De Nardi (2006).5 As Guvenen et
al. (2019) shows, because of this heterogeneity, in such an environment there is an important
distinction between taxing wealth and taxing capital income, a feature absent in our bench-
mark model. Since pass-through business profits in the United States are taxed as individual
income, tax reforms depress entrepreneurs' incentives to accumulate wealth and overcome
collateral constraints, thus affecting their production choices. These effects are potentially
important because private business owners account for 40% of output in the United States.
Motivated by these considerations, we next augment our model to allow for entrepreneurial
activity. We revisit the question of efficient redistribution in this richer setting and once
again find that a flat income tax is nearly optimal.

6.1     Framework
We extend the standard incomplete markets economy studied above by assuming that an
exogenously given fraction  of households have the option to run a private business. These
households supply labor and also earn business income t (a, z ) which depends on their en-
trepreneurial ability z and their wealth a due to a collateral constraint. Entrepreneurs max-
imize the same objective and face the same budget constraint as in the benchmark model,
listed in equations (1) and (2). The only difference is that their income includes profits and
is given by
                                   it = Wt et ht + rt-1 at + t (at , zt ).
   4
     We use a broad definition of entrepreneurs that encompasses all private business owners, not only those
actively engaged in managing their business.
   5
     See also Meh (2005), Boar and Knowles (2020) and Bhandari et al. (2020a) who study tax policy in
economies with private business owners.


                                                     28
   Entrepreneurs produce the same homogenous good as corporate firms using the same
technology
                                                     1-   1-         
                                               yt = zt  kt lt            .

Their entrepreneurial efficiency zt follows a Markov process with transition probability Fz (zt+1 |zt ).
We assume that the processes for labor and entrepreneurial ability are independent. En-
trepreneurial profits are equal to

                                          t (at , zt ) = yt - Wt lt - Rt kt .

Unlike corporate firms, they face a collateral constraint which limits the capital used in
production to a multiple   1 of their wealth

                                                      kt  at .

Notice that the marginal return to wealth for entrepreneurs, net of the equilibrium interest
rate, is
                                       t (at , zt )
                                                    = µt (at , zt ) ,
                                           at
where µt (at , zt ) is the multiplier on the collateral constraint. Poor but efficient entrepreneurs
are more constrained and therefore have a higher return to saving. The entrepreneurs' Euler
equation for wealth accumulation is therefore given by

                      c-         -        a
                       it =  Et cit+1 1 - it+1 + (1 - ~it+1 ) (rt + µit+1 )

so income taxes reduce the shadow return to saving and hinder their ability to overcome
collateral constraints.
   Collateral constraints introduce two additional distortions relative to our benchmark
model. First, they generate dispersion in the marginal product of capital across produc-
ers, generating misallocation and reducing TFP. Second, they depress the capital-output
ratio. To see the impact on misallocation, we note that aggregating individual producers'
choices allows us to write an aggregate production function
                                           e                            -            
                                          yit di + Nt yt  Yt = Zt Kt L1
                                                                      t                 ,
                                   entr
       e
where yit denotes the output of entrepreneur i, Nt is the mass of corporate firms, and yt is the
output produced by an individual corporate firm, while Kt and Lt denote aggregate capital
and labor. Aggregate productivity Zt is endogenously determined and is equal to
                                                    1-(1-)                        1-(1-)                -
                               -                                             -
           Zt =            zit it 1- di + Nt z                           zit it     1-
                                                                                            di + Nt z       ,
                    entr                                          entr


                                                          29
where it = 1 + µit /Rt and z is the productivity of corporate firms. Absent collateral
constraints, it = 1, and aggregate productivity increases to
                                                                    1-
                                    Zt   =          zit di + Nt z        .
                                             entr

To see that collateral constraints also depress the capital-output ratio and act as a tax on
capital, we note that aggregating individual capital choices across firms gives
                                                Yt      ¯t ,
                                                   = Rt 
                                                Kt

where ¯t =   1
                         it kit di + Nt kt is a weighted average of the capital wedge of individual
             Kt   entr
producers.

6.2    Parameterization
Table 9 reports the parameter values and moments we targeted to calibrate this version
of the model. The externally-set parameters have the same values as in our benchmark
model. We assume that entrepreneurial ability zt follows an AR(1) process with persistence
z and volatility z . We choose the parameters governing the process for labor market
and entrepreneurial ability, the fraction of entrepreneurs, the discount factor, the collateral
constraint and the span of control parameter to match the moments listed in Panel A of the
table. In addition to targeting the wealth to income ratio and moments characterizing overall
wealth and income inequality, we now require that the model also reproduces the fraction
of entrepreneurs in the data, their wealth and income shares, the fraction of entrepreneurs
in the top 0.1% and 1% wealth bracket and the Gini coefficients of the wealth and income
distributions for entrepreneurs and workers separately. All these statistics are computed using
the 2013 SCF, a year for which Bhandari et al. (2020b) find that, despite its limitations, the
SCF data on aggregate business income aligns well with the IRS data. In addition, we target
the sales share of corporations reported by Dyrda and Pugsley (2018) and the size-weighted
average debt to capital ratio for entrepreneurs reported by Crouzet and Mehrotra (2017) for
US firms and Zetlin-Jones and Shourideh (2017) for UK firms. As Panel A of Table 9 shows,
the model successfully reproduces all these statistics.
   We briefly discuss the model's implications for the severity of financial constraints. We
note that the capital-weighted fraction of constrained entrepreneurs is equal to 43%, reflect-
ing the relatively low value of the leverage ratio  of 2.3 necessary to match the debt to
capital ratio of entrepreneurs in the data. Nevertheless, our model predicts relatively small

                                                     30
overall losses from misallocation, of 1.3%, similar to those in Midrigan and Xu (2014), partly
reflecting that corporate firms are unconstrained. The capital wedge      ¯ induced by collat-
eral constraints depresses the capital-output ratio of entrepreneurial firms by 17% and the
aggregate capital-output ratio by 6%.

6.3    Optimal Policy
Table 10 reports optimal policies chosen by a utilitarian planner. As earlier, we gradually
increase the number of tax instruments that the planner has at its disposal. The first column
of the table shows that the flat optimal tax chosen by the planner is 58%, very similar to
the 56% chosen in the benchmark economy. The welfare of the poorest 20% of households
increases by 42%, that of households in the middle of the distribution increases by 7%, while
wealthy households experience welfare losses of 13% on average. These numbers are similar
to those in the benchmark model. Overall, utilitarian welfare increases by 9.1%. Notice also
that the drop in macroeconomic aggregates and the change in inequality across steady states
are also quantitatively similar to those induced by implementing the optimal flat income tax
in the economy without entrepreneurs.
   Consider next a planner who can use non-linear income taxes. As the second column of
the table shows, the planner reduces the median marginal income tax to 51% and increases
the marginal income tax at the 95th percentile to 60%, numbers once again very similar to
those in the benchmark model. Non-linear income taxes allow the planner to increase the
utilitarian welfare gains from 9.1% to 9.8%. A planner who can also use wealth taxes, sets the
flat wealth tax equal to 0.6%, but the marginal welfare gains from this additional instrument
are negligible. Finally, a planner that can also use non-linear wealth taxes chooses to tax
wealth only at the top, setting the median marginal wealth tax equal to zero and taxing
the wealth of households at the 95th percentile of the wealth distribution at a rate of 0.5%,
increasing utilitarian welfare gains to 10.6%. As in the benchmark model, the beneficiaries
of a richer set of tax instruments are households in the middle of the distribution, and a flat
income tax achieves the vast majority (86%) of the maximum attainable welfare gains.
   Because wealth and income taxes are not equivalent in this model, we next study optimal
policy reforms that separately tax labor income, capital income and wealth. We report the
results of these experiments in Table 11. For brevity we restrict attention to linear taxes
only. The first column reports the optimal policy and its effects on welfare when the planner
can only use labor income taxes. The optimal tax on labor income is equal to 63% and it


                                              31
allows the planner to increase lump-sum transfers relative to the status quo, increasing the
welfare of the poorest 20% of households by 19%. However, utilitarian welfare falls relative to
the status quo, since the planner no longer taxes capital. This benefits entrepreneurs, whose
average welfare increases by 10%, and hurts workers who now pay higher taxes on their labor
income. Overall, their welfare falls on average by 6%. The reason utilitarian welfare falls is
that the majority of households in our economy are workers and these agents are poorer on
average than entrepreneurs.
   In the second column of the table we show that allowing the planner to tax capital income
rt-1 at + t (at , zt ) in addition to labor income greatly increases utilitarian welfare, by 9.5%.
The planner achieves these gains by taxing capital income at a rate slightly higher than labor
income (66% vs. 53%). Notice however, that the marginal welfare gains from being able to
tax capital and labor income at different rates are small. In particular, welfare gains are
now 9.5%, only slightly higher than the 9.1% achieved with a uniform flat tax levied on both
sources of income reported in the first column of Table 10. By taxing capital the planner is
able to redistribute from the relatively wealthy entrepreneurs, whose welfare falls by 14%,
towards workers, who experience welfare gains of 5% on average.
   In the third column of the table we allow the planner to use labor income and a wealth tax.
Since the wealth tax falls on both workers and entrepreneurs, a tax on wealth is unable to
achieve as much redistribution as a tax on capital income. Consequently, utilitarian welfare
only increases by 5.6%. Notice that the average welfare of both workers and entrepreneurs
falls in this experiment, suggesting that the wealth tax is too blunt a tool of redistribution.
As pointed out by Guvenen et al. (2019), the advantage of the wealth tax is that it improves
allocative efficiency because, unlike a capital income tax, it does not fall exclusively on
productive entrepreneurs. To see this, Figure 9 displays the transition dynamics induced
by moving from the status quo to the optimally chosen capital income and wealth taxes
reported in the last two columns of Table 11. Notice that the capital income tax increases
misallocation and significantly depresses the capital stock of entrepreneurs, increasing the
implicit tax on capital in the economy. In contrast, misallocation falls in the wealth tax
reform and the capital stock of entrepreneurs falls much less, resulting in a decline in the
capital wedge. Consequently, aggregate productivity falls more under the capital income tax
reform. These efficiency considerations are swamped however by the planner's concern for
redistribution. Since entrepreneurs in our economy are much wealthier on average, as in
the data, the planner desires to redistribute towards workers and thus prefers to tax capital


                                               32
income instead of wealth. Indeed, we found that when the planner can tax both capital
income and wealth in addition to labor income, it chooses to set the wealth tax equal to zero
and reproduces the allocations reported in the second column of Table 11.
    Notice that this result differs from Guvenen et al. (2019), who argue that a wealth tax is
preferable to taxing capital income. Our analyses deviate along a number of dimensions. In
contrast to Guvenen et al. (2019), in our framework entrepreneurs co-exist with unconstrained
corporate firms and operate a technology that uses both capital and labor. Our losses from
misallocation are therefore much smaller than in their setting (1.3% vs. 20%). In addition, we
target the large wealth and income concentration in the hands of entrepreneurs and conduct
optimal policy taking transition dynamics into account. That our results are different from
those of Guvenen et al. (2019) therefore simply reflects well known results in public finance
that the details of the model critically influence the size of optimal taxes.
    Notwithstanding all these subtleties, our main point stands: a flat income tax is nearly
optimal and the marginal gains from either non-linear income, wealth or differential taxation
of capital and labor income are small.


7     Conclusions
Motivated by the large increase in wealth and income inequality in the United States, we ask:
what are the most efficient means of redistribution in an unequal society? We answer this
question by characterizing the optimal shape of income and wealth tax schedules in a dynamic
general equilibrium model that reproduces the observed wealth and income inequality.
    We find that taxing capital and labor income at a uniform flat rate is nearly optimal,
in that the incremental gains from introducing more complex non-linear income and wealth
tax schedules are relatively small. Intuitively, increasing taxes on wealth and the income
of top earners depresses the capital stock and output, reducing the tax base and therefore
the amount of lump-sum transfers. Since the welfare of the poor is primarily determined by
the size of these transfers, a utilitarian planner avoids distorting the savings and labor sup-
ply choices of high-ability households. Though households in the middle of the distribution
benefit from more progressive income and wealth taxes, utilitarian welfare, which dispropor-
tionately weighs the consumption-equivalent welfare of the poor, increases little when the
planner is able to use more complex tax instruments. This result is robust to a number of
perturbations of the model, as well as to explicitly modeling private business ownership and
the ensuing heterogeneity in rates of return stemming from financial constraints.

                                              33
References
Aiyagari, S. Rao, "Optimal Capital Income Taxation with Incomplete Markets, Borrowing
 Constraints, and Constant Discounting," Journal of Political Economy, 1995, 103 (6),
 1158­1175.

   and Ellen R. McGrattan, "The optimum quantity of debt," Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 1998, 42 (3), 447 ­ 469.

Bakis, Ozan, Baris Kaymak, and Markus Poschke, "Transitional Dynamics and the
 Optimal Progressivity of Income Redistribution," Review of Economic Dynamics, 2015, 18
 (3), 679 ­ 693.

Benabou, Roland, "Unequal Societies: Income Distribution and the Social Contract,"
 American Economic Review, March 2000, 90 (1), 96­129.

  , "Tax and Education Policy in a Heterogeneous-Agent Economy: What Levels of Redis-
  tribution Maximize Growth and Efficiency?," Econometrica, 2002, 70 (2), 481­517.

Berger, David W, Luigi Bocola, and Alessandro Dovis, "Imperfect Risk-Sharing and
 the Business Cycle," Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research 2019.

Bhandari, Anmol and Ellen McGrattan, "Sweat Equity in U.S. Private Business," 2018.
 Minneapolis Fed Staff Report 560.

  , Ellen R. McGrattan, and Yuki Yao, "Taxation of Paid- and Self-Employment,"
  2020. working paper.

  , Serdar Birinci, Ellen R. McGrattan, and Kurt See, "What Do Survey Data Tell
  Us about U.S. Businesses?," 2020. working paper.

Boar, Corina and Matthew Knowles, "Entrepreneurship, Agency Frictions and Redis-
 tributive Capital Taxation," 2020. working paper.

   and Virgiliu Midrigan, "Markups and Inequality," Working Paper 25952, National
  Bureau of Economic Research June 2019.

Bowles, Samuel and Herbert Gintis, "Efficient Redistribution: New Rules for Markets,
 States, and Communities," Politics & Society, 1996, 24 (4), 307­342.

Br¨
  uggemann, Bettina, "Higher Taxes at the Top: The Role of Entrepreneurs," 2019.
 working paper.

Cagetti, Marco and Mariacristina De Nardi, "Entrepreneurship, Frictions, and
 Wealth," Journal of Political Economy, 2006, 114 (5), 835­870.

Castaneda, Ana, Javier Diaz-Gimenez, and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull, "Accounting for
 the U.S. Earnings and Wealth Inequality," Journal of Political Economy, 2003, 111 (4),
 818­857.


                                          34
Conesa, Juan Carlos and Dirk Krueger, "On the Optimal Progressivity of the Income
 Tax Code," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2006, 53, 1425­1450.

  , Sagiri Kitao, and Dirk Krueger, "Taxing Capital? Not a Bad Idea after All!,"
  American Economic Review, March 2009, 99 (1), 25­48.

Correia, Isabel, "Consumption Taxes and Redistribution," American Economic Review,
 2010.

Crouzet, Nicolas and Neil R. Mehrotra, "Small and Large Firms over the Business
 Cycle," 2017.

Daruich, Diego and Raquel Fern´   andez, "Universal Basic Income: A Dynamic Assess-
 ment," Working Paper 27351, National Bureau of Economic Research June 2020.

Domeij, David and Jonathan Heathcote, "On the Distributional Effects of Reducing
 Capital Taxes," International Economic Review, 2004, 45 (2), 523­554.

Dyrda, Sebastian and Benjamin Pugsley, "Taxes, Regulations of Businesses and Evo-
 lution of Income Inequality in the US," 2018. Working Paper.

  and Marcelo Pedroni, "Optimal Fiscal Policy in a Model with Uninsurable Idiosyncratic
  Shocks," 2018. working paper.

Ferriere, Axelle, Philipp Gr¨   ubener, Gaston Navarro, and Oliko Vardishvili, "Tax
  Progressivity, Credits, and Transfers in the United States," 2020. working paper.

Guner, Nezih, Remzi Kaygusuz, and Gustavo Ventura, "Income Taxation of U.S.
 Households: Facts and Parametric Estimates," Review of Economic Dynamics, 2014, 17
 (4), 559­581.

Gutierrez, German, Callum Jones, and Thomas Philippon, "Entry Costs and the
 Macroeconomy," Working Paper 25609, National Bureau of Economic Research February
 2019.

Guvenen, Fatih, Gueorgui Kambourov, Burhan Kuruscu, Sergio Ocampo, and
 Daphne Chen, "Use It or Lose It: Efficiency Gains from Wealth Taxation," Working
 Paper 26284, National Bureau of Economic Research September 2019.

Heathcote, Jonathan and Hitoshi Tsujiyama, "Optimal Income Taxation: Mirrlees
 Meets Ramsey," 2019. working paper.

  , Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L. Violante, "Optimal Tax Progressivity: An
  Analytical Framework," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (4), 1693­1754.

Hopenhayn, Hugo A., "Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium,"
 Econometrica, 1992, 60 (5), 1127­1150.

Imrohoroglu, Ayse, Cagri S. Kumru, and Arm Nakornthab, "Revisiting Tax on Top
  Income," Technical Report 2018.

                                          35
Kaymak, Bari¸  s and Markus Poschke, "The Macroeconomic and Distributional Effects
 of Progressive Wealth Taxes," 2019. working paper.

Kindermann, Fabian and Dirk Krueger, "High Marginal Tax Rates on the Top 1%?
 Lessons from a Life Cycle Model with Idiosyncratic Income Risk," Working Paper 20601,
 National Bureau of Economic Research 2014.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, Matthew Weinzierl, and Danny Yagan, "Optimal Taxation in
 Theory and Practice," Journal of Economic Perspectives, December 2009, 23 (4), 147­74.

Meh, Cesaire, "Entrepreneurship, Wealth Inequality, and Taxation," Review of Economic
 Dynamics, July 2005, 8 (3), 688­719.

Midrigan, Virgiliu and Daniel Yi Xu, "Finance and Misallocation: Evidence from Plant-
 Level Data," American Economic Review, February 2014, 104 (2), 422­58.

Quadrini, Vincenzo, "Entrepreneurship, Saving, and Social Mobility," Review of Economic
 Dynamics, 2000, 3 (1), 1 ­ 40.

Rotberg, Shahar and Joseph Steinberg, "The Economic Effects of Wealth Taxes and
 Wealth Tax Evasion," 2020. working paper.

Saez, Emmanuel, "Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Income Tax Rates," The Review
  of Economic Studies, 2001, 68 (1), 205­229.

Zetlin-Jones, Ariel and Ali Shourideh, "External financing and the role of financial fric-
  tions over the business cycle: Measurement and theory," Journal of Monetary Economics,
  2017, 92 (C), 1­15.




                                           36
                                 Table 1: Parameterization

                                 A. Moments Used in Calibration


                                                          Data    Model

                                Wealth to income ratio     6.6      6.6

                                Gini wealth                0.85    0.84
                                Gini income                0.64    0.65

                                Wealth share top 0.1%      0.22    0.23
                                Wealth share top 1%        0.35    0.35

                                Income share top 0.1%      0.14    0.14
                                Income share top 1%        0.22    0.22




                                        B. Parameter Values


                    Assigned                                              Calibrated

        1       CRRA                                     0.966    discount factor
        2       inverse Frisch elasticity         e      0.986    autocorrelation e
        1/3     capital elasticity                e      0.171    std. dev. e shocks
        0.06    depreciation rate                 p      0.0002   prob. enter super-star state
a , a   0       wealth tax                        q      0.975    prob. stay super-star state
s       0.065   consumption tax                   e
                                                  ¯      15.1     ability super-star state, rel. to mean
c       0.36    corporate profits tax                    0.166    lump-sum transfer, rel. per-capita GDP
k       0.20    capital gains tax                        0.280    income tax schedule
        0.04    exit rate, corporations                  0.049    income tax schedule
        1.5     elasticity of entry rate
        0.85    span of control
¯
B       1       government debt to GDP




                                                 37
                   Table 2: Non-Targeted Moments

                       Data        Model                                        Data      Model

A. Wealth Distribution                                 B. Income Distribution

Share top 5%            0.63       0.57                Share top 5%             0.39       0.39
Share top 10%           0.75       0.72                Share top 10%            0.51       0.51

Share bottom 75%        0.09       0.08                Share bottom 75%         0.29       0.27
Share bottom 50%        0.01       0.00                Share bottom 50%         0.10       0.06
Share bottom 25%       -0.01       0.00                Share bottom 25%         0.02       0.01



           Notes: The data moments are based on the 2013 SCF survey.




                   Table 3: Dimensions of Inequality

                         Welfare       Post-Tax Income         Pre-Tax Income          Wealth

Share top 1%              0.12                  0.15                   0.22             0.35
Share top 5%              0.23                  0.28                   0.39             0.57
Share top 10%             0.33                  0.39                   0.51             0.72

Share bottom 75%          0.47                  0.40                   0.27             0.08
Share bottom 50%          0.26                  0.14                   0.06             0.00
Share bottom 25%          0.06                  0.05                   0.01             0.00




                                           38
     Table 4: Optimal Tax Policy. Maximize Utilitarian Welfare ( = 1)


                                            Flat           Non-linear     + Flat        + Non-linear
                                         income tax        income tax    wealth tax      wealth tax

                                                  A. Tax Schedule


        marg income tax, 50th pct           0.56              0.50          0.47             0.49
        marg income tax, 95th pct           0.56              0.58          0.55             0.55
        marg wealth tax, 50th pct             0                0            0.006           0.002
        marg wealth tax, 95th pct             0                0            0.006           0.007
        lump-sum transfer                   0.28              0.25          0.24             0.24


                                                  B. Welfare Change


        bottom 20%                           0.42            0.38           0.38             0.40
        middle 20%                          0.06             0.07           0.08            0.09
        top 20%                             -0.14            -0.14          -0.15           -0.21
        planner's objective                0.078             0.085          0.087           0.095


                                        C. Change in Macro Aggregates


        output                              -0.19            -0.21          -0.23           -0.23
        tfp                                 -0.03            -0.03          -0.04           -0.04
        capital                             -0.36            -0.38          -0.43           -0.42
        employment                          -0.10            -0.11          -0.10           -0.11
        wage                                -0.11            -0.11          -0.14           -0.13
        interest rate (level, %)             6.58            6.84            7.56            7.40


                                                    D. Inequality


        Gini wealth                         0.94              0.77          0.76             0.50
        Gini income                         0.73              0.64          0.64             0.57
        Gini welfare                        0.30              0.26          0.25             0.21



Notes: Panels A, C and D report values of variables in the new steady state. The lump-sum transfer is
expressed relative to initial per-capita GDP. Panel B reports welfare changes taking transitions into account.
For reference, the interest rate in the initial steady state is equal to 3.98%.




                                                      39
               Table 5: Optimal Tax Policy. Role of Taxing Capital


                                         Flat          Non-linear    + Flat      + Non-linear
                                      labor tax        labor tax    wealth tax    wealth tax

                                              A. Tax Schedule


        marg labor tax, 50th pct         0.63             0.59         0.50          0.51
        marg labor tax, 95th pct         0.63             0.64         0.57          0.57
        marg wealth tax, 50th pct         0                0          0.042         0.035
        marg wealth tax, 95th pct         0                0          0.042         0.043
        lump-sum transfer                0.28             0.26         0.26          0.24


                                              B. Welfare Change


        bottom 20%                       0.30            0.27         0.44           0.46
        middle 20%                        0              0.01         0.08          0.10
        top 20%                         -0.06            -0.06        -0.17         -0.23
        planner's objective             0.029            0.033        0.093         0.107



Notes: Panel A reports values of variables in the new steady state. The lump-sum transfer is expressed
relative to initial per-capita GDP. Panel B reports welfare changes taking transitions into account.




                                                  40
  Table 6: Optimal Tax Policy. Alternative Preferences for Redistribution

                                          Flat            Non-linear    + Flat        + Non-linear
                                       income tax         income tax   wealth tax      wealth tax


                                   I. Maximize Average Welfare,  = 0


                                                A. Tax Schedule

       marg income tax, 50th pct           0.43              0.38         0.42            0.42
       marg income tax, 95th pct           0.43              0.43         0.48            0.48
       marg wealth tax, 50th pct            0                 0          -0.007             0
       marg wealth tax, 95th pct            0                 0          -0.007          -0.007
       lump-sum transfer                   0.24              0.22         0.23            0.23

                                                  B. Welfare Change

       bottom 20%                          0.24             0.20          0.20             0.19
       middle 20%                         0.03              0.04          0.03            0.03
       top 20%                            -0.05             -0.05         -0.04           -0.03
       planner's objective                0.006             0.008         0.010           0.010



                                   II. Maximize Social Welfare for  = 2


                                                A. Tax Schedule

       marg income tax, 50th pct           0.60              0.55         0.52            0.53
       marg income tax, 95th pct           0.60              0.61         0.58            0.57
       marg wealth tax, 50th pct            0                 0           0.009           0.007
       marg wealth tax, 95th pct            0                 0           0.009           0.011
       lump-sum transfer                   0.29              0.27         0.25            0.25

                                                  B. Welfare Change

       bottom 20%                          0.46             0.43          0.43            0.44
       middle 20%                         0.06              0.07          0.07            0.08
       top 20%                            -0.16             -0.17         -0.19           -0.22
       planner's objective                0.151             0.154         0.157           0.164




Notes: Panels A report policy variables in the new steady state. The lump-sum transfer is expressed relative
to initial per-capita GDP. Panels B report welfare changes taking transitions into account.


                                                     41
                  Table 7: Sensitivity: Parameterization


                                               Lower IES   Higher Frisch   Gaussian
                                   Data
                                                 =2           =1            ability

                                  A. Parameter Values


 , discount factor                              0.953         0.965         0.961
e , autocorrelation e                           0.986         0.987         0.990
e , std. dev. e shocks                          0.214         0.156         0.236
p, prob. enter super-star state                 0.0003        0.0003          ­
q , prob. stay super-star state                  0.981         0.978          ­
e
¯, ability super-star state                       16.4         14.5           ­


                                          B. Moments


Wealth to income ratio              6.6           6.6           6.6          6.6
Gini wealth                        0.85          0.84          0.85          0.87
Gini income                        0.64          0.65          0.64          0.78
Wealth share top 0.1%              0.22          0.22          0.22          0.06
Wealth share top 1%                0.35          0.35          0.35          0.25
Income share top 0.1%              0.14          0.14          0.14          0.06
Income share top 1%                0.22          0.22          0.22          0.23




                                          42
             Table 8: Sensitivity: Optimal Policy


                                   Flat       Non-linear    + Flat
                                income tax    income tax   wealth tax

                             A. Lower IES,  = 2


marg income tax, 50th pct          0.72            0.67       0.52
marg income tax, 95th pct          0.72            0.75       0.66
wealth tax                          0                0       0.044
social welfare gains               0.289           0.298     0.339


                            B. Higher Frisch,  = 1


marg income tax, 50th pct          0.51            0.46       0.39
marg income tax, 95th pct          0.51            0.52       0.46
wealth tax                          0                0       0.014
social welfare gains               0.049           0.05      0.061


                             C. Gaussian Ability


marg income tax, 50th pct          0.65            0.79       0.78
marg income tax, 95th pct          0.65            0.63       0.61
wealth tax                          0                0       0.005
social welfare gains               0.246           0.256     0.257




                                   43
         Table 9: Economy with Entrepreneurs: Parameterization

                                A. Moments Used in Calibration


                                                                    Data   Model

                        Wealth to income ratio                      6.6     6.5

                        Percentage entrepreneurs                    6.6    6.6
                        Wealth share of entrepreneurs               0.46   0.44
                        Income share of entrepreneurs               0.31   0.28
                        Fraction entrepr., top 0.1% wealth          0.66   0.65
                        Fraction entrepr., top 1% wealth            0.70   0.80

                        Gini   wealth, all hhs                      0.85   0.87
                        Gini   income, all hhs                      0.64   0.66
                        Gini   wealth, entrepr.                     0.78   0.78
                        Gini   income, entrepr.                     0.68   0.68
                        Gini   wealth, workers                      0.81   0.87
                        Gini   income, workers                      0.58   0.62

                        Wealth   share   top   0.1%                 0.22   0.17
                        Wealth   share   top   1%                   0.35   0.37
                        Income   share   top   0.1%                 0.14   0.12
                        Income   share   top   1%                   0.22   0.22

                        Average debt to capital ratio               0.35   0.34
                        Sales share of corporate firms              0.63   0.63




                                         B. Parameter Values


                   Assigned                                                Calibrated

        1      CRRA                                        0.969    discount factor
        2      inverse Frisch elasticity                   0.117    share of entrepreneurs
        1/3    capital elasticity                     z    0.961    AR(1) z
        0.06   depreciation rate                      z    0.696    std. dev. z shocks
a , a   0      wealth tax                             e    0.981    AR(1) e
c       0.36   corporate profits tax                  e    0.198    std. dev. e shocks
k       0.20   capital gains tax                      p    0.0001   prob. enter super-star state
        0.04   exit rate, corporations                q    0.985    prob. stay super-star state
        1.5    elasticity of entry rate               e
                                                      ¯    18.3     ability super-star state, rel. to mean
                                                           2.303    leverage constraint
                                                           0.784    span of control
                                                      z    2.63     productivity corporate firms




                                                      44
        Table 10: Optimal Policy: Economy with Entrepreneurs,  = 1


                                            Flat           Non-linear     + Flat        + Non-linear
                                         income tax        income tax    wealth tax      wealth tax

                                                  A. Tax Schedule


        marg income tax, 50th pct           0.58              0.51          0.47             0.50
        marg income tax, 95th pct           0.58              0.60          0.57             0.57
        marg wealth tax, 50th pct             0                0            0.006             0
        marg wealth tax, 95th pct             0                0            0.006           0.005
        lump-sum transfer                   0.29              0.26          0.26             0.25


                                                  B. Welfare Change


        bottom 20%                           0.42            0.38           0.38             0.40
        middle 20%                          0.07             0.08           0.09            0.09
        top 20%                             -0.13            -0.13          -0.14           -0.17
        planner's objective                0.091             0.098          0.100           0.106


                                        C. Change in Macro Aggregates


        output                              -0.20            -0.22          -0.23           -0.23
        tfp                                 -0.03            -0.03          -0.04           -0.04
        capital                             -0.38            -0.41          -0.46           -0.45
        employment                          -0.12            -0.13          -0.11           -0.12
        wage                                -0.09            -0.10          -0.13           -0.12
        interest rate (level, %)             5.31            5.54            6.44            6.15


                                                    D. Inequality


        Gini wealth                         0.93              0.85          0.85             0.73
        Gini income                         0.72              0.68          0.69             0.65
        Gini welfare                        0.26              0.25          0.25             0.23



Notes: Panels A, C and D report values of variables in the new steady state. The lump-sum transfer is
expressed relative to initial per-capita GDP. Panel B reports welfare changes taking transitions into account.
For reference, the interest rate in the initial steady state is equal to 2.86%.




                                                      45
Table 11: Wealth vs. Capital Income Taxes in Economy with Entrepreneurs


                                               Flat labor    + Flat capital     + Flat
                                              income tax      income tax       wealth tax

                                            A. Tax Schedule


            labor income tax                     0.63            0.53             0.56
            capital income tax                    0              0.66              0
            wealth tax                            0                0             0.043
            lump-sum transfer                    0.26            0.26             0.26


                                             B. Welfare Change


            bottom 20%                            0.19            0.41            0.35
            middle 20%                           -0.05           0.08            0.04
            top 20%                              -0.02           -0.14           -0.15
            average welfare workers              -0.06            0.05           -0.02
            average welfare entrepreneurs        0.10            -0.14           -0.04
            planner's objective                 -0.011           0.095           0.056



Notes: Panel A reports values of variables in the new steady state. The lump-sum transfer is expressed
relative to initial per-capita GDP. Panel B reports welfare changes taking transitions into account.




                                                 46
                                     Figure 1: Tax Function

                             1- 1-                                               1- 1-
                         +   1- y                                                1- y




Notes: The figure plots the relationship between pre- and post-tax income under the assumption that post-
                              - 1-                               - 1-
tax income is equal to i)  + 1
                             1- y     in the left panel and ii) 1
                                                                1- y  in the right panel. The dashed line is
the 45 degree line.




                          Figure 2: Welfare Effect of Changing 




                                                    47
Figure 3: Welfare Effect of Changing 




Figure 4: Welfare Effect of Changing a




                  48
               Figure 5: The Cost of Redistribution




Figure 6: Effect of Tax Reforms on Lump-sum Transfers and Wedges




                                49
Figure 7: Effect of Tax Reforms on Macro Aggregates




   Figure 8: Distributional Effect of Tax Reforms




                         50
Figure 9: Effect of Capital and Wealth Taxes on Financial Distortions




                                 51
