                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    UNDERSTANDING THE GERMAN CRITICISM OF THE TARGET SYSTEM AND
                 THE ROLE OF CENTRAL BANK CAPITAL

                                       Roberto Perotti

                                     Working Paper 27627
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27627


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2020




I thank Francesco Giavazzi, Marco Maffezzoli and Luca Paolazzi for very useful comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Roberto Perotti. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Understanding the German Criticism of the Target System and the Role of Central Bank capital
Roberto Perotti
NBER Working Paper No. 27627
July 2020
JEL No. E58,E63,F33

                                         ABSTRACT

Criticism of the Target system by a group of central European scholars has become a widespread
argument against the policies of the European Central Bank and even the integrity of the
monetary union, and even standard fare in the media and in the political debate in Germany. Most
academics and practitioners that have participated in the debate have been dismissive of the
German preoccupations. In this paper, I first try and clarify the many remaining
misunderstandings about the workings and implications of the Target system. I propose a unified,
systematic and simple approach to the study of the workings of the Target system in response to
different shocks and in comparison with different alternative regimes. I then argue that the
German criticism of the Target system is not so unfounded after all, and should be taken
seriously, both on theoretical grounds and for its political implications.


Roberto Perotti
IGIER Universita' Bocconi
Via Roentgen 1
20136 Milano
ITALY
and CEPR
and also NBER
roberto.perotti@unibocconi.it
1 INTRODUCTION
The monetary union, and in particular the European Central Bank, are the object of harsh criticism from
several quarters. The reasons for these criticisms vary, but in Germany and other countries the Target
system is among the most salient. That system is often cited as a serious threat to the very integrity of
the monetary union, and its critique by a group of central European scholars has even become standard
fare in the media and in the political debate of those countries 1.
          The scholarly debate itself started almost ten years ago, and despite some heated exchanges (at
least by the standards of academia) the views of the participants do not seem to get any closer. The
earlier debate was particularly active during the sovereign and banking crisis of 2011-2012, which led to
an accumulation of Target claims by Germany peaking at 730bn euros in the summer of 2014. At the
time, a series of papers by academics, including De Grauwe and Ji (2012) and Whelan (2014), together
with several contributions particularly on VoxEu.org, argued that most of the criticisms had no basis. It
is fair to say that to many academics these contributions appeared to have conclusively shown that the
criticisms of the Target system as such were theoretically unfounded.
          After declining considerably, Target imbalances came back with a vengeance with the start of
Quantitative Easing in January of 2015: the German net Target claims reached a peak of 932bn at the
end of 2018, and with the end of QE in 2019 they declined only slightly to 804bn as of end-February
2020. With the resumption of QE in November 2019 and its subsequent enlargement under the
Pandemic Emergency Purchase Program, the net Target claims of Germany are likely to increase further,
all the more so should there be a new flight to safety from some country hit by a government debt crisis.
          Predictably, the increase in Target claims associated with QE has reignited criticism of and worries
about the Target system. The arguments used in this new wave of criticism are identical to those of the
earlier debate (see e.g. Sinn 2018). Either the critics have not read carefully the earlier academic
contributions that purportedly had proved them wrong, or the arguments of the critics' critics were not
so self-evident after all.
          There are several reasons why the debate does not seem to be anywhere nearer to being settled
than it was five years ago. The criticism of the Target system was rarely formalized exactly, and it was not
easy to understand exactly what it consisted of. In particular, it was rarely clear whether it was the Target
system per se that was being criticized, or rather Target imbalances were seen only as the manifestation
of problems created by specific choices of monetary policy. Most critics of the Target system would have
claimed that it was both: see for instance Westermann (2014). It was also not always clear what realistic
arrangements the Target critics had in mind as alternatives. On the other hand, in their defense of the
Target system the critics of the critics went too far, and refused to concede some valid points of the latter.
          The purpose of this paper is twofold. First, to try and clarify the many remaining
misunderstandings about the workings and implications of the Target system. I propose a unified,
systematic and simple approach to the study of the workings of the Target system in response to different
shocks: in particular (i) a current account shock; (ii) capital flight or a capital repatriation shock (iii) and
Quantitative Easing (QE). Also, I argue that the Target system can only be evaluated (and its criticism can

1
 It even found a way in the internal debate of the European Central Bank when in March 2012 the Bundesbank's
president Jens Weidmann wrote a letter to the then President of the ECB Mario Draghi demanding guarantees for
Germany's Target claims (see Reuters 2012).

                                                       2
only be understood) against carefully specified alternatives: I will consider a monetary union without a
Target system, in which transfers of reserves between banks occur though the ECB directly and not via
national central banks; a Target system with periodic settlement of balances; and a fixed exchange rate
system.
         In the process of clarifying the working of the Target system, I point out two results. First, Target
balances are irredeemable and, in equilibrium, carry no effective remuneration. A private company
subject to accounting standards might well have to value them at 0. Yet they appear in the conventional
balance sheets of the national central banks at face value. This in turn has led to persistent
misunderstanding on the interpretation of the whole Target system. I show that (to a first approximation)
this is not a mistake, as the creation of a Target balance is always accompanied by a change in reserves
of an equal amount but an opposite sign.
         Second, I point out that one alternative variously advanced by both critics and defenders of the
Target system, the settlement of Target balances, is nearly impossible to implement in the Eurozone. The
parallel with the much cited Interdistrict Settlement Account of the Federal Reserve banks does not hold,
for reasons that have gone previously unnoticed.
         The second goal of this paper is to use this more systematic approach to reconsider the German
criticism of the Target system. I argue that there are two types of criticisms that should be taken more
seriously than the academic literature and many policymakers have been willing to do so far. First, the
Target system is not just a reflection of monetary policy, but it could amplify the macroeconomic
responses to monetary policy and other shocks. Second, the system does increase the risks to the
German taxpayer in case of a Eurozone breakup.
         I reach several conclusions. First, and contrary to what has been argued by some commentators,
a default on the German Target claims is a loss of real resources to the German taxpayer, relative to what
would have happened in alternative monetary regimes, like a fixed exchange rate or a Target system
with settlement.
         Second, and again contrary to a widely held position, this conclusion holds regardless of what is
the cause of the accumulation of Target claims, whether they are the results of capital flows (which in
themselves do not change the net foreign asset position of a country) or of current account surpluses.
         Third, if it causes conventional capital to go very negative, a large default on its Target claims
could force a post-breakup Bundesbank to face a trilemma: either accept an immediate recapitalization
by the government, or accept a delayed recapitalization via a stream of subsidies over a long period of
time, or else increase seigniorage and miss the inflation target. The first two options would jeopardize
the independence of the central bank, the third would force it to adopt an undesired monetary policy
stance.
         Fourth, it is well known that in a world of fiat money a central bank could continue its business
as usual even with a mildly negative capital, which does not force it to face the trilemma above. However,
in practice central bankers and most politicians would simply find it inconceivable to work with negative
capital: the central bank will be recapitalized. In the case of Germany the principle has even been affirmed
by the constitutional court, and the ECB itself has taken a strong stance on the issue.
         Sixth, a Target default , and the ensuing negative equity of the Bundesbank, could easily be much
larger than nearly all the cases of negative equity studied in the literature. This would simply be
unexplored territory, both for central bankers and for the public, where psychology could play a bigger
role than economics.
         Seventh Target balances and the associated default risk could easily influence the monetary
policy of the Eurozone, contrary to what many have argued. It is true that the monetary policy of the

                                                      3
Eurozone is usually decided consensually, but a large Target claim might conceivably increase the threat
point of the other countries and force Germany to accept a more accommodative Eurozone policy in
order to reduce the risk of default.
         Obviously this paper has many antecedents. The debate was sparkled by several contributions by
a number of German and Austrian economists. Among the first, and making no pretense at
completeness 2, Sinn and Wollmershäuser (2012a) (issued in 2011 as a working paper) and Sinn (2011a)
and (2011b), with initial replies by Buiter, Rahbari, and Michels (2011a) and (2011b), RebelEconomist
(2011), Whelan (2011), and Cecchetti, McCauley and McGuire (2012). Subsequent contributions will be
cited in the next sections where relevant. An important one is Whelan (2014), that appeared in Economic
Policy at the peak of the previous debate on Target balances. While the present paper has many overlaps
with and builds on that paper, it also differs in its methodology, in its findings, in its focus, and most
importantly in its assessment of the Target criticisms. While Whelan (2014) was dismissive of nearly all
Target criticisms, I reach much more nuanced conclusions, and indeed do find that some of these
criticisms are well grounded and should not be taken lightly. Continuing to ignore them might exacerbate
and poison the political debate and could jeopardize, rather than reinforce, the integrity of the monetary
union, as it will entrench the critics and radicalize the political opposition to the monetary union.




2 THE TARGET SYSTEM
Target is a real-time cross-border settlement system used by Eurozone central banks, and also by a few
non-Eurozone ones. The details are technical, but for our purposes the basic features of the system are
very simple. 3 Target records the claims and liabilities of each National Central Bank (NCB) of the
Eurosystem vis à vis the rest of the Eurosystem. Whenever a payer in a country pays with deposits the
payee in another country, a Target claim (liability) is penciled in to the NCB of the payee (payer). This is
necessary because a transfer of deposits between banks always takes place via a transfer of central bank
reserves; if the transfer of deposits concerns two commercial banks that hold reserves at two different
NCBs, a system must be devised to keep track of these movements of reserves between NCBs. Target is
such a system.
        Consider first how a transfer of deposits would occur between Paolo and Kurt, who live in a
country outside the Eurozone, with its own money and its own central bank (first panel of Table 1).
Whenever Paolo pays Kurt 10 units of account with deposit money, Paolo's bank debits his account for
10 units, and then instructs the central bank to transfer ownership of 10 units of central bank reserves
from Paolo's bank to Kurt's bank; the latter then credits Kurt's account for 10 units.




2
  I also cite only the literature in English. There exists also a considerable literature in German that I do not have
access to.
3
  Perhaps the best, simple introduction to the Target system is Jobs, Handig, and R. Holzfeind (2012). Strictly
speaking, what I call here "Target system" is "Target2", the second generation of the settlement system, that started
operations in November 2007.

                                                          4
                                         Table 1: The mechanics of Target claims

                                         Paolo and Kurt live in the same country
             Paolo's bank                             Central Bank                                 Kurt's bank
           Assets     Liabilities             Assets                  Liabilities               Assets     Liabilities
                                                                   Reserves of Paolo's bank    Reserves at
        Reserves at      Paolo's                                                                             Kurt's
                                                                   = -10                       central
        central bank     deposit                                                                             deposit
                                                                   Reserves of Kurt's bank     bank
        = -10            = -10                                                                               = +10
                                                                   = + 10                      = +10


                  Paolo and Kurt live in two different countries belonging to a monetary union
             Paolo's bank               Bank of Italy            Bundesbank             Kurt's bank
           Assets     Liabilities   Assets      Liabilities  Assets     Liabilities Assets      Liabilities
        Reserves at      Paolo's      Target net    Reserves of    Target net    Reserves of   Reserves at   Kurt's
        own NCB          deposit      claim         Paolo's bank   claim         Kurt's bank   own NCB       deposit
        = -10            = -10        = -10         = -10          = +10         = + 10        = +10         = +10




Now suppose Paolo and Kurt live in Italy and Germany respectively, two countries that belong to the
Eurozone: the two countries share a currency, but each keeps its own national central bank (second panel
of Table 1). Paolo's bank holds reserves at the Bank of Italy, while Kurt's bank holds reserves at the
Bundesbank. Because of this, the process of transferring reserves between two banks in two different
jurisdictions cannot occur in one step, but it requires an intermediate step.
         Like before, the transfer of deposits is effected via a transfer of reserves between two
commercial banks; but if reserves were simply transferred from the reserve account of Paolo's bank at
the Bank of Italy to the reserve account of Kurt's bank at the Bundesbank, the latter would suffer a
decline in its net worth by 10 euros (commercial banks' reserves are a liability item of central banks) and
would have to pay interests on the extra reserves. 4 To avoid this, a claim for 10 euros on the European
Central Bank is penciled in on the balance sheet of the Bundesbank, and correspondingly a debit of 10
euros to the European Central Bank is penciled in on the balance sheet of the Bank of Italy. These are
the net Target claims of the two banks.
         Thus, Paolo's bank debits his account for 10 euros, and then has its own reserve account at the
Bank of Italy debited for the same amount. In turn, the net Target claims of the Bank of Italy are reduced
by 10 euros, while those of the Bundesbank are increased by 10 euros. The Bundesbank then credits the
reserve account of Kurt's bank for 10 euros, and the latter credits Kurt's deposit account for the same
amount. The end result for Paolo and Kurt and for their commercial banks is the same as in the first
example, but now the balance sheets of the two NCBs have changed: the Bundesbank's (Bank of Italy's)
net foreign asset position improves (worsens) by 10 euros. In the one-country example of the first panel,
instead, the balance sheet of the single central bank had not changed.
         Note that nothing in a monetary union requires this intermediate step. The European Monetary
Union could have decided to eliminate all NCBs, and to keep a single central bank. All banks in the
European Monetary Union would then hold reserves with this central bank, and any cross-border transfer
of deposits would have occurred much as in the first example. Presumably for political reasons, the



4
    At the time of writing the interest rate on excess reserves is negative.

                                                             5
European Monetary Union preserved the existence of each country's NCB.5 Whenever a monetary union
is created that maintains separate central banks for separate jurisdictions, a system that keeps track of
the debits and credits (i.e., the transfers of banks' reserves) between central banks is necessary.
         Note that it makes no difference whether the cross-border deposit transfer occurs for the
purpose of paying a purchase of goods and services (a current account transaction) or an asset (a private
capital account transaction): in both cases the net Target balance of the payee's (payer's) NCB improves
(worsens). 6 Concretely, this means that a country (or rather, its NCB) accumulates a Target liability
whenever a transaction increases the current account deficit or causes an outflow of capital, and the
transaction is paid for by a transfer of deposits.




3 CRITICISMS OF TARGET
Criticism of the Target system can be found in numerous contributions. In what follows, and at the risk
of some oversimplification, I try to distil the main charges from this body of critical literature.

1. Misguided monetary policies led to the accumulation of large Target liabilities by periphery countries
by creating large amounts of liquidity in the Eurozone (see e.g. Sinn 2018 and Sinn and Wollmershäuser
2012a). Since the inception of the Euro the ECB kept interest rates in periphery countries "artificially"
low, thus making it easier to finance large public and current account deficits. Then, excessively loose
monetary policy during and after the financial crisis also created the conditions for subsequent capital
flights during the sovereign debt and banking crises of 2011 and 2012 in the periphery countries, and for
the repatriation of German capital that had financed some of the current account deficit earlier. The
"excessively loose monetary policy" took the form of, among others, very generous use of Emergency
Liquidity Assistance, a very generous expansion of collateral accepted by the Eurosystem for refinancing
operations, and the first outright purchase programs like the Security Market Program. Finally, the
programs of large scale asset purchases that started in earnest in January 2015, also known as
Quantitative Easing, also contributed to yet more accumulation of Target liabilities by periphery
countries.
         To the extent that Target imbalances can be considered mere reflections of the underlying
monetary policies, these are criticisms of the monetary policies adopted by the ECB. There is an
enormous debate on these policies: the present paper is not an addition to this literature. However, the
Target critics go further. They would start from the observation that the Target system "transforms"
marketable claims with a well-defined maturity held by the private sector of the Target creditor into non-
marketable, perpetual claims held by the central bank of the Target creditor against the Eurosystem (see
Sinn 2012a p. 53). This leads to the next two criticisms of Target:



5
  Another reason might be that this system works better in the case of a breakdown of the cross-border interbank
market: a bank of country A wishing to transfer deposits to country B deals directly with the NCB of country A, not
with a bank in country B. However, a breakdown in the interbank market usually means that a bank in country A is
not willing to lend to a bank in country B; it does not mean that the payment system breaks down, in the sense that
bank A would be unwilling to transfer reserves to bank B if it decided to lend.
6
  Obviously in the first case ­ a current account transaction - the net foreign asset position of the payee's (payer's)
country improves (worsens); in the second ­ a capital account transaction ­ it remains unchanged.

                                                          6
2. The Target system itself amplifies the responses to these monetary policy shocks and other shocks,
which result in high cross-border flows of payments and high Target imbalances. For instance, if Target
debt were collateralized Southern European countries would have been able to run much smaller current
account deficits than they did.

3. The Target system increases the risks to the German taxpayer in case of a euro breakup. In other
words, Target claims are a particularly risky asset for the creditor country; some alternatives exist that
would be less risky.

This paper deals with questions 2. and 3, with a warning that in the Target debate they are not always
clearly distinguished from question 1. In addition, these two issues might not be independent of each
other, but for illustrative purposes I will deal with them separately. One source of misunderstandings in
the debate is that these questions assume a comparison to other possible monetary regimes (the Target
system "amplifies" the flows and "increases" the risks), but these alternative regimes are rarely spelled
out explicitly and systematically. Thus, in what follows I will consider three specific alternatives to the
current regime of monetary union cum Target.

1. A monetary union without national central banks, but with a single European Central Bank where all
banks hold their reserves. Banks transfer reserves directly to and from their accounts at the ECB. After
all, the Bank of Italy does not keep track of the movements of reserves between Lombardy and Piedmont.

2. A monetary union with a Target system, but in which the Target balances are settled periodically, as
proposed by Hans-Werner Sinn and by others (see e.g. Sinn 2012b). Obviously settlement should be done
with assets whose value cannot be manipulated by the Target debtor, such as gold or debt instruments
issued by a reliable non-Eurozone debtor in a stable currency, etc.: I call this "breakup-proof" assets, to
indicate that a Target debtor cannot threaten default on these assets in case of a Euro breakup. A
persistent debit position in the Target system would lead to the depletion of the pool of breakup-proof
assets of the NCB of that country.

3. An asymmetric fixed exchange rate system, where the periphery countries peg their exchange rate and
are in charge of implementing the monetary policies that keep the system in place, or else must be willing
and able to lose breakup-proof assets. Essentially, this would be a re-enactment of the European
Exchange Rate Mechanism in place in Europe between 1979 and 1999.

In this framework, one could ask two types of questions:

1. Do different monetary regimes lead to different Target balances accumulated by each country, in
response to similar shocks?

2. Do different monetary regimes imply different costs in case of a breakup of the monetary union, for a
given level of Target balances accumulated by each country?

Answering the first question requires a full model. I will concentrate on the second question, although in
the process I will have something to say also on the first. To address these questions, it is important to
define the notion of Euro breakup precisely. I will focus on two. First, an "orderly" breakup, consisting of

                                                     7
a split in two monetary unions, presumably a "southern" one and a "northern" one. Second, a
"disorderly" breakup, in which all countries go their own way, and no monetary union exists anymore. In
each case I assume that Target debtors recognize only the Target liabilities towards countries that have
remained in their monetary union. Hence, in the case of a disorderly breakup, all Target net creditors lose
all their Target net claims. I discuss later whether losing all the Target claims is a realistic scenario, or one
should expect only a partial default.
          There is widespread consensus ­ even among participants on the opposite sides of the debate --
that the buildup of Target imbalances has proceeded in four broad stages. 7 First, before the financial
crisis, an accumulation of current account deficits by several Southern European countries. Second, the
repatriation of German capital after 2008. Third, capital flights from Southern European countries when
confidence in their banking systems and government finances deteriorated sharply in 2011-12. Fourth,
Quantitative Easing.




4 A NARRATIVE OF THE ACCUMULATION OF TARGET IMBALANCES
Figure 1 displays the evolution of the Target balances of the four largest Target creditors ­ Germany,
Luxembourg, Finland, and Netherlands ­ and the GIIPS (Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain)
countries. In this section I briefly describe the causes of the main episodes of accumulation of Target
imbalances. Because the story has been told several times, I will keep it short.



                                Figure 1: The evolution of Target balances




                 Source: The Euro Crisis Monitor, Institute of Empirical Economic Research of Osnabrück University


7
  See, among others, Whelan (2014) and (2017), Sinn (2018), Sinn and Wollmershauser (2012a) and (2012b)
DeNederlanscheBank (2016), European Central Bank (2017). Although this narrative is by now fairly
uncontroversial, it was not always so. In particular, Sinn and coauthors were often interpreted as emphasizing a
pure "current account" interpretation of Target balances (see e.g. Cecchetti, McCauley and McGuire 2012) - an
incorrect representation of their writings.

                                                           8
        CURRENT ACCOUNT DEFICITS
The Target liabilities of GIIPS countries were limited until 2008. However, this masks a substantial
difference of behavior between Italy and Spain. Italy had limited current account deficits; Spain had much
larger deficits (see Figure 2) , but their effects on Target liabilities were offset by large capital imports
(Figure 3). In other words, Spain was transferring deposits abroad in order to pay for an excess of imports
over exports of goods, but was also receiving transfers of deposits from abroad, paying for the assets it
was selling abroad.

                             Figure 2: The current account of Italy and Spain




               Source: EUROSTAT Database


        CAPITAL REPATRIATION
With the financial crisis, the current account deficit of Spain declined (Figure 2), but a large amount of
foreign capital that had financed the construction boom of Spain was repatriated, leading to a large
accumulation of Target liabilities (Figure 3)




                                                     9
                    Figure 3: The evolution of the net Target claims of Italy and Spain




               Source: The Euro Crisis Monitor, Institute of Empirical Economic Research of Osnabrück University




           CAPITAL FLIGHTS AND CAPITAL REPATRIATION FROM GIPSIC COUNTRIES
In the summer of 2011 several GIIPS countries suffered a crisis of confidence in their banking system and
in their government debt. Substantial amounts of domestic capital fled these countries, while core
countries continued to repatriate their capital. For both reasons, the Target liabilities of GIIPS countries
increased.
         DeNederlanscheBank (2016) and European Central Bank (2017) among others have labelled this
large increase in Target imbalances a "demand driven" phenomenon, as the process started with a shock
to the private sector. In this account, the Eurosystem acted purely as an intermediary, simply transferring
reserves from one NCB to another in response to a private sector shock. In other places Sinn and others
have argued that these capital flights were facilitated and amplified by changes in the monetary policies
implemented in those years of the Eurozone (see e.g. Sinn and Wollmershauser 2012a). A leveraged
institution like a bank can buy foreign assets by borrowing funds. The most immediate source of funds
to the banking system is the Eurosystem itself. In 2008, the Eurosystem started conducting marginal
refinancing operations with the fixed rate, full allotment system: the Eurosystem would fix the interest
rate at which it would provide funds, and it would satisfy any demand by banks, provided of course they
could post adequate collateral. 8
         At the end of 2011 and beginning of 2012 the Eurosystem launched two Long Term Refinancing
Operations, for a duration of three years and at very attractive interest rates, which eventually totaled
almost 1tn euros, largely allocated to Spanish and Italian banks. These bought domestic (mostly
government) and foreign assets, and replaced bonds that were coming due. A substantial fraction of these
bonds had been bought by foreign investors, who thus repatriated their capital.




8
    In addition, the types of acceptable collateral were enlarged and their minimum quality relaxed.

                                                             10
         QUANTITATIVE EASING
After peaking in mid-2014, Target imbalances declined substantially, only to rise again from 2016. At the
end of 2018 Germany's Target claims stood at a record level of almost 1tn. This time the cause was
Quantitative Easing, the set of programs of large scale asset purchases by the Eurosystem. Obviously this
created a large amount of liquidity in the system, which as we have seen might contribute to the
accumulation of Target imbalances in the presence of other shocks. However, this time there was a more
immediate, and purely technical, reason why QE translated into large Target imbalances: Germany's
Target claim increase when, say, the Bank of Italy buys Italian government bonds from a German bank
or hedge fund, or from a non-Eurozone financial institution with a correspondent bank in Germany. This
is equivalent to a repatriation of German capital, which leads to an accumulation of Target balances (I
defer a more detailed discussion of the effects of QE on Target balances to section 9).
DeNederlanscheBank (2016), European Central Bank (2017) label this a "supply driven" phenomenon, as
the initial shock is a monetary policy change.




5 PRELIMINARIES

In the next sections I study the effects of the four shocks described above on the balance sheets of various
sectors of a representative Target debtor, country A, and a representative Target creditor, country B,
under the four different monetary regimes. I consider three sectors: the non-financial private sector
("private sector" for short), the banking system, the NCB, and the country as a whole. When the change
in liabilities is different from the change in assets, the net worth of a sector changes; when this happens
for the country as a whole, the net foreign asset position of the country changes.
          In each case, I describe the change in the balance sheet in two cases: before and after a disorderly
breakup in which all Target liabilities are defaulted. 9 I call the latter case the "shadow balance sheet" of
the sector. The shadow balance sheet of the country determines the loss or gain for a country in the case
of a breakup. A more negative (or less positive) balance in the shadow balance sheet than in the actual
balance sheet for the country as a whole is an indication that the net foreign asset position of the country
worsens as a consequence of the breakup. 10
          The numbers in each cell in the tables below have to be interpreted as changes with respect to
the pre-shock situation. In the tables, "D" stands for "deposits"; "T" for Target balances (Target balances
always appear on the asset side of a NCB: a negative sign represents a Target liability); "R" for reserves;
"Z(J)" for an asset issued by entity J, i.e. a liability of that entity; hence, it appears on the liability side of
that entity with a positive sign, and on the asset side of the purchaser of that asset, also with a positive
sign. "Z(S)" represents a breakup-proof asset, i.e. an asset which, once it has been transferred to the
creditor, is no longer in the power of the debtor to default on: this could be gold, a safe asset issued by
a third entity in a stable currency that is not part of the Eurozone, like US Treasuries, etc.



9
  Obviously the same could be done in the case of an orderly breakup. The logic is the same in the case of a disorderly
or an orderly breakup, only the default rate changes for a given net aggregate Target balance of a country.
10
   To highlight the role of Target per se, I assume, almost certainly counterfactually, that the breakup has no effect
on the output of each country and on the aggregate wealth of the two countries combined.

                                                          11
              One must make assumptions on what will happen to the assets and liabilities of each sector in
    case of a disorderly Euro breakup. NCBs default on any liability towards entities outside their monetary
    union; hence, Target liabilities are defaulted; the reserves and the refinancing operations of commercial
    banks end up on the balance sheet of the NCB of their own country. In the examples below, for
    illustrative purposes I assume a default rate of 100 percent. I also assume that the pattern of defaults
    on the liabilities of the private sector are independent of the monetary regime.




    6 A CURRENT ACCOUNT DEFICIT IN COUNTRY A
    I start with a current account shock: perhaps because of a shock to the discount factor, private sector A
    runs a current account deficit of 10 euros with private sector B. In the rest of the paper, country A is the
    Target debtor and country B the Target creditor.


               IOU
    I start with a case that does not involve deposits with the banking sector. Private sector A pays with a
    IOU: Table 2 shows what happens next. The first panel of the table refers to country A, the second to
    country B. The net foreign asset ("NFA") position of private sector A, and of the country as a whole,
    worsens without any effect on the two central banks (the change in the NFA position of the country as a
    whole is recorded in the last column). Private sector B has improved its NFA position vis à vis private
    sector B, and this remains true even after a breakup 11.

                                              Table 2: CA deficit of A paid with a IOU

                       Private sector             Banking system                 NCB                        Country
                                                                                                                               NFA
                    Assets      Liabilities     Assets    Liabilities   Assets         Liabilities    Assets     Liabilities


    Pre-
                                IOU = +10                                                                        IOU = +10     -10
    breakup
A
    Post-
                                IOU = +10                                                                        IOU = +10     -10
    breakup

    Pre-
                  IOU = +10                                                                          IOU = +10                 +10
    breakup
B
    Post-
                  IOU = +10                                                                          IOU = +10                 +10
    breakup

    When the current account deficit is paid with a IOU, Table 2 would apply to any other regime: monetary
    union without Target, monetary union with Target and settlement, and fixed exchange rates. In all these
    cases the key point is that the two private sector have settled the current account transaction with an
    IOU from the buyer of the goods to the seller, and with no intermediation of the banking sector nor of
    any central bank. Note, for future reference, that in this case private sector B owns a marketable claim
    on private sector A with a well defined maturity.



    11
         Of course, this assumes that after a breakup private contracts are fulfilled.

                                                                   12
              A MONETARY UNION              WITH TARGET
    Paying with a private IOU is not common. Much more frequently, private sector B wants to be paid with
    a deposit. In the case of a monetary union with a Target system (Table 3), the deposits are transferred
    via a transfer of central bank reserves from the account of private sector A at banking system A to the
    account of private sector B at banking system B. Thus, private sector B improves its net asset position by
    increasing its deposit at banking sector B rather than by improving its net foreign asset position vis à vis
    private sector A, as in the IOU case. Now it is NCB B that improves its net foreign asset position thanks
    to a positive Target claim.

                     Table 3: Current account deficit of A in a monetary union with Target

                     Private sector              Banking system                  NCB                       Country
                                                                                                                              NFA
                  Assets      Liabilities      Assets    Liabilities   Assets          Liabilities   Assets     Liabilities


    Pre-
                  D = -10                      R = -10     D = -10     T = -10          R = -10      T = -10                  -10
    breakup
A
    Post-
                  D = -10                      R = -10     D = -10                      R = -10                                0
    breakup

    Pre-
                  D = +10                     R = +10     D = +10      T = +10          R = +10      T = +10                  +10
    breakup
B
    Post-
                  D = +10                     R = +10     D = +10                       R = +10                                0
    breakup
    R: banks' reserves issued by NCB.


    In case of breakup, country A does not recognize the Target liability. Consequently, country B no longer
    records an improvement in the net foreign asset position, despite having recorded a current account
    surplus; therefore, NCB B's net worth declines by 10 euros, as on the liability side it recognizes its increase
    in reserves to banking system B.


              A PURE MONETARY UNION
    Suppose there is no Target system: there are no national central banks, just a common central bank, the
    ECB, where all banks of the monetary union hold a reserve account (Table 4). The transfer of reserves
    between the two banking systems occurs without any claim between national central banks being
    recorded, just as it happens when a bank based in Piedmont transfers deposits to a bank based in
    Lombardy. Rather, reserves issued by the ECB (denoted by "R(E)" in Table 4) are transferred between
    commercial banks.
            No breakup-proof assets are transferred between the two countries. Hence, because in case of a
    breakup NCB B assumes the liability of reserves held by banking system B, its net worth declines by 10
    after the breakup (recall that all changes in the table are relative to the situation before the current
    account shock). This is offset by an improvement by 10 in the net worth of private sector B, as its
    deposits increase. Country B as a whole records no improvement in the net foreign asset position despite
    the current account surplus. Thus, the shadow balance sheet of NCB B is exactly the same as in a monetary
    union with a Target system, shown in Table 3.




                                                                  13
                       Table 4: Current account deficit of A in a monetary union without Target

                     Private sector              Banking system                       NCB                         Country
                                                                                                                                      NFA
                  Assets       Liabilities    Assets       Liabilities     Assets           Liabilities     Assets      Liabilities


    Pre-
                  D = -10                    R(E) = -10     D = -10                                       R(E) = -10                  -10
    breakup
A
    Post-
                  D = -10                     R = -10       D = -10                          R = -10                                   0
    breakup

    Pre-
                   D = +10                    R(E) = +10     D = +10                                      R(E) = +10                  +10
    breakup
B
    Post-
                   D = +10                     R = +10       D = +10                         R = +10                                   0
    breakup
    R(E): banks' reserves issued by the ECB; R: banks' reserves issued by NCB




              A FIXED EXCHANGE RATE REGIME
    In a fixed exchange rate regime the transfer of deposits from private sector A to private sector B involves
    basically the same steps as in a monetary union with Target; the only, but key, difference is that the
    improvement in the net foreign asset position of NCB B occurs not by recording a Target claim, but via a
    transfer of foreign exchange reserve assets from NCB A (these assets, denoted as "Z(S)" in Table 5, are
    also breakup-proof). As a consequence, the shadow balance sheet of the NCBs is the same as the actual
    balance sheets; in case of a breakup, NCB B and country B preserve the improvement in the net foreign
    asset position, unlike in the previous two cases.

                      Table 5: Current account deficit of A in a fixed exchange rate regime

                     Private sector              Banking system                       NCB                         Country
                                                                                                                                      NFA
                  Assets       Liabilities    Assets       Liabilities     Assets           Liabilities     Assets      Liabilities


    Pre-
                  D = -10                     R = -10       D = -10      Z(S) = -10          R = -10      Z(S) = - 10                 - 10
    breakup
A
    Post-
                  D = -10                     R = -10       D = -10      Z(S) = -10          R = -10      Z(S) = - 10                 - 10
    breakup

    Pre-
                  D = +10                     R = +10       D = +10      Z(S) = +10          R = +10      Z(S) = + 10                 + 10
    breakup
B
    Post-
                  D = +10                     R = +10       D = +10      Z(S) = +10          R = +10      Z(S) = + 10                 + 10
    breakup
              Z(S): foreign exchange reserve assets




              A MONETARY UNION WITH TARGET AND SETTLEMENT
    Settlement of the Target balances means that the Target liabilities incurred by a NCB over the previous
    period are made good by transferring the property of breakup-proof assets for the same value to the
    creditor NCB. The shadow balance sheet of the two NCBs under a fixed exchange rate regime can be

                                                                  14
    replicated by a monetary union with a Target system with settlement. The only difference is that, instead
    of exchanging reserve assets, the NCBs exchange breakup-proof assets (which of course could overlap
    with foreign reserve assets). Therefore, Table 6 is exactly like Table 5, with Z(S) now representing
    breakup-proof assets.

         Table 6: Current account deficit in A in a monetary union with Target and settlement

                     Private sector            Banking system                     NCB                         Country
                                                                                                                                  NFA
                  Assets       Liabilities   Assets    Liabilities    Assets            Liabilities     Assets      Liabilities


    Pre-
                  D = -10                    R = -10     D = -10     Z(S) = -10          R = -10      Z(S) = - 10                 - 10
    breakup
A
    Post-
                  D = -10                    R = -10     D = -10     Z(S) = -10          R = -10      Z(S) = - 10                 - 10
    breakup

    Pre-
                  D = +10                    R = +10    D = +10      Z(S) = +10          R = +10      Z(S) = + 10                 + 10
    breakup
B
    Post-
                  D = +10                    R = +10    D = +10      Z(S) = +10          R = +10      Z(S) = + 10                 + 10
    breakup
              Z(S): breakup-proof assets


    One could therefore argue that a monetary union with Target and settlement combines the advantages
    of a monetary union (the near-irrevocability of exchange rates, and all other advantages of a monetary
    union, including political ones) with the advantages of a fixed exchange rate regime (a built-in mechanism
    for the automatic correction of current account imbalances and capital flights, and the insulation of the
    leading country from default of the followers). However, things are more complicated than this.




    7 A TARGET SYSTEM WITH SETTLEMENT?
    The Target critics have frequently pointed out that the Federal Reserve system is a monetary union with
    the equivalent of Target with settlement, as Federal Reserve banks settle their balances each year. This
    is correct, but the notion and the consequences of settlement in the Federal Reserve system are very
    different from what Target critics have in mind.
              The Interdistrict Settlement Account ("ISA") is an item on the balance sheet of each Reserve bank
    where transactions that involve two Reserve banks are recorded. Exactly like the Target system, it records
    transfers of payments between two commercial banks in two different districts as an interdistrict claim
    (liability) of the Reserve bank of the payee (payer). And like in the Eurosystem, the recent increase in ISA
    balances is associated with the Quantitative Easing program of the Fed. The purchases of assets are
    conducted by the New York Fed for all Reserve banks; as a consequence, and much like the German NCB
    when it buys Italian assets for the Italian NCB from a hedge fund with an account at a German-based bank
    (see below), the New York Fed gets a ISA claim.
              Differently from the Target system, the ISA balances are settled each year. In the Target debate,
    there has been considerable confusion over the modality of settlement. Some of this confusion has been
    cleared, but two fundamental misunderstandings persist, as I show below.


                                                                15
         In the past, settlement occurred by transfers of the gold certificates accounts of the Reserve
banks. Nowadays, the settlement occurs via changes in the share of the System Open Market Account
       12

holdings (SOMA: basically, all the asset purchased via open market operations). The formula for this
allocation is logically straightforward, although in practice it is complicated by the need to account for
changes in the banknotes outstanding of each Reserve bank, an item that is quantitatively unimportant
and that I will ignore for illustrative purposes.
         Assume that the ISA balances at the end of period t-1 have all been settled, so that the average
                                                                                                   
ISA balance during period t is all due to operations during time t. Then the theoretical amount    ,+1 of
SOMA holdings allocated to district Reserve bank j given the amount of total SOMA holdings at time t,
 , and therefore given , , is determined by:


                                                
                                               ,+1 -  , =                                                 (1)

In other words, and abstracting from asymmetries in the allocation of banknotes, 13 a positive net asset
position in the ISA implies an equal increase in the theoretical allocation of SOMA holdings to that district
                                                                                                      
Reserve bank (recall that the ISA balance is a flow variable). The actual allocation ,+1 is based on ,+1 ,
adjusted to reflect the fact that total SOMA holdings in period t+1 might have changed relative to period
t:

                                                                +1
                                               ,+1 =  ,+1
                                                                
                                                                                                          (2)


Thus, any negative position on the ISA leads to a loss of assets, hence less seigniorage and profits.
         However, this mechanism is simply not replicable in the Eurosystem. The Fed system buys almost
only federal government and agency debt; therefore, Reserve banks can use nearly all the Fed assets to
settle their ISA imbalances: it is virtually impossible for a Reserve bank to run out of such assets. This is
because settlement in the Federal Reserve system was not meant to be a protection against a breakup of
the United States (an issue that is simply not in the debate), but a system to allocate profits equitably. In
the European Monetary Union, the goal of settlement would not be to ensure an equitable distribution
of profits among NCBs: this goal is already achieved by the current Target system, provided Target
balances are remunerated at the "correct" interest rate. 14 Rather, the goal of settlement in the European
Monetary Union would be to insulate the creditor NCB from the risk of default by the debtor NCB in case
of breakup of the Eurozone. For this to happen, settlement must occur with breakup-proof assets: by
definition, these assets cannot be assets issued by a public entity of the debtor country, and maybe not
even by its private sector. In the four asset purchase programs of the ECB, the vast majority of assets
purchased by each NCB have been issued by entities of the same nationality of that NCB. Quite simply,
Target debtors NCBs do not have enough breakup-proof assets to even come close to be able to settle
their Target balances. For instance, in March 2019 the Bank of Italy had 91.1bn of gold and 46.5bn

12
   The gold certificate account is an item on the asset side of each Reserve bank, and represents a claim on the gold
held by the US Treasury.
13
   The correct expression, that takes into account asymmetries in the allocation of banknotes, is:
                                           
                                                                         ,
                                           ,+1 -     , =  -        ,     -     
                                                                         ,
where  represents banknotes in circulation and  gold certificate accounts.
14
   Target critics argue, with reason, that this is not the case right now. We discuss this issue below.

                                                         16
claims on non-Euro area residents denominated in foreign currency, against a Target liability of
492.7bn. 15 Insisting on the settlement of Target balances would almost certainly trigger a breakup of
the Eurozone.
          There have been proposals that are implicitly or explicitly designed to get around this constraint.
They all conflict with the requirement that the assets use for settlement should be breakup-proof. Sinn
(2012b) proposes to collateralize the Target balances with senior claims to state-owned real estate or
future tax revenues. In case of a disorderly breakup these claims would be easily reneged on, and almost
certainly would be. Whelan (2014) proposes instead to use the collateral used in refinancing operations
and from the Securities Market Program. However, the former consists mostly of domestic assets that, in
case of disorderly breakup, would be redenominated in the currency of the debtor country; the latter are
mostly government bonds, which suffer from the same problem and, as we have seen, are certainly not
breakup-proof. Since Whelan wrote his paper, the much larger Public Sector Purchase Program has put
trillions of government debt on the books of NCBs. But they too are unusable for settlement, for the
reasons we have seen.
          Even if insisting on settlement did not break up the Eurozone, and as long as monetary policy
remains the same across Eurozone countries (with a common fixed rate of refinancing operations and
full allotment), settlement of Target claims in the Eurozone would only work by rationing the amount of
breakup-proof assets available to a NCB, not by changing interest rates. As such, it would not replicate
the automatic adjustment mechanisms inherent in a fixed exchange rate regime.
          In the end all this is hardly relevant however, because settlement itself in the Fed system is very
different from what Target critics have in mind; in fact, one could argue that it is no settlement at all, in
the sense that this term is widely understood. The point of settling the ISA balances is that, theoretically,
a Reserve bank with a negative balance receives a smaller share of the SOMA portfolio, hence less
seigniorage and profits. However, all earnings generated in the Fed system are remitted to the Treasury
after paying the stockholders:16 in fact, in 2017 the Fed system remitted earnings to the Treasury for
$80,559mn after paying dividends for $784mn (see Federal Reserve System 2018, p. 47). Settlement
simply changes the nominal distribution of profits, which however, after they have been distributed, are
almost entirely transferred to the government anyway. As long as a Reserve bank earns enough profits
to cover its operating expenditures, settlement of ISA balances is irrelevant. 17




8 CAPITAL FLIGHTS FROM A AND CAPITAL REPATRIATION TO B
Now consider a shock that causes a reallocation of assets across the private sectors of the two countries.
Because of a preference shock, or a shock to the confidence in the banking system or in the government
of country A, the private sectors in country A or B want to get rid of some assets issued by entities residing
in A, and instead buy assets issued by entities residing in B. If private sector A sells A assets and buys B


15
   See the 2017 Annual Report of the Bank of Italy, Table a3.1.
16
   Reserve banks are required to compensate their stockholders (depository institutions) at 6%, or, in the case of a
stockholder with assets of more than $10bn, at the yield of the 10-year Treasury note auctioned at the last auction
(see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Act, Section 7).
17
   Of course, in practice it might be irrelevant even if earnings were less than operating expenditures. As shown by
Konig (2012), the Fed has the right to suspend the settlement of ISA balances, and it did so on at least two occasions
in the past, although in the thirties of the last century.

                                                         17
    assets, it is typically called "capital flights from A"; if private sector B does the same, it is typically called
    "capital repatriation to B". The effects on the balance sheets of all sectors involved are the same, and can
    be studied together. In fact, the logic of the Target system is exactly the same whether private sector A
    buys with deposits goods for 10 euros from private sector B (a current account deficit of A), or if it buys
    with deposits a financial asset issued by private sector B (a capital flight from A), or issued by private
    sector A but owned by private sector B (a capital repatriation to B). The T-accounts are illustrated in Table
    7 to Table 11 (recall that, in what follows, the expression Z(J) stands for a financial assets issued by a
    private entity of country J).


              A MONETARY UNION WITH TARGET
    Table 7 illustrates the impact on the balance sheets of the various sectors in the two countries. The B
    asset purchased by private sector A is still paid for by a transfer of deposits from A to B. The only
    difference with the case of a current account deficit is that deposits belonging to private sector A are
    used to purchase an asset issued by private sector B instead of goods or services produced by private
    sector B: private sector A now records an improvement in its net foreign asset position, that offsets the
    worsening of the net foreign asset position of NCB A. As a consequence, before the breakup, instead of
    a worsening (improvement) in the net foreign asset position of country A (B) as in the case of a current
    account deficit, now the net foreign asset positions of the two countries are unchanged.

                               Table 7: Capital flights in a monetary union with Target

                      Private sector              Banking system                  NCB                        Country
                                                                                                                                 NFA
                  Assets       Liabilities     Assets     Liabilities   Assets          Liabilities    Assets      Liabilities


    Pre-          D = -10                                                                               T = -10
                                               R = -10      D = -10     T = -10          R = -10                                  0
    breakup      Z(B) = +10                                                                           Z(B) = +10
A
    Post-         D = -10
                                               R = -10      D = -10                      R = -10      Z(B) = +10                 +10
    breakup      Z(B) = +10

    Pre-
                   D = +10       Z(B) = +10     R = +10    D = +10      T = +10          R = +10       T = +10     Z(B) = +10     0
    breakup
B
    Post-
                   D = +10       Z(B) = +10     R = +10    D = +10                       R = +10                   Z(B) = +10    -10
    breakup
    Z(B): asset issued by a resident of country B.


    Therefore, after the breakup has occurred and Target liabilities are reneged, country A (B) now shows
    an improvement (worsening) of the net foreign asset position, instead of no change in the case of a
    current account deficit.
             A comparison of Table 3 and Table 7 also sheds light on an issue that has caused considerable
    misunderstandings in the initial phases of the debate. Suppose that a country (like Spain before the
    financial crisis) runs a current account deficit for 10 euros and receives capital inflows (the opposite of
    capital flights) for 10 euros. Its accumulation of net Target balances would be 0, as the Target liability
    caused by the current account deficit would be offset by the Target claim caused by the capital inflows.
    This shows that there is no necessary connection between current accounts or private capital flows and
    changes in Target balances.




                                                                   18
             The case of a capital repatriation is similar, except that instead of private sector A buying an
    asset issued by a resident of country B, now private sector B sells back an asset issued by a resident of
    country A (see Table 8).

                            Table 8: Capital repatriation in a monetary union with Target

                      Private sector              Banking system                  NCB                        Country
                                                                                                                                 NFA
                  Assets       Liabilities     Assets     Liabilities   Assets          Liabilities    Assets      Liabilities


    Pre-
                  D = -10      Z(A) = -10      R = -10      D = -10     T = -10          R = -10       T = -10     Z(A) = -10     0
    breakup
A
    Post-
                  D = -10      Z(A) = -10      R = -10      D = -10                      R = -10                   Z(A) = -10    +10
    breakup

    Pre-           D = +10                                                                             T = +10
                                                R = +10    D = +10      T = +10          R = +10                                  0
    breakup       Z(A) = -10                                                                          Z(A) = -10
B
    Post-          D = +10
                                                R = +10    D = +10                       R = +10      Z(A) = -10                 -10
    breakup       Z(A) = -10
    Z(A): asset issued by a resident of country A.

    This table can be used to interpret Sinn's statement that "QE can therefore be seen as a process of
    retroactively financing prior current account deficits with overdraft credit from the Eurosystem" (Sinn
    2016 p. 28). In the table, Z(A) represents assets issued in the past by A entities to pay for A's current
    account deficits, and purchased by the combination of the non-bank private sector and of the bank
    ssector of country B. With QE, these assets are replaced on the combined balance sheets of non-bank
    private sector and of the bank system of country B by reserves of NCB B. The latter in turn gets Target
    claims. Thus, country B as a whole has lost these assets and replaced them with Target claims, what Sinn
    calls "overdraft credit from the Eurosystem".



              A PURE MONETARY UNION
    Exactly the same outcome obtains in a pure monetary union, i.e. a monetary union without Target (Table
    9, representing the case of a capital flight from A). As we know, in this monetary regime the transfer of
    reserves between accounts at the ECB takes the place of changes in Target claims and liabilities. But
    reserves issued by the ECB are not breakup-proof, as each NCB recognizes only the reserves credited to
    the commercial banks of their own country.




                                                                   19
                              Table 9: Capital flights in a monetary union without Target

                      Private sector              Banking system                        NCB                        Country
                                                                                                                                       NFA
                  Assets       Liabilities     Assets       Liabilities     Assets            Liabilities    Assets      Liabilities


    Pre-          D = -10                                                                                   Z(B) = +10
                                              R(E) = -10     D = -10                                                                    0
    breakup      Z(B) = +10                                                                                 R(E) = -10
A
    Post-         D = -10
                                               R = -10       D = -10                           R = -10      Z(B) = +10                 + 10
    breakup      Z(B) = +10

    Pre-
                   D = +10       Z(B) = +10   R(E) = +10       D = +10                                   R(E) = +10    Z(B) = +10       0
    breakup
B
    Post-
                   D = +10       Z(B) = +10     R = +10        D = +10                     R = +10                     Z(B) = +10      -10
    breakup
    Z(B): asset issued by a resident of country B; R(E): banks' reserves issued by the ECB; R: banks' reserves issued by the NCB.




              FIXED EXCHANGE RATES
    In a fixed exchange rate regime a payment with deposits generates equivalent transfers of foreign
    exchange reserve assets. Hence, the shadow balance sheet of each sector is the same as its actual balance
    sheet, and a capital flight from A (or a capital repatriation to B) does not generate any change in the net
    foreign asset position of the country, whether before or after the breakup.




                               Table 10: Capital flights in a fixed exchange rate regime

                      Private sector              Banking system                        NCB                        Country
                                                                                                                                       NFA
                  Assets       Liabilities     Assets       Liabilities     Assets            Liabilities    Assets      Liabilities


    Pre-          D = -10                                                                                   Z(B) = +10
                                               R = -10       D = -10       Z(S) = -10          R = -10                                  0
    breakup      Z(B) = +10                                                                                 Z(S) = -10
A
    Post-         D = -10                                                                                   Z(B) = +10
                                               R = -10       D = -10       Z(S) = -10          R = -10                                  0
    breakup      Z(B) = +10                                                                                 Z(S) = -10

    Pre-
                   D = +10       Z(B) = +10     R = +10        D = +10     Z(S) = +10     R = +10           Z(S) = +10   Z(B) = +10     0
    breakup
B
    Post-
                   D = +10       Z(B) = +10     R = +10        D = +10     Z(S) = +10     R = +10           Z(S) = +10   Z(B) = +10     0
    breakup
    Z(B): asset issued by a resident of country B; Z(S): foreign exchange reserve assets.




              A MONETARY UNION WITH TARGET AND SETTLEMENT
    Like before, a monetary union with Target and settlement generates exactly the same allocations as a
    fixed exchange rate regime.




                                                                   20
                    Table 11: Capital flights in a monetary union with Target and settlement

                      Private sector              Banking system                        NCB                        Country
                                                                                                                                       NFA
                  Assets       Liabilities     Assets       Liabilities     Assets            Liabilities    Assets      Liabilities


    Pre-          D = -10                                                                                   Z(B) = +10
                                               R = -10        D = -10      Z(S) = -10          R = -10                                  0
    breakup      Z(B) = +10                                                                                 Z(S) = -10
A
    Post-         D = -10                                                                                   Z(B) = +10
                                               R = -10        D = -10      Z(S) = -10          R = -10                                  0
    breakup      Z(B) = +10                                                                                 Z(S) = -10

    Pre-
                  D = +10      Z(B) = +10      R = +10       D = +10       Z(S) = +10          R = +10      Z(S) = +10   Z(B) = +10     0
    breakup
B
    Post-
                  D = +10      Z(B) = +10      R = +10       D = +10       Z(S) = +10          R = +10      Z(S) = +10   Z(B) = +10     0
    breakup
              Z(B): asset issued by a resident of country B; Z(S): breakup ­proof assets.




    9 QUANTITATIVE EASING
              After declining to a minimum of 462bn in August 2016, in December 2018 the Target claims of
    the Bundesbank stood at 966bn, far above the previous August 2014 peak of 749bn during the
    sovereign debt crisis. This accumulation of Target claims started in earnest in 2015, with the beginning
    of QE. Since December 2018 the Target claims of the Bundesbank declined to 837bn in October 2019,
    to start increasing again to 870bn in November 2019. Note the perfect coincidence with the resumption
    of QE as of November 1 2019, albeit for smaller amounts (20bn monthly).
              In itself, QE does not have to create large Target imbalances. With QE, the Eurosystem buys long
    term assets, mostly government bonds, from banks and non banks like hedge funds. Each NCB purchases
    government bonds of its own country, and in proportion to its own capital key. These government bonds
    are carried on the books of the NCB that purchases them. 18 Thus, absent major rebalances of the
    nationality of the portfolios by the seller of the assets, there are no reasons to expect large Target
    imbalances resulting from QE.
              QE generated large Target claims of Germany and other Nordic countries because many of the
    Italian government bonds the Bank of Italy purchased were sold by German entities, or even banks or
    hedge funds headquartered outside the Eurozone but with a correspondent bank (or a branch, in the case
    of a bank) located in Germany. 19 When the Bank of Italy buys 10 euros of Italian government bonds (Z(A)
    in Table 12 below) from a German bank, it instructs the Bundesbank to credit the reserve account of that
    bank for 10 euros, in exchange for the Italian government bonds. The Bank of Italy has 10 euros more of
    Italian government bonds and 10 euros more of Target liabilities. The German banking system has
    swapped an asset, Italian government bonds, for another asset, banks' reserves at the Bundesbank. The
    Bundesbank has extra liabilities for 10 euros of banks' reserves, and an equivalent amount of extra Target
    claim. If instead of a German bank the Bank of Italy bought Italian bonds from a German hedge fund, or



    18
      A small proportion, 8 percent of all QE purchases, is bought directly by the ECB and held on its books.
    19
      For more details on the impact of QE on Target balances, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2016), Auer and Bogdanova
    (2017), Castillo and Varela (2017), and European Central Bank (2016) and (2017).

                                                                    21
    a British hedge fund with a correspondent bank located in Germany, the process would require a few
    more intermediate steps but the end result would be the same.
             Thus, an increase in Target claims arises mechanically when a NCB buys its QE assets from
    financial institutions located in the Eurozone but outside that NCB's country, or even located outside the
    Eurozone. In fact, 80 percent of assets purchased in QE programs have been sold by non-domestic
    counterparties, and about 50 percent by counterparties outside the Eurozone. Many of these non-
    Eurozone counterparties are located in the United Kingdom (which does not participate directly in the
    Target system), and have correspondent banks in Germany (see European Central Bank 2017).
             Note that in some cases, like Spain and Italy, the decline in holdings of Spanish and Italian
    government bonds by foreign residents has been limited during QE. Between March 2015 and October
    2019 holdings of Italian public debt by the Bank of Italy increased from 5.8 to 19.6 percent; holdings by
    nonresidents fell from 39.4 to 35.1 percent, one third of the QE purchases. 20 Prima facie, this seems to
    contradict the explanation above. But QE can cause an accumulation of Target claims via an indirect
    channel as well, namely a portfolio rebalancing effect. A domestic resident that sells Italian bonds to the
    Bank of Italy under the Public Sector Purchase Program might decide to re-invest the proceeds in, say, a
    US bond. This rebalancing too might take place via German banks, thus reinforcing the Target
    implications of QE (see European Central Bank 2017).


              A MONETARY UNION WITH TARGET
    Table 12 describes the changes in the actual and shadow balance sheets in the current monetary regime.
    This table can be understood by referring to the example above, where country A is Italy buying Italian
    government bonds from banks in country B, Germany. Because country B accumulates, mechanically,
    large Target claims, a disorderly breakup leads to a worsening of the net foreign asset position of the
    country.

                           Table 12: Quantitative Easing in a monetary union with Target

                      Private sector              Banking system                          NCB                         Country
                                                                                                                                          NFA
                  Assets       Liabilities      Assets          Liabilities     Assets          Liabilities     Assets      Liabilities


    Pre-                                                                      Z(A) = + 10                     Z(A) = +10
                                                                                                                                           0
    breakup                                                                     T = -10                        T = -10
A
    Post-
                                                                              Z(A) = + 10                     Z(A) = +10                  +10
    breakup

    Pre-                                        R = + 10                                                       T = + 10
                                                                               T = + 10         R = + 10                                   0
    breakup                                   Z(A) = - 10                                                     Z(A) = - 10
B
    Post-                                       R = +10
                                                                                                R = + 10      Z(A) = - 10                 -10
    breakup                                   Z(A) = - 10
              Z(A): asset issued by a resident of country A..




    20
      Source: Bank of Italy online dataset, series FPI_FP.M.IT.S13.F3.S121.101.112.FAV.EUR.EDP,
    FPI_FP.M.IT.S13.F3.S12BI1.101.112.FAV.EUR.EDP, FPI_FP.M.IT.S13.F3.S12BI2.101.112.FAV.EUR.EDP,
    FPI_FP.M.IT.S13.F3.SBI1.101.112.FAV.EUR.EDP FPI_FP.M.IT.S13.F3.S2.101.112.FAV.EUR.EDP. The figures refer to
    public debt in the form of government securities only.

                                                                       22
              A PURE MONETARY UNION
    Now suppose we are in a pure monetary union. The ECB buys A assets from banking system B, and pays
    with excess reserves. In country B, the banking system has, like before, 10 less of A assets but 10 more
    of ECB reserves. This is also the change in the balance sheet of the country. If the Eurozone breaks up,
    and the ECB's assets are allocated to the NCB of the issuer of the asset, the new NCB of A finds itself with
    10 of assets issued by A entities. This is an improvement of the net foreign asset position of country A
    by 10. By the same token, central bank B now has 10 of liabilities to its banking system, but it has no
    assets to show for this. The net foreign asset position of country B worsens by 10.

                        Table 13: Quantitative Easing in a monetary union without Target

                      Private sector             Banking system                      NCB                         Country
                                                                                                                                     NFA
                  Assets       Liabilities     Assets       Liabilities     Assets         Liabilities     Assets      Liabilities


    Pre-
                                                                                                                                      0
    breakup
A
    Post-
                                                                          Z(A) = +10                     Z(A) = +10                  +10
    breakup

    Pre-                                      R(E) = + 10                                               R(E) = + 10
                                                                                                                                      0
    breakup                                   Z(A) = - 10                                               Z(A) = - 10
B
    Post-                                       R = +10
                                                                                           R = +10      Z(A) = - 10                  -10
    breakup                                   Z(A) = - 10
    Z(A): asset issued by a resident of country A; R(E): banks' reserves issued by the ECB; R: banks' reserves issued by NCB




              FIXED EXCHANGE RATES
    It is not obvious what should be the equivalent of a QE experiment in a fixed exchange rate regime:
    perhaps a coordinated purchase of assets by the two central banks A and B. Suppose NCB A buys assets
    issued by government A from banks residing in B. It would have to do so by transferring foreign exchange
    reserve assets to NCB B. The result is in Table 14.



                           Table 14: Quantitative Easing in a fixed exchange rate regime

                      Private sector             Banking system                      NCB                         Country
                                                                                                                                     NFA
                  Assets       Liabilities     Assets       Liabilities     Assets         Liabilities     Assets      Liabilities


    Pre-                                                                  Z(A) = + 10                    Z(A) = +10
                                                                                                                                      0
    breakup                                                                Z(S) = -10                    Z(S) = -10
A
    Post-                                                                 Z(A) = + 10                    Z(A) = +10
                                                                                                                                      0
    breakup                                                                Z(S) = -10                    Z(S) = -10

    Pre-                                        R = + 10                                                 Z(S) = + 10
                                                                            Z(S) = + 10   R = + 10                                    0
    breakup                                   Z(A) = - 10                                                Z(A) = - 10
B
    Post-                                       R = +10                                                  Z(S) = + 10
                                                                            Z(S) = + 10   R = + 10                                    0
    breakup                                   Z(A) = - 10                                                Z(A) = - 10
              Z(A): asset issued by a resident of country A; Z(S): foreign exchange reserve assets.



                                                                   23
              A MONETARY UNION WITH TARGET AND SETTLEMENT
    As usual, a monetary union with Target and settlement would reproduce exactly the outcome of a fixed
    exchange rate regime: see Table 15.

                Table 15: Quantitative Easing in a monetary union with Target and settlement

                      Private sector             Banking system                      NCB                         Country
                                                                                                                                     NFA
                  Assets       Liabilities     Assets       Liabilities     Assets         Liabilities     Assets      Liabilities


    Pre-                                                                  Z(A) = + 10                    Z(A) = +10
                                                                                                                                      0
    breakup                                                                Z(S) = -10                    Z(S) = -10
A
    Post-                                                                 Z(A) = + 10                    Z(A) = +10
                                                                                                                                      0
    breakup                                                                Z(S) = -10                    Z(S) = -10

    Pre-                                        R = + 10                                                 Z(S) = + 10
                                                                          Z(S) = + 10     R = + 10                                    0
    breakup                                   Z(A) = - 10                                                Z(A) = - 10
B
    Post-                                       R = +10                                                  Z(S) = + 10
                                                                          Z(S) = + 10     R = + 10                                    0
    breakup                                   Z(A) = - 10                                                Z(A) = - 10
              Z(A): assets issued by a resident of country A; Z(S): breakup-proof assets.




    10 THE EFFECTS OF A TARGET DEFAULT ON THE REAL RESOURCES OF A
          COUNTRY

    I now address the second question set out in section 3, namely: "Do different monetary regimes imply
    different costs in case of a breakup of the monetary union, for a given level of Target balances
    accumulated by each country?"


              THE RATE OF REMUNERATION OF TARGET BALANCES
    The answer is not straightforward. It depends largely on how Target balances are remunerated, which is
    itself, remarkably enough, not a straightforward issue. The ambiguities arise from the peculiarities of the
    profit and loss account and of the balance sheets of Eurozone NCBs. It is useful to start from the resource
    constraint of a central bank of the Eurosystem. I will omit some non essential items and focus on the
    main ones: 21

         (+1 -  ) + (+1 -  ) +  (1 +  ) +  (1 +  ) +   +  -  =
                                                                                                                               (3)
                      = +1 + +1 +   +           + +1

    In this expression,  is currency,  is assets purchased outright by the NCB and  is the interest rate on
    these assets;  is assets held temporarily by the NCB, via repurchase agreements (refinancing
    operations in the parlance of the ECB); these are remunerated at the main refinancing operations rate,
     . Both  and  are assumed to have a maturity of one year for simplicity.  represents net Target

    21
      I make several simplifying assumptions. I abstract from the ECB share in banknotes (8 percent) and in QE
    purchases. I also abstract from complications regarding the distribution of banknotes issued by a NCB (whether or
    not they are in excess of the capital key of the NCB), in order to focus on the issues of interest in this paper.

                                                                   24
              
claims and      the reserves created whenever a Target claim arises (recall that the formation of a Target
                                                                         
claim is always accompanied by an equal change in reserves, hence          is identically equal to  ). I take
          
 and  to be outside the control of the NCB and fixed in nominal terms, the result of past shocks. 
is reserves other than those created when the Target claim  arose;  the interest rate on reserves. The
term   represents the remuneration of Target balances: according to the Eurosystem rules, Target
claims are also remunerated at the main refinancing operations rate  .  and  is monetary
income received and paid by the NCB, respectively (I explain these two terms below). +1 represents
dividends paid by the NCB to its Treasury.
         Thus, the left hand side of (3) represents the "resources" of the NCB. +1 -  is issuance of
new currency, or banknotes; +1 -  is issuance of new reserves. By issuing new currency or reserves
in excess of the existing stock, the central bank creates means of payment with which it can command
resources. The right hand side of (3) can be seen as the "uses" of the resources. These can be used to buy
assets outright +1 , to enter new refinancing operations +1 , to pay interest on reserves, or dividends
to the Treasury (the profits of the NCB).
          and  represent "monetary income received" from the Eurosystem and "monetary
income paid" to the Eurosystem, respectively. These two items are calculated as follows. First, each NCB
pays to the "pool" of income an imputed return from its main assets, calculated at the reference interest
rate  ; the assets to be pooled are  ,  , and the Target net claims  . From this, the NCB subtracts
the interest paid on reserves,   . 22 Thus the monetary income paid into the pool by the NCB is

                                                       
                                   =  ( +  +  ) -  ( +  )                                                (4)

The monetary income paid by all NCBs is pooled and redistributed to each NCB according to its capital
key. If  is the capital key of our generic NCB, the monetary income it receives is calculated as follows

                                           =  ( +  ) =                                                   (5)

                                =  [ ( +                       
                                          +  +  ) -  ( +  +  +  )]                                       (6)

where an asterisk denotes the other countries. Because by definition the sum of all Target net claims is
0, Target balances do not appear in (6).
        Expression (3) can be used to understand the remuneration of Target balances. Suppose there is
a shock and capital inflows increase by  . This is also the change in Target net claims. Also, as we know
reserves increase by  in the capital importing country and fall by the same amount in the capital
                                  
exporting countries:      = -        =  . Thus, from (3) the net change in the NCB's profits is

                                        
                              +1 =   -   +  -                                                               (7)

                                               )
where from (4)  =   -   and from (6)  = - ( +    = 0. Therefore

22
  There is still some element of ambiguity because strictly speaking the Eurosystem directives state that one should
subtract the interest paid on "Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euro" (Annex I, paragraph A.2 of the Decision of the European Central Bank of November 25 2010
(ECB/2010/23)). The list that follows this statement does mention excess reserves; however, it is not clear that
excess reserves acquired as a counterpart of a Target claim should be regarded as "related to monetary policy
operations".

                                                        25
                                              
                          +1 =   -   - (   -   )=0                                                       (8)

Thus, after pooling, the effective remuneration of Target balances to the NCB is 0. Note that this is
independent of the fact that, as of the time of writing, the interest rate on Target claims before pooling
is 0, because so is the rate on main refinancing operations. 23



        IS A TARGET DEFAULT A TRANSFER OF REAL RESOURCES?
10.2.1 Target balances represent real resources in an alternative regime
         Target balances are not claims to any stream of resources; they are non marketable; and they
are irredeemable: they cannot be exchanged against a medium of exchange at any time. What do they
represent? In other words, if the Bundesbank's 1tn of a claim that has no intrinsic value are defaulted,
does this represent a loss of real resources to Germany as a whole? To answer this question one should
ask in turn: "loss" relative to what?
         Consider the case of a current account surplus shock, as in Table 3. The non-bank private sector
in country B experiences a temporary positive income shock of 10 euros and wants to postpone its
consumption by transferring these 10 euros abroad. It does so by acquiring a deposit at its own banking
system; the latter receives the deposit from abroad in the form of central bank reserves; NCB B receives
a notional external asset to compensate it for the extra liabilities (reserves) that it takes on its balance
sheet.
         What ensures that the non-bank private sector B will be able to consume more in the future is
not the Target claim accumulated by NCB B, but the extra deposit that it has received by running a
current account surplus. There is no constraint on Target claims, they could be negative by large amounts
and still the non-bank private sector B will be able to transfer deposits abroad in the future to consume
its 10 euros.
         In the case of a capital repatriation to B, the non-bank private sector B wants to swap a foreign
asset for a domestic deposit; the foreign asset ends up on the balance sheet of the NCB of B as a Target
claim. In both cases ­ current account shock and capital repatriation shock - the banking system of
country B is a pure intermediary and ends up with more deposits and more reserves; the NCB also is a
pure intermediary and ends up with a higher Target claim and more reserves.
         In a monetary union with settlement or in a fixed exchange rate regime, the outcome is exactly
the same except that NCB B receives marketable, default-proof assets that are claims on real resources
of other countries.
         Thus, in case of a breakup of the monetary union with Target, and assuming that the interbank
market is still functioning, the non-bank private sector B will still be able to use its deposits to carry out
consumption smoothing, but NCB B will start operation with 10 euros less than if the monetary regime
had been a monetary union with settlement or a fixed exchange rate regime. These 10 euros of default-
free assets would have represented a claim on real resources of foreign countries.



23
  Recently, Fuest and Sinn (2018) and Sinn (2019) have argued that Target claims do receive a remuneration. I
present their arguments in Appendix A, and I argue that they are incorrect because they omit some elements in the
calculation of the remuneration.

                                                       26
         In other words: Target claims do not themselves constitute claims on real resources of other
countries, but they stand for the claims on the resources of other countries that the post-breakup NCB of
the creditor country would have had if the pre-breakup regime had been a monetary union with
settlement or a fixed exchange rate regime.
          A default on Target claims represents a loss (relative to a different regime) of real resources for
the post-breakup NCB B, but also for the country as a whole: it is not offset by a default-free asset on the
balance sheet of the private sector. If the monetary regime had been a monetary union with settlement
or a fixed exchange rate regime, after the breakup NCB B could have used the 10 euros of the default
free asset to buy goods for 10 euros and distribute them for free to its citizens, or it could have used
these resources to reduce the taxes that its citizens pay. Having done this, it could still have started
operations exactly like NCB B after the breakup of the monetary union with Target.


10.2.2 Does the risk facing Germany depend on the underlying cause of the Target claim?
         It might also be tempting to think that only those Target claims that are due to a current account
surplus represents a claim on resources, as stated in the following passage that it is worth quoting in its
entirety. " [...] if Germany has net claims on the rest of the eurozone it must be that Germany has
accumulated current account surpluses against these countries in the past. There is no other way Germany
can accumulate financial claims on the rest of the eurozone. These observations lead to the following
insights. First, it is true that by holding large foreign claims, a country can take a risk. This risk will
materialize when some of the foreign debtors default on their debt. Second, the Target2 claims of
Germany are not a good indicator of this risk. Put differently, when in 2010 the Target2 claims started
to increase dramatically, this did not change the risk Germany was facing. As we have made clear, the
Target liabilities have increased mainly as a result of speculative flows [emphasis added]. The latter do
not change the net claims of Germany on the rest of the eurozone ­ only the composition of these claims
and liabilities" (De Grauwe and Ji 2012, p. 10).
         According to this quote, the risk faced by Germany depends only on the overall net foreign asset
position of the country as a whole, not on its composition. Before the repatriation of capital from Spain,
the German private sector had a bond issued by a Spanish bank; now the German NCB has a Target claim.
Both are external assets of the country as a whole, and it is not obvious which one is more risky. Dullien
and Schieritz (2012) argue that in case of a euro breakup even Spanish private debtors would default to
some extent. 24 This might be true, but it also remains true that, contrary to De Gauwe and Ji's assertion,
in an alternative monetary regime Germany would face a lower risk whether the Target claim arose from
a current account surplus or a capital inflow.
         To see this, suppose Germany starts with 100 euros in Spanish bonds and 0 Target claims, hence
with a net foreign asset position of 100 euros. Now due to a current account shock the German Target
balances increase by 100: the net foreign asset position of Germany is now 200. Alternatively, due to a
capital repatriation shock Germany sells the Spanish bonds for 100 euros and acquires a Target claim for
100 euros: the net foreign asset position is still 100 euros. It is true that in the first case Germany could
experience a default on 200 euros of net foreign assets, and in the second case only on 100 euros. But it
remains true that in an alternative regime where Target claims are replaced by default-proof assets,
Germany would face a lower risk in both cases: the maximum default that German can experience is 100
euros in the first case and 0 in the second.

24
  However, a private retaliatory default by Spanish debtors would require a coordination mechanism that is hard
to envision, except if the default occurs via a depreciation of the new Spanish currency.

                                                      27
10.2.3 Target claims as a creeping expropriation?
          The Target system is frequently considered as a kind of creeping expropriation of the savers of
Target creditors. Consider this quote from Sinn and Wollmershäuser (2012a) p. 486, about the
repatriation of German loans to Spain after the debt crisis: "their wealth is gradually being converted
from marketable assets held by their savings institutions into mere claims against their NCBs, which are
in turn backed only by Target claims against the ECB system: claims [...] which can never be called due
and that may vaporize should the euro cease to exist". Table 8 can be used to understand this quote:
there, the aggregate of the non-bank private sector and of the banking system in B replaces assets issued
by an entity in A with newly created reserves at NCB B; the latter backs these reserves with a newly
acquired Target claim vis à vis the Eurosystem.
          This and many other similar statements could be interpreted in different ways. First, that the
(combined non-bank and bank) private sector of Germany was expropriated of a foreign asset, Spanish
bonds, and given bank reserves in exchange for that. This would be incorrect. This was a voluntary private
capital repatriation by German savers: in other words, they wanted to replace their claims on the Spanish
private entity with a claim on a German entity. This claim on a German entity is reserves at the NCB, that
are not backed by anything anyway, and are always convertible into currency, and also into foreign
deposits (the opposite flow to a capital repatriation).
          Thus, the question is not what the private sector gets, but what the German NCB gets. The second
interpretation of the quote above is that in an alternative monetary regime the claims received by the
German NCB would be of a different nature, with the consequences that we have examined: the country
as a whole could sell the gold or the default-proof assets it would receive; in monetary union with Target,
it is stuck with an irredeemable, non-monetizable asset. This is a valid interpretation of the statement.
          A third interpretation is that the easy monetary policies of the ECB made this substitution of
claims easier, by giving Spanish debtors access to almost unlimited credit from their central bank on
better terms than from their German creditors. This is a legitimate argument, but it is about monetary
policy rather than the Target system per se.
          A fourth interpretation is that the Target claims of the German NCB on the Eurosystem are more
risky than the private claims that they have replaced. This is the opposite claim to that of Dullien and
Schieritz (2012) that we have seen above. It is an empirical question.




11 THE EFFECTS OF A TARGET DEFAULT ON THE OPERATION OF MONETARY
     POLICY

Target balances are part of the capital of a NCB as it is published in the official balance sheets. A breakup
of the Eurozone with default on Target liabilities would cause a decline in the capital of NCBs that are
Target creditors. To many, this has potentially severe implications for the conduct of monetary policy of
the post-breakup central bank. Although the two issues obviously have a common cause, this "monetary
policy consequence" issue is different from the "loss of real resources" issue.
        Views on the monetary policy consequences of a large decline in central bank capital differ
sharply depending on the professional role: "If you ask monetary economists whether we should care if

                                                     28
a central bank's capital level falls below zero (even for an extended period of time), most will say no. Pose
the same question to central bank governors, and the answer in nearly every case will be yes." (Cecchetti
and Schoenholtz 2015).
         Why do virtually all economists argue that central bank capital is irrelevant to the conduct of
monetary policy? In a world of fiat money, a central bank can create its own liabilities as it pleases at
(nearly) zero cost of production and with a zero interest rate, or in any case with an interest rate lower
than the interest rate on the assets it can purchase with these liabilities. Because these liabilities happen
to be accepted by everyone as means of payment, the standard notion of insolvency does not apply to a
central bank. In fact, I know of no theoretical model of the transmission of monetary policy where the
ability of a central bank to pursue its monetary policy targets impinges on the central bank's accounting
capital being positive.
         As De Grauwe and Ji (2012) write, referring to Sinn and Wollmershäuser (2012a)'s point that a
default on Germany's Target claims would imperil the ability of the Bundesbank to pursue its monetary
policy goals: "The mistake is to believe that the value of the money base (the central bank's liabilities) is
determined by the value of the assets held by the central bank. [...] In fact in the fiat money system we live
in, the central bank could literally destroy the assets without any effect on the value of the money base.
In order to stabilize the value of the money base, the central bank should keep the right supply of money
base, i.e. a supply that will maintain price stability. That is all that is needed. This condition is independent
of the value of the assets held by the central bank".
          Whelan (2014) p. 111 makes a similar point: "As discussed above, a central bank operating a fiat
currency could have assets that fall below the value of the money it has issued ­ the balance sheet could
show it to be `insolvent' ­ without having an impact on the value of the currency in circulation. A fiat
currency's value, its real purchasing power, is determined by how much money has been supplied and the
factors influencing money demand, not by the central bank's stock of assets."
         This is correct ....up to a point. For a start, the value of money is not independent of any stock of
assets of the central bank: if the interest earned on the stock of assets is insufficient to pay interest on
reserves, the central bank must be forced either to sell more assets, or to issue new reserves to pay for
the interest on reserves. In the former case in the long run the central bank will end up with zero assets;
in the latter it might be forced to create more monetary base than is consistent with its inflation target.
         To see this, consider the highly simplified balance sheet of a central bank that does not belong
to a monetary union, and therefore does not have Target balances, as in Table 16. This will allow us to
focus on the role of central bank capital on the operations of the central bank. The central bank starts
with assets  (government bonds) equal to 1500. On the liability side, it has currency for 500 and
excess reserves for 1000. 25 Accounting capital is 0.

                               Table 16: Balance sheet of the central bank, I

                           Assets                                         Liabilities
              Government bonds  =                           Currency  = 500
                                                            Excess reserves  = 1000
                                                            Equity  = 0

25
   As shown below, on the liability side the central bank also has a government deposit account. However, its balance
is typically small, as it is utilized mainly to transfer funds to and from the governments accounts at the central bank
and at the banking system. For simplicity I assume that its balance is always 0, except for a few instantaneous
operations as described below. Therefore, they earn 0 interest at the end of the period.

                                                          29
Assets are remunerated at 1 percent; for simplicity, I assume that excess reserves are also remunerated
at 1 percent. Suppose that the central bank's objective is to keep the monetary base stable. How does it
achieve this goal? To follow the process, it might be useful to keep in mind the central bank's budget
constraint, expression (3). Each year the central bank receives 15 euros from the government in interest:
this destroys 15 euros of monetary base. 26 To restore the monetary base, the central bank pays 10 euros
of interest on reserves by issuing reserve; the remaining 5 euros of monetary base it restores by buying
assets for 5 euros, or by paying dividends to the government for 5 euros, or a combination of both. 27 The
end result is no change in the monetary base and a combination of increase in asset holdings and
dividends to the government. The details of the process are displayed in Appendix B.
         Now suppose the central bank shreds 500 euros of assets, leaving it with negative capital for
500 euro, as in Table 17:

                              Table 17: Balance sheet of the central bank, II

                           Assets                                       Liabilities
              Government bonds  =                         Currency  = 500
                                                          Excess reserves  = 1000
                                                          Equity  = -500

The central bank can pay interest on reserves with the interest it receives on its assets: even though
equity is negative, it can still control inflation without reducing it holdings of assets; dividends to the
government are 0.
        Assume instead that the central bank shreds 750 euros of assets, resulting in negative equity for
750 euros as in Table 18.

                             Table 18: Balance sheet of the central bank, III

                           Assets                                       Liabilities
              Government bonds  =                         Currency  = 500
                                                          Excess reserves  = 1000
                                                          Equity  = -750



The central bank receives only 7.5 euros from the government in interest: this destroys 7.5 euros of
monetary base. But it still creates 10 euros of monetary base to pay interest on reserves; hence it must
now sell 2.5 euros of assets to avoid an increase in the monetary base. The end result is a decline in its



26
   Monetary base is destroyed because the government pays 15 euros of interest by transferring that amount from
its deposit account at commercial banks to its account at the central bank; to do so, commercial banks instruct the
central bank to reduce their reserves by 15 euros and credit the government account at the central bank by the
same amount.
27
   Distributing dividends to the government creates monetary base because the central bank credits the government
account at the central bank for 5 euros; when the government transfers this amount to its deposits at commercial
banks, the central bank credits the reserves of commercial banks by 5 euros.

                                                        30
asset holdings and no profits rebated to the government: exactly the opposite of the previous case. The
details of this process are detailed in Appendix C.
         As the process continues, the central bank might find itself with no assets: at that point it will
have to pay for interest on reserves with more reserves, thus losing control of inflation. Note that this
problem is not due to negative equity per se, but to the relative size of interest bearing assets and
reserves; as a comparison of Table 17 and Table 18 shows, beyond a certain point (in this case 500 euros)
negative capital leads to a self-reinforcing loss of assets and further decline in capital.
         The worry of losing all assets in this spiral might seem far-fetched: the central banks of advanced
countries have quintupled their asset holdings in the space of a few years, and interest on reserves is
negative in the Eurosystem. Yet as far as I can reconstruct it, this is the main rationalization one can find
for the notion that negative central bank equities (even small ones) have to be eliminated, and fast. 28
         So far, we have not mentioned two alternatives to the apocalyptic scenario in which the central
bank loses all its interest bearing assets and therefore loses control of inflation: the central bank could
pay the interest on reserves by getting more interest-bearing assets from the government ("immediate
recapitalization") or by getting each year a subsidy from the government, i.e. a negative dividend
("delayed recapitalization"). Central bankers would hate these two options too, however, because the
government might exact something in exchange for its help: the central bank would lose its
independence. 29
         It is time to put all this together more formally. Start from the budget constrain of the central
bank, expression (3). In a symmetric equilibrium in which the share in each type of central bank asset
and liability is equal to the capital key  ,  -  = 0 and expression (3) becomes

                       (+1 -  ) + (+1 -  ) +  (1 +  ) +  (1 +  ) +   =
                                                                                                                (9)
                             = +1 + +1 +   +          + +1

Assume, as it is standard in the literature on seigniorage, that  =  =  , and define seigniorage as
 +1 = +1 -  . 30 Divide all sides of (9) by +1 and let a small letter denote a variable in real terms.
Then (9) can be written as

                                                               
                                     ( +  -  )(1 +  )              =                                        (10)
                                                                +1



28
   Consider for instance the following quote from a 2010 speech by the then Bank of England's governor Mervin
King: "cancelling our holding of gilts means that the Bank of England has no assets to sell when the time comes to
tighten monetary policy. And when Bank Rate eventually starts to return to a more normal level, as one day it will,
the Bank would then have no income, in the form of coupon payments on gilts, to cover the payments of interest on
reserves at the Bank of England that we had created. The Bank would become insolvent unless it created even more
money to finance those interest payments, and that would lead ultimately to uncontrolled inflation."
29
   Note that in theory there is a fourth option, an alternative to eliminating negative equity: the central bank could
issue its own debt, which would reduce reserves (see Bindseil, Manzanares and Weller 2004). Thus, effectively this
would replace reserves with central bank debt certificates: in other words, it would be a sterilization of reserves.
However, the central bank's debt certificates would be a very close substitute for reserves. They would not formally
count as monetary base, but for all practical purposes they would be equivalent.
30
   In the present context, the assumption that  =  is problematic, as reserves currently pay a negative interest
rate, hence it would be more appropriate to define seigniorage as (+1 -  ) + (+1 -  ). I follow the standard
definition in order to make use of existing estimates of the present value of seigniorage, and I discuss this exstension
below.

                                                          31
                                                   
                                                                              
                     = (+1 + +1 - +1 ) - +1 + +1 +                         - 
                                                                        +1    +1

Define the (constant) inflation rate and the real interest rate as

                                        +1              1 + 
                                            1 + ; 1 +                                                  (11)
                                                        1 + 

Then we can then write (10) as

                                  (+1 + +1 - +1 ) +1            
                                                         +1        
             ( +  -  ) =                         -     +    +    -                                     (12)
                                        1 +        1 +  1 +  1 +  1 + 

                                                                             
Now shift forward by one period, recalling that we are holding constant  and  in nominal terms and
                                                  2
that  /+2 = ( / )( /+2 ) =  /(1 + ) , and similarly for  /+2 :

                                       (+2 + +2 - +2 ) +2 -  +2        
                                                                      (  -  )
          (+1 + +1 - +1 ) =                           +         +                                               (13)
                                             1 +        1 +       (1 + ) 1 + )2
                                                                        (

Replacing into (12) and then continuing the recursion

                                                  
               + -  +                      + + + - + 
                                 - 
      +  -  =         +              + lim                                                             (14)
               (1 + )   1 +   (1 +  )        (1 + )
                       =1                         =0


                + ++ -+ 
Assuming lim         (1+)
                                  =0
           


                                                              
                                        +          +     
                             +  =  +         -         +  -                                            (15)
                                      (1 + )    (1 + )
                                             =1              =1


Expression (15) is sometimes called the "comprehensive" balance sheet of the central bank, to distinguish
it from the conventional balance sheet. 31 Conventional, or accounting, equity is defined as the excess of
accounting assets over accounting liabilities

                                                     
                                       =  +  +  -  -  -                                                (16)

Hence from (15)

                                                                  
                                      +                 +
                                            =  +  +                                                    (17)
                                    (1 + )           (1 + )
                                   =1                            =1




31
  As far as I can reconstruct, the notion of comprehensive balance sheet of a central bank was first introduced by
Fry (1992) and then Stella (1997).

                                                       32
Expression (17) says that the present value of dividends is equal to the sum of currency in circulation,
conventional capital, and the present value of future seigniorage, The sum of the last two items is
sometimes called "comprehensive capital". One might wonder how a financial asset with no expiration
and carrying no effective remuneration ends up with a positive value  in the expression for conventional
                                                                                         
capital (16). The reason is that it always accompanied by the matching liability          , which is the reason
why in equilibrium the remuneration of Target claims is 0.     32

          Expression (17) illustrates clearly the trilemma discussed above, faced by a central banker in case
of a large decline in conventional equity  : the central bank must either accept a higher present value of
seigniorage, or an increase in assets  , presumably provided by the government (the case of "immediate
recapitalization"), or a lower present value of dividends, which could become negative if  is low enough
(the case of "delayed recapitalization"). 33 The last two alternatives are unpalatable to the central bank
because, should the present value of dividends become negative, the government might exact conditions
in exchange for the help it extends the central bank.
          Note that, aside from issues of reputation, public relations, and repeated interactions,
"immediate" and "delayed" recapitalizations are very similar. There is no substantive difference between
the following two scenarios. Referring to the example above, in an immediate recapitalization the
government hands the central bank a consol with a yearly coupon of 2.5; in a delayed recapitalization
the government commits to pay the central bank a subsidy of 2.5 every year. However, a central banker
will certainly prefer the former alternative, for two reasons. First, it is easier for a future government to
renege on the promise to pay a subsidy to the central bank than to default on the consol: it is unlikely
that a path for future dividends has been set. Second, an immediate recapitalization is a one-off event; a
delayed recapitalization makes the central bank dependent on the government forever.
          In fact, the reaction of central bankers to a negative equity position of their central bank is almost
invariably "immediate recapitalization". The 2018 ECB Convergence report, pp. 25-26, writes: "[...]the
event of an NCB's net equity becoming less than its statutory capital or even negative would require that
the respective Member State provides the NCB with an appropriate amount of capital at least up to the
level of the statutory capital within a reasonable period of time" [emphasis added]. The German
Constitutional court has also affirmed the principle that the Bundesbank should not operate with negative
capital. 34
          Still, a central banker would like even more not to be facing then choice between immediate or
delayed recapitalization. From her point of view, both alternatives are a threat to her independence.
This is the fundamental reason why central bankers do not like negative central bank equity: because,
they claim, it prevents them from pursuing some of the monetary policies that they might want to
implement in the future, or else puts them at the mercy of politicians. 35


32
   This result is correct only to a first approximation because we have assumed that  =  .
33
   Reis (2013) calls a configuration where the present value of central bank dividends is negative "intertemporal
insolvency".
34
   See German Constitutional Court (2017), cited in Fuest and Sinn (2018) p. 42.
35
   Even aside from issues of default, there is another reason why a Target claim is not like other assets and can be
problematic for a central banker. Within conventional capital  there is an important difference between  and
 . The former is made of marketable assets, the latter is not: as a consequence, they are not perfect substitutes.
It could be that  is large and the present value of dividends positive calculated according to expression (17); but
if  is small and  large, the central bank might be unable to absorb liquidity, because  cannot be sold in a
liquidity-absorbing open market operation. On the other hand, one could argue that the impact of a Target default
on the ability to implement a tighter monetary policy is overdone. It is widely acknowledged now that the
"normalization" of monetary policy, i.e. an increase in the short interbank interest rate like the EONIA rate, does

                                                        33
12 IMPLICATIONS FOR THE BUNDESBANK
How realistic are all these worries? Let's consider the implications of a decline in Target balances caused
by a breakup of the Eurozone. I will make some educated guesses about the monetary policy
implications of this event for the Bundesbank. To do so, I will proceed in steps. I will first take expression
(17) literally, and ask whether there are realistic configurations under which the post-breakup
Bundesbank would end up with a negative present value of dividends if it wanted to stick to a 2 percent
inflation rate target. I will then move to more realistic scenarios, in which central bankers (and taxpayers)
are not interested only in the expected present value of dividends.
         The first term on the right hand side of (17), capital plus reserves of the Bundesbank, is
approximately 100bn. The second term, banknotes in circulation, is currently 700bn, of which about
400bn issued in excess of the German capital key. It is plausible to assume that Germany would
recognize its currency liabilities at the moment of breakup, as defaulting on them would be a heavy
reputational blow, and could even be economically harmful, as it would imply giving up future
seigniorage. 36
         This brings us to the last term on the right hand side of (17), the expected present value of
seigniorage. This is obviously also the hardest term to estimate, as it depends on a number of
assumptions. For simplicity, in the derivation of expression (17) I have assumed no GDP growth. But as
GDP grows, the demand for currency increases, and so does seigniorage. Formally, this means that the
correct discount rate is not the real interest rate , but  - , where  is the rate of growth of GDP. The
estimate depends also on the elasticity of the demand for currency to the interest rate and to GDP,
because this determines how much seigniorage can be extracted from the private sector without
increasing inflation above the target 2 percent rate.
         Buiter and Rahbari (2012a) and (2012b) assume a real interest rate of 2 percent, a real growth
rate of 1 percent, an inflation rate of 2 percent, and estimate an interest rate semielasticity of the
demand for currency of 2.9. If the income elasticity of the demand for currency is assumed to be 0, they
estimate a present value of seigniorage for the whole Eurozone of 1.4tn; if the income elasticity is
assumed to be 1, the present value of seigniorage is estimated at 2.5tn. Banknotes issued by the
Bundesbank are about half of the total issuance of Euro banknotes. If the proportion remains unchanged
after breakup, the Buiter ­ Rahbari estimates imply a present value of seigniorage for the post-breakup
Bundesbank between roughly 700bn and 1.25tn.
         Hilscher, Raviv and Reis (2015) and Reis (2015) advocate using risk adjusted discount factors to
discount the future flow of uncertain seigniorage, and calculate that doing so could easily cut the present
values seigniorage as calculated by Buiter and Rahbari by a factor of 3 or more. This would leave a range
of present value of seigniorage roughly between 200bn and 400bn. Note that these are all lower
bounds because excess reserves are not counted as seigniorage in these calculations.
         Now let's consider reasonable figures for a loss on the Target claims. Let's take the round figure
of 1tn for the current German Target claims. What would be the default rate in case of a disorderly

not necessarily require absorbing liquidity, but can be done with a progressive increase of the interest on excess
reserves.
36
   It is probably the case that a large share of these 300bn excess banknotes circulates in Germany. Whelan (2017)
assumes instead that Germany would renege on these banknotes, but this seems unrealistic.

                                                       34
Eurozone breakup? If the other countries did pay their Target liabilities, but in their currency, the default
rate would be roughly equal to the weighted average depreciation of the debtor countries vis à vis the
new deutschemark. A reasonable guess would be in the order of 30 percent, or a 300bn default.
        But it is not difficult to imagine a more drastic scenario. After all, Target liabilities and claims are
a rather arcane concept, as the debate of the recent years has confirmed over and over again. It would
not be difficult for a populist Southern European government to interpret it, in good or bad faith, as
"bankers' debt" with which "we want nothing to do". It might not even be difficult to try to present it as
no debt at all: Target debt represents a liability towards the Eurosystem, not towards a specific country
or NCB, and it would be tempting, if disingenuous, to claim that this is a debt to an entity that does not
exist anymore. Hence a scenario in which the leavers default on the entire 1tn Target debt cannot be
ruled out. Certainly this scenario is envisaged as a possibility in numerous contributions to the Target
debate, as Sinn (2012b) or Whelan (2014).
        The numbers that follow refer to a disorderly breakup, in which all Eurozone countries go their
own way. In case of an orderly breakup, in which the Eurozone splits into two monetary unions,
Germany's Target loss would be a fraction of the total Target default of "southern" Eurozone equal to its
(new) capital key share in the "northern" Eurozone. In this sense, the calculations I present below are
upper bounds.
        Table 19 displays the present value of the Bundesbank's dividends (left half of each cell) and ,the
Bundesbank's capital (right half of each cell), calculated using expression (17), for a default on Target
claims between 300bn and 1000bn, for a present value of seigniorage between 200bn and 1,250bn,
and for values of banknotes in circulation of 700bn. Even in the most extreme scenario, with a complete
default on Target claims and the lower bound of the estimates of the present value of seigniorage, the
present value of dividends would still be non-negative.

                             Table 19: Present value of Bundesbank dividends

                                                           Present value of seigniorage,  bn
                                                         200              700             1,250
          Default on Target            -300          700     -200   1,200     -200    1,750    -200
          claims,  bn                 -1,000          0      -900    500      -900    1,050    -900
        The table displays the present value of Bundesbank dividends (left half of the cell) and the conventional
        capital (right half of the cell), using the formula of expression (17), under various hypotheses about the
        present value of seigniorage (top row) and of default on the Bundesbank's Target claims (left column). The
        table assumes a current liability for currency in circulation of 700bn, and initial capital plus reserves of
        100bn.



Of course, conventional equity in this case would be negative by 900bn, but if one takes this result
literally it appears that the German Bundesbank would not need financial support from the government
(in present value terms) in order to pursue its monetary policy objectives. 37 This is consistent with the
economists' view.

37
  Note however that the estimates of the present values of seigniorage presented here are based on a definition
of seigniorage that includes only the change in currency +1 - . If one instead defines seigniorage as +1 -
 + +1 -  , as it might be more appropriate in the current situation of negative interest on reserves, then there
would be even more scope for a default on Target claims without affecting the ability of the Bundesbank to pay a
positive present discounted value of dividends to the government and without impacting on its target inflation rate.

                                                            35
         However, at closer inspection this table is far from reassuring from the point of view of a central
banker. The condition that the present value of seigniorage be consistent with a two percent inflation
rate and the result that the present value of dividends be non-negative are not very relevant for a real-
life discussion of the issue. Real-life central bankers and taxpayers simply do not care about what might
happen 200 years from now. A non-negative present value of dividends is compatible with a long string
of highly negative dividends now or in the near future if capital is small or negative. 38
         In fact, in all the cells of Table 19 the central bank's capital is negative, and in the second row
heavily so. As we have seen, a negative accounting capital increases the risk of facing, possibly just for a
few periods, a trade-off between getting financial help from the government or relaxing monetary policy.
Central bankers tend to be risk-averse, conservative people, for reasons that are well known to (and
advocated by) economists: such an event has an enormous weight in a central banker's loss function. For
a number of reasons (culture, politics, prestige, and some would perhaps say even misguided economic
theories) it is simply inconceivable that a post-breakup Bundesbank would accept to start operations
with negative conventional equity, whatever its amount. Any shortfall of the conventional equity (let
alone the comprehensive equity) of the Bundesbank will be recapitalized.
         It is true that there are numerous examples of central banks that have operated with negative
conventional equity 39 without suffering any apparent impediment to the pursuit of their goals of
monetary policy. However, the shortfalls in conventional equity that have been studied in the literature
are small relative to what would happen in case of a total default on the Target claims of the Bundesbank.
Quite simply, this is unexplored territory, where psychological factors might play an equal or more
important role than rational economic factors, as envisaged in this quote by the then governor of the
Bank of Japan Fukui "[in the event of negative capital t]he central bank might either run into difficulties
in conducting its policy or other business operations, or might cause the view to spread that it will, and
eventually it will become difficult to maintain public confidence in the currency." (Fukui, 2003, cited in
Cukiermann (2006), p.5)




13 THE COSTS OF RECAPITALIZATION
It has been argued that a recapitalization, besides being unnecessary because a central bank can operate
with negative capital, would anyway be costless, a mere book-keeping item: "However, even if it is
decided after a break-up that the Bundesbank should be provided with assets from the Federal
government for recapitalization purposes, rather than being hugely costly, this recapitalization would
have no impact on either the net asset position of the German state or its flow of net income. Let's assume
the German government recapitalizes the Bundesbank by providing it with an interest-bearing
government bond. While the government's gross debt will increase, the government bond becomes an
asset of< the Bundesbank, so the total public net debt does not change, while the higher net interest
income arising from these assets would increase the amount the Bundesbank could return in dividends to
the German government by the same amount, resulting in no change in the total flow of income for the
public sector." (Whelan 2014 p. 111)


38
     Reis (2015) calls this "period central bank insolvency".
39
     See for instance Dalton and Dziobek (2005) and Archer and Moser-Boehm (2013) and the literature cited therein.

                                                         36
         This statement is correct but can easily be misinterpreted. A recapitalization is to a first
approximation neutral from the point of view of the private sector, in that it does not change the net
asset position of the private sector or of the consolidated public sector (the combination o fthe
government and the central bank): tax receipts are transferred from the government to the central bank,
and the same amount comes back to the government in the form of higher dividends from or lower
subsidies to the central bank. By the same logic, shredding domestic government bonds held by the
central bank is also neutral.
         But shredding Target claims, or any claim on foreign entities, is not neutral for the private sector.
A recapitalization is neutral conditional on net foreign assets of the central bank having been lost; but the
loss of these net foreign assets itself is not neutral. This key distinction has not always been clear in the
discussion. A default on the Target claims of Germany is not a purely nominal or accounting phenomenon:
as we have seen, it is a loss of real resources for the German taxpayer, irrespective of what caused the
accumulation of Target claims in the first place. 40




14 CONCLUSIONS
        Rather than restating the main conclusions of the analysis so far (see the Introduction for a brief
summary of the main results) this section addresses very briefly the first question set out in section 3:
even aside from issues of default, does the Target system alter monetary policy in such a way to amplify
the macroeconomic imbalances of Eurozone members, like capital flows or current account imbalances?
One could argue that the Eurozone monetary policy is agreed upon collectively, hence Target balances
are just a manifestation of a monetary policy that Germany has agreed to. This is formally correct.
However, what Germany agrees to today depends also on the terminal conditions, which in turn
determine the threat point of the other countries. A larger Target claim for Germany means more
bargaining power for the debtor countries, because it implies larger German losses from a Target default.
Even in a cooperative setting, Germany might find it in its own interest to agree to a more accommodative
monetary policy just to reduce the probability of a breakup, with the accompanying Target default.




40
  Recently, Whelan (2017) has argued that in case of a breakup Germany would lose the interest on its Target claims
but would benefit from the increase in seigniorage as the demand for a safe currency like the Deutschemark would
increase.

                                                        37
15 APPENDIX A
Recently, Fuest and Sinn (2018) and Sinn (2019) have argued that Target claims do receive a
remuneration. Their argument is best made with one example taken from their contribution. To abstract
from the effects of differences between the shares of each country's assets and liabilities and their
respective capital keys, let's assume a symmetric world in which all countries have the same capital keys
and their shares in each asset and liability of the Eurozone are equal to their capital keys. Now suppose
that there is a shock, causing a capital outflow of 10 from country A to country B. As we know, other
things equal this generates an increase of Target claims and of excess reserves for the same amount at
NCB B, and the opposite at NCB A. NCB B's contribution to the pool of monetary income (the term in
brackets on the right hand side of (6)) falls by   10, while NCB A's contribution increases by the same
amount. The total pool of interest income does not change, hence effectively central bank B's saves
  10: Fuest and Sinn (2018) and Sinn (2019) conclude that the remuneration of the marginal 10 of
Target balances is  , the interest rate on excess reserves. However, as I have shown in expression (8) of
section 10, this is not the whole effect: taking into account also the monetary income received, the
remuneration of Target balances is 0.
         Suppose instead that both central banks want to undo the effects of the capital flow on their
monetary base. NCB A buys assets for  = 10, and increases excess reserves correspondingly; NCB B
sells assets for 10 and reduces excess reserves by the same amount. Thus now the net change in excess
reserves at each central bank is 0. The combined non-Target assets on the balance sheets of the two NCBs
also do not change, hence the pool of monetary income on the right hand side of (6) does not change;
however, after the shock NCB B contributes   10 less to the pool (it has sold 10 of assets), but receives
the same share (of an unchanged pool of monetary income) as before the shock. Hence, the savings in
the contribution to the pool can be considered the remuneration of the extra 10 of Target claims.
According to Fuest and Sinn (2018) and Sinn (2019), the rate of return on Target balances is therefore  .
         However, here too the actual remuneration should take into account also the entire monetary
income paid, expression (4), and the other elements in expression (3). Once this is done, one finds that
the net effect on the income of NCB B is a decline in income equal to - ( -  ), because NCB B has
sold assets. However, this is not the remuneration of Target balances: this is just the effect of the
discretionary change in the balance sheets of the two central banks after the shock. In other words, they
could always do this, regardless of the Target balance shock.




16 APPENDIX B
In step 1 of Table 20, the central bank pays interest on excess reserves for 10. It does so by crediting the
reserve accounts of banks for that amount; in other words, by creating excess reserves for 10. In step 2
the government pays the central bank 15 in interest payments. As the government does so by
transferring 15 from its deposit account at commercial banks to its deposit account at the central bank,
and then by having its deposit account at the central bank debited for 15, this results in a decline in
reserves by 15. The net result so far is a decline in excess reserves and the monetary base by 5. Because
the central bank's objective is to keep the monetary base stable, in step 3 it can restore the initial value
of the monetary base by conducting a liquidity injecting open market operation: it just has to buy assets


                                                    38
for 5. It does this by creating reserves for that amount. These extra assets for 5 represent the profit of
the central bank, that it rebates to the government as dividends in step 4. 41

                                 Table 20: Stabilizing the monetary base, I

                                                         Resources                                 Uses
 Step 1: Central bank pays
                                                     +1 -  = +10                                 = +10
 interest on reserves
 Step 2: Government pays                             +1 -  = -15
 interests                                             = +15
 Step 3: Central bank restores
                                                      +1 -  = + 5                            +1 -  = +5
 the monetary base
 Step 4: Central bank devolves                                                               +1 -  = -5
 profits to government                                                                       +1 = +5
                                                                                             +1 = +5
                                                        = +15
 Total effect                                                                                  = +10
                                                       +1 -  = 0
                                                                                             +1 -  = 0




17 APPENDIX C
Consider Table 21. Now it receives only 7.5 in interest from its holdings of government bonds (step 2).
To restore the value of the monetary base, it now has to conduct a liquidity absorbing operation (9nstead
of a liquidity injecting operation, as in Table 20) for 2.5, by selling 2.5 of assets (step 3). It cannot pay a
positive dividend (step 4).

                                Table 21: Stabilizing the monetary base, II

                                                         Resources                                 Uses
 Step 1: Central bank pays
                                                     +1 -  = +10                                 = +10
 interest on reserves
 Step 2: Government pays                             +1 -  = -7.5
 interests                                             = +7.5
 Step 3: Central bank restores
                                                     +1 -  = -2.5                          +1 -  = -2.5
 the monetary base
 Step 4: Central bank devolves
 profits to government
                                                                                             +1 = 0
                                                        = +7.5
 Total effect                                                                                 = +10
                                                       +1 -  = 0
                                                                                           +1 -  = -2.5


41
  The end result would be the same if in step 1 the central bank paid interest by selling assets for 10 euros instead
of creating new reserves for 10 euros.

                                                         39
REFERENCES
Adler, G., P. Castro and C. Tovar (2012): "Does central bank capital matter for monetary policy?", IMF
         Working Paper, no 12/60, February.
Archer, D. and P. Moser-Boehm (2013): "Central bank finances", Bank for International Settlements
         paper No. 71
Auer, R. (2014): "What drives TARGET2 balances? Evidence from a panel analysis", Economic Policy,
         January, pp. 139-197
Auer, R. and B. Bogdanova (2019): "What is driving the renewed increase in TARGET2 balances?", BIS
         Quarterly Review, March 2017, pp. 7-8
Bindseil, U. and P. König (2011): "The economics of TARGET2 balances", SFB 649 Discussion Paper 2011-
         035, Humboldt University, Berlin
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System: Federal Reserve Act,
         https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/section7.htm
Bruegel (2018): "A Dataset on Sovereign Bond Holdings", Last updated October 24, 2018
         https://bruegel.org/publications/datasets/sovereign-bond-holdings/
Buiter, W. H. (2014): "Central banks: powerful, political and unaccountable?", CEPR working paper No
         10223
Buiter, W. H. and E. Rahbari (2012a): "Looking into the deep pocket of the ECB", Citi Global Economics
         View, 27 February 2012
Buiter, W. and E. Rahbari (2012b): "Target2 Redux: The Simple Accountancy and Slightly More Complex
         Economics of Bundesbank Loss Exposure through the Eurosystem", Citi Economics, Global
         Economics, 16 October 2012
Buiter, W. H. and E. Rahbari (2012c): "The ECB as lender of last resort for sovereigns in the Euro area",
         CEPR working paper No 8974
Buiter, W. H., E. Rahbari, and J. Michels (2011a): "TARGETing the wrong villain: Target2 and intra-
         Eurosystem imbalances in credit flows", Global Economics View, CitiBank, 9 June.
Buiter, W. H., E. Rahbari and J. Michels (2011b): "The implications of intra-euro area imbalances in
         credit flows", CEPR Policy Insights No. 57, August 2011
Castillo, S. and C. Varela (2017): "Target2 imbalances are rising, should we worry?" BBVA Global Flash,
         January 31, 2017
Cecchetti, S., R. N. McCauley and P. M. McGuire (2012): "Interpreting TARGET2 balances", Bank of
         International Settlements Paper No. 393.
Cecchetti, S. and K. Schoenholtz (2015): "Do central banks need capital?", Money, Banking and
         Financial Markets blog, https://www.moneyandbanking.com/commentary/2015/5/26/do-
         central-banks-need-capital
Cukierman, A. (2006): "Central bank finances and independence ­ how much capital should a CB have?"
DeNederlandscheBank (2016) Target2 imbalances reflect QE and persistent fragmentation within the
         euro area, 16 June 2016
Dalton, J. and C. Dziobek (2005): "Central bank losses and experiences in selected countries", IMF
         Working Paper No. 05-72
De Grauwe, P. and Y. Ji (2912): "What Germany should fear most is its own fear", CEOS Working
         Document, no. 368



                                                   40
DeNederlanscheBank (2016): "Target2 imbalances reflect QE and persistent fragmentation within the
         euro area",June 16, 2016
Deutsche Bundesbank (2016): "The impact of Eurosystem securities purchases on the TARGET2
         balances", Deutsche Bundesbank Monthly Report, March 2016, pp. 53.55
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019): 2018 Annual Report
Dullien, S. and M. Shieritz (2012), "German savers should applaud the growing TARGET balances",
         Voxeu.org http://www.voxeu.org/article/german-savers-should-applaudgrowing-target-
         balances
European Central Bank (2013): "Target balances and monetary policy operations", ECB Monthly Bulletin,
         May 2013, pp. 103-114
European Central Bank (2016): "TARGET balances and the asset purchase programme", ECB Economic
         Bulletin, 7/2016, pp. 20-23
European Central Bank (2017): "The ECB's asset purchase programme and TARGET balances: monetary
         policy implementation and beyond", ECB Economic Bulletin, 3/2017, pp. 21-26
Federal Reserve System (2018): Federal Reserve Banks Combined Financial Statements, 2017
Fry, M. (1992): "Can a central bank go bust?", The Manchester School, vol 60,Supplement, June.
Fuest, C., and H.W. Sinn (2018): "Target Risks without Euro Exits", CESifo Forum 19, no. 4 , pp. 36­45.
Fukui, T. (2003) `Challenges for Monetary Policy in Japan', Speech at the Spring Meeting
         of the Japan Society of Monetary Economics, 1 June,
         http://www.boj.or.jp/en/type/press/koen/ko0306a.htm#02c
German Constitutional Court (Bundesverfassungsgericht, 2017): Decision of the Second Senate, 18 July,
         2 BvR 859/15, Randnr. 1­137, www.bverfg.de/e/rs20170718_2bvr085915.html
Hilscher, J., A. Raviv, and R. Reis (2015): "Measuring the Market Value of Central Bank Capital." Brandeis
         University and Columbia University.
Jobs, C., Handig, M., and R. Holzfeind (2012): "Understanding TARGET 2: The Eurosystem's Euro
         Payment System from an Economic and Balance Sheet Perspective", Monetary Policy and the
         Economy, Q1 2012, OeNB, pp. 81-91
Koning, J. P. (2012). "The idiot's guide to the Federal Reserve Interdistrict Settlement Account", blog
         post available at http://jpkoning.blogspot.ie/2012/02/idiots-guide-to-federal-reserve.html
RebelEconomist (2011): "Right on Target", http://reservedplace.blogspot.com/2011/07/right-on-
         target.html
Reis, R. (2013): "The mystique surrounding the central bank's balance sheet, applied to the European
         crisis", American Economic Review 103(3): pp. 135-140
Reis, R. (2015): "Different types of central bank Insolvency and the central role of seignorage"
         Journal of Monetary Economics, 73, 20-25, July 2015.
Reis, R. (2017): "Can the central bank alleviate fiscal burdens?", working paper, London School of
         Economics
Reuters (2012): "ECB FOCUS-Weidmann gains traction with policy pushback",
         https://www.reuters.com/article/ecb/ecb-focus-weidmann-gains-traction-with-policy-
         pushback-idUSL5E8E23JF20120305
Sinn, Hans-Werner (2011a): "The ECB's stealth bailout", VoxEU.org, 1 June,
         https://voxeu.org/article/ecb-s-stealth-bailout
Sinn, H.-W. (2011b), "On and off Target", VoxEU.org, 14 June, https://voxeu.org/article/and-target
Sinn, H. W. (2012a): "Target losses in case of a Euro breakup" Cesifo Forum 4


                                                   41
Sinn, H-W (2012b), "Fed versus ECB: How TARGET Debts Can Be Repaid", VoxEU 10 March,
         https://voxeu.org/article/fed-versus-ecb-how-target-debts-can-be-repaid
Sinn, H. W. (2018): "The ECB's fiscal policy", NBER working paper No. 24613, May 2018
Sinn, H. W. (2019): "The effective rate of interest on Target balances", CESifo Working paper 7878,
         September
Sinn, H. W. and T. Wollmershäuser (2012a): "Target loans, current account balances and capital flows:
         the ECB's rescue facility", International Tax and Public Finance, 19(4), 468­508.
Sinn, H. W. and T. Wollmershäuser (2012b): "Target balances and the German financial account in light
         of the European balance-of-payments crisis", CESifo Working Paper No. 4051, December.
Stella, P. (1997): "Do central banks need capital?", IMF Working Paper, no 97/83, July
Stella, P. (2003): "Why central banks need financial strength", Central Banking, vol 14, no 2, November
Stella, P. (2008): "Central bank financial strength, policy constraints and inflation", IMFWorking Paper
         08/49, February.
Westermann, R. (2014): "Discussion of Whelan", Economic Policy, January, pp. 117-125
Westermann, F. (2016), "Target2 Imbalances Rise again", International Financing Review, 7 April 2016,
         http://www.ifre.com/target-2-imbalances-rise- again/21242227.fullarticle
Westermann, F. (2017), "Capital Flight towards Germany", OMFIF, 27 February,
         https://www.omfif.org/analysis/commentary/2017/february/capital-flight-towards-germany
Whelan, K. (2011): "Professor Sinn misses the target", VoxEU.org, 9 June,
         https://voxeu.org/article/there-hidden-eurozone-bailout
Whelan, K. (2014): "TARGET2 and Central Bank Balance Sheets", Economic Policy 29(77), pp. 79­137,
         https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-0327.12025
Whelan, K. (2017): "Should We Be Concerned about Target Balances?" European Parliament, In-depth
         Analysis for the Econ Committee, IP/A/ECON/2017-04,
         www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/IDAN/2017/607366/IPOL_IDA(2017)607366_EN.pdf




                                                   42
