                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              PERSUASION ON NETWORKS

                                       Georgy Egorov
                                      Konstantin Sonin

                                     Working Paper 27631
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27631


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2020




The authors are grateful to Renee Bowen, Ozan Candogan, Martin Cripps, Piotr Dworczak,
Wioletta Dziuda, Emir Kamenica, Konrad Mierendorff, Roger Myerson, Elliot Lipnowski, Nikita
Roketskiy, and seminar participants at UCL, Berkeley, UCSD, HKBU/NTU/CEIBS/NUS for
their helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Georgy Egorov and Konstantin Sonin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Persuasion on Networks
Georgy Egorov and Konstantin Sonin
NBER Working Paper No. 27631
July 2020
JEL No. D85,L82,P16

                                          ABSTRACT

We analyze persuasion in a model in which each receiver can buy a direct access to the sender's
signal or rely on her network connections to get it. For the sender, a higher bias increases the
impact per direct receiver, yet diminishes the willingness of agents to receive information.
Contrary to naive intuition, the optimal propaganda might target peripheral, rather than centrally-
located agents, and is at its maximum levels when the probability that information flows between
agents is close to zero or one, but not in-between. The impact of network density depends on this
probability as well.


Georgy Egorov
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
g-egorov@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Konstantin Sonin
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1307 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
ksonin@uchicago.edu
1    Introduction

Autocratic governments use propaganda to maintain their grip on power and achieve other goals
(Guriev and Treisman, 2019). Over the years, the Soviet Union has engaged in mass campaigns
to expand literacy, reduce Orthodox church participation, mobilize youth to participate in de-
velopment programs, reduce alcohol consumption and embrace a healthy lifestyle, increase and,
in other time periods, decrease the birth rate, and many others (Service, 2003). In the com-
munist China, mass campaigns were used, in addition to maintaining support for the party and
its leaders, to promote development of individual industrial plants, encourage extermination of
rats, mosquitoes, and sparrows, or spearhead destruction of cultural artifacts (Shapiro, 2001).
    In the democratic realm, governments have often used propaganda campaigns to mobilize
population during wars. During World War I, the British government has been using production
of literature and films to increase the support for war both domestically and in the (still neutral)
United States (Taylor, 1999). Currently, the US government finance efforts to nudge people to
sign up for the health insurance provided by the Affordable Care Act (Thaler and Sunstein,
2009). In Afghanistan, the US government has successfully organized information operations to
encourage local population to report road-side bombs and increase support for the reintegration
of former Taliban fighters (Sonin and Wright, 2019).
    In this paper, we analyze the limits on propaganda that stems from the existence of infor-
mation networks that connect dictator's subjects. We do not focus on the spread of opposition
information: the only information that is transmitted through the network is the dictator's own
signal. The limit on propaganda comes from the incentive constraints of the receivers. If get-
ting information is costly ­ e.g., the cost is the price of newspaper subscription or simply the
alternative cost of switching on a radio ­ the signal should be informative enough so that the
receiver would opt to bear the cost. In a network, an agent might receive information from a
neighbor, which reduces her willingness to subscribe. Thus, there is a trade off for any producer
of propaganda: when the signal is more slanted, the impact on those who get information from
them is higher, yet the willingness of agents to become direct receivers is lower.
    To analyze the impact of propaganda, we use the basic Bayesian persuasion model (Ka-
menica and Gentzkow, 2011; Bergemann and Morris, 2019; Kamenica, 2019). Relative to other
celebrated communication protocols such as cheap talk in Crawford and Sobel (1982), verifiable
messaging in Milgrom (1981), and signaling in Spence (1973), Bayesian persuasion assumes more
commitment power on behalf of the sender. This makes Bayesian persuasion a natural commu-
nication mechanism in a setup, where the sender's bias corresponds to censorship of a media


                                                 1
Figure 1: Sender-optimal equilibria as a function of p. Subscribers are solid blue. The optimal slant is
decreasing on [0, p2 ) and [p2 , p1 ), and constant, at the maximum level, on [p1 , 1].


or a propaganda campaign. Dictators do not edit news in the real time: instead, they appoint
biased editors or establish institutions of censorship to generate the slanted signal (King, Pan
and Roberts, 2013, 2017; Lorentzen, 2014; Rozenas and Stukal, 2019).
    There is a single sender who maximizes the expected amount of action by agents connected
in a network. In a political economy setting, this will be, e.g., mobilization in support of a
leader or abstention from the anti-government protest. The sender chooses the information
design without knowing the state of the world ­ this is a critical element of Bayesian persuasion.
After the sender chooses the information design, receivers compare the cost of getting this
information with the value that information provides to them; less slant makes information
more valuable. Example 1 shows the consequences of the optimal choice by receivers (whether
to buy subscription themselves or to get information for free from their neighbors) and the
sender who optimizes the impact of propaganda in a very simple network.

Example 1. Consider the network in Figure 1. The probability that information passes through
any link connecting two agents is p; there is a non-zero cost of subscribing to the signal. For
different values of p, different levels of slant are optimal. If p is high enough (p > p1 ), the
sender-optimal structure is such that the slant is at its maximum compatible with an individual
agent buying subscription, the central agent chooses to subscribe, while each of peripheral agents
opt to receive information from the central one. If p is low enough (p < p2 ), then the impact
is maximized if everyone is a subscriber. Finally, for intermediate values of p, p2 < p < p1 ,
the sender-preferred equilibrium is such that the slant is below the maximum level, the two
peripheral agents buy subscription, and the central one receives information from them.



                                                       2
   Figure 2: The sender-optimal equilibrium structure for different levels of p. Subscribers are solid.


       In Example 1, the sender has to reduce the slant at the intermediate levels of p to make
subscription incentive compatible for peripheral agents. If the central agent buys subscription,
peripheral agents would get information with probability p. If the peripheral agents subscribe,
then the central agent gets information with probability 1 - (1 - p)2 , which exceeds p whenever
p = 0, 1. Therefore, the sender trades off a lower level of slant that induces the desired action to
have a higher probability that the signal reaches every agent. Propositions 1 and 2 demonstrate
this logic in the case of one-way (directed) networks, and Propositions 3 and 4 describe equilibria
in two-way (undirected) networks.
       Example 1 show that the sender of propaganda would not necessarily target the centrally
connected individual. In general, when an agent with a high degree of centrality (an "influencer")
receives information directly, this crowds out the incentives of those who can receive information
from this agent. In Example 2, when the edge probability p is sufficiently low, the sender would
prefer that every peripheral agent becomes a subscriber, yet the central agent, for whom the
incentive compatibility constraint is tighter, does not.1 Proposition 8 provides this result for
any star network.

Example 2. Consider a star network with r peripheral nodes depicted in Figure 2. When
the edge probability p is high, then the naive logic applies: the impact is maximized when the
central agent is a subscriber (solid blue), and other receive information from her. However, when
p is low, it might be optimal for the sender that everyone but the central agent opts to receive
information directly, while the central agent receives information from r peripheral agents.
   1
     Jackson and Yariv (2011) discuss the best-shot public goods game, a game of local public-good provision,
first analyzed by Bramoull´  e and Kranton (2007) and Galeotti et al. (2010), as an example of network games
with externalities. In a model of information diffusion in a development context, Akbarpour and Jackson (2018)
have effect similar to that in Example 2: the optimal seeding structure might target peripheral, rather than the
centrally connected agents.



                                                       3
Figure 3: In networks P1 and P1 , as well as in networks P2 and P2 , each agent has the same number
of links (two and four, resp.). When p is above a certain threshold, the government propaganda is more
effective in P1 and P2 . However, in P1 , the sender-optimal subscription set is a singleton if and only if
p = 1, while in P2 is a singleton whenever p is larger than some p < 1.


   In our model, the immediate consequence of the presence of a network for the sender is that
once citizens rely on each other to receive information, there is less bias that the government
can induce. An increase in the slant reduces the citizens' incentives to subscribe. As a result, a
more dense social network forces the government to report information more truthfully; this, in
turn, makes authoritarian governments willing to deal with highly granular, atomized polities.
Not surprisingly, many totalitarian regimes discouraged all kind of networking, even strictly
non-political, save for directly state-supervised one (Service, 2003; Roberts, 2018). Proposition
6 illustrates the impact of network density on the optimal slant: a more dense network with the
same frequency of subscribers features lower optimal slant.
   Example 3 demonstrates another mechanism through which network structure limits per-
suasion. We compare two networks, with each agent having the same number of links in either
of them, yet networks having different topology. As a result, the sender's ability to persuade
receivers connected via such networks is different.

Example 3. Consider two pairs of networks in Figure 3: P1 and P1 , and P2 and P2 . In each
pair, agents have the same number of connections (2 and 4, respectively). In a sender-optimal
equilibrium, it is easier to influence agents' actions and maintain government support in P1 and
P2 . In particular, there exists a threshold p such that for any p > p, the government would
survive for a wider range of parameters with polity P1 than with polity P1 and with P2 rather
than P2 . When p is high enough (not necessarily close to 1), the sender-optimal slant in P1 and
P2 is at the maximum level and each connected component has a unique subscriber. For P1 , it
is never optimal to have slant at its maximum unless p = 1; for P2 , again, there exists another
threshold p < 1, such that the maximum slant is optimal for any p > p.



                                                    4
   As Example 3 illustrates, the equilibrium subscription structures are drastically different in
P1 and P2 . In P1 = Z, for any p, 0 < p < 1, the subscribers are allocated at a regular distance.
The equilibrium is sender-optimal when the distance that is consistent with the subscribers'
incentive compatibility constraint is at the minimum. This distance approaches infinity as p
tends to 1, but it is never infinite unless p = 1. In contrast, in P2 = Z2 , for any level of
propaganda and cost of subscription, there exists a threshold p < 1 such that for any p > p,
there is exactly one subscriber (Proposition 7). Every other agent does not subscribe, expecting
information to reach him with a sufficient probability ­ regardless of the distance from the unique
subscriber. The reason for this is percolation (Broadbent and Hammersley, 1957): when p is
large enough, there exists, almost surely, a unique infinite cluster of connected nodes. For any
agent in the network, the probability of getting informed is the probability of belonging to this
infinite cluster. As a result, the spread of information, and the limits to propaganda, are very
different in Z and Z2 , and, more importantly, in networks which are locally similar to Z and Z2 .
   Finally, the discussion in Section 7 highlights another important feature of authoritarian
propaganda. The sender's utility is maximized in two extreme cases. When p is very low,
everyone is a subscriber and very little reduction of the maximum slant is needed to satisfy each
subscriber's incentive compatibility constraint. When p is close to 1, there is a single subscriber,
so the slant is at the maximum level.
   In our model of persuasion on networks, we ignore almost all of the peer effects discussed
in the network literature. (See, e.g., Jackson and Yariv, 2011, and Jackson, Rogers and Zenou,
2016, on the central role of externalities in network analysis.) The only externality that is
present in our model is that a direct access to information by an agent discourages those who
could get information from her to buy access themselves. Still, this parsimonious setup allows
to demonstrate the tension between information diffusion in a network and propaganda efforts
by the sender, and challenge, at least theoretically, the naive wisdom that the agents with a
high degree of network centrality are the most obvious targets of the optimal propaganda.

   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief literature review.
Section 3 contains the setup. Section 4 starts the analysis with the case of directed networks.
Section 5 analyzes undirected networks, while Section 6 relates our results to percolation on
infinite lattices. Section 7 applies the model's logic to propaganda in non-democratic regimes.
Section 8 concludes, and the Appendix contains technical proofs.




                                                 5
2    Related Literature

Bayesian Persuasion. Kamenica and Gentzkow (2011) introduced the general notion of
Bayesian persuasion that encompassed many models, in which commitment to information
disclosure serves as a persuasion mechanism (e.g., Aumann and Maschler, 1966; Brocas and
Carrillo, 2007; Ostrovsky and Schwarz, 2010; Rayo and Segal, 2010). Dewatripont and Tirole
(2005) introduced the moral hazard aspect of communication with a conflict of interest be-
tween sender and receiver. Calv´
                               o-Armengol, De Mart´
                                                  i and Prat (2015) extended their model to
network communication, in a setting very different from what we consider in this paper.
    Bayesian persuasion with multiple receivers was considered in Bergemann and Morris (2013,
2019), Mathevet, Perego and Taneva (2020), and Taneva (2019). Alonso and C^
                                                                          amara (2016)
and Kosterina (2018) assume that signals are public, in Wang (2015) signals are independent,
and Arieli and Babichenko (2016), Bardhi and Guo (2018), and Chan et al. (2019) allow for
arbitrary private signals. In Kolotilin (2015, 2018), the persuasion mechanism that the sender
designs relies on private information reported by the receivers. In our model, the persuasion
part is elementary compared to that in any of these papers. Still, it allows us to describe the
limits that the network structure puts on the sender's persuasion power.
    Gentzkow and Kamenica (2014) provide an important connection between the literatures
on Bayesian persuasion and rational inattention (e.g., Sims, 2003). In our model, the receivers
weight the benefits and the costs of having a direct access to information, which makes the un-
derlying intuition somewhat similar to the rational inattention mechanism. In Bloedel and Segal
(2018), a rationally inattentive receiver bears an entropic cost to process the sender's signals;
the special case of their model with a binary state and state-independent sender preferences is a
deep generalization of our single-receiver version. (Also, see Lipnowski, Mathevet and Wei 2020,
and the follow-up paper Wei 2018). Finally, Matyskova (2018) considers, in a single-receiver
setting, Bayesian persuasion in the case which is "opposite" to ours in the sense that learning
from the sender is free but acquiring additional information about the state is privately costly.
Again, the contribution of this paper is in identifying the impact of the network structure on
persuasion power even if the persuasion problem is very basic.


Information in Networks.        We rely on Jackson (2008) as an exhaustive review of the early
literature and an excellent exposition of basic models of information diffusion in networks. Bala
and Goyal (1998) pioneered a model of information diffusion in a network with Bayesian agents.
(See also Acemoglu et al., 2011.) In Golub and Jackson (2010), agents receive independent


                                               6
signals about the true value of a variable and then update their beliefs by repeatedly taking
weighted averages of neighbors' opinions. Sadler (2020) considers information contagions in
a discrete network with Bayesian players that do not necessarily know the network structure.
In Lipnowski and Sadler (2019), if two players are linked in a network, they get information
about each others' strategies. (In our model, information flows through a network link with
some probability.) Galperti and Perego (2019) consider a model, in which a designer sends
signals to agents who then communicate in a network before playing the game. In our model,
any two informed agents have the same information, rather than two different signals, and
therefore cannot learn from each other. A more general model would combine the two sets
of assumptions: if, in addition to the signal from the media source, the agents receive private
signals, our qualitative effects will stay the same.
   Jackson and Yariv (2011) survey both the non-economics and economics literature on the
role of externalities and diffusion in networks. (Akbarpour and Jackson, 2018, analyze the
dynamics of such diffusion.) Chwe (2000) models people in a coordination game who use a
communication network to tell each other their willingness to participate. Candogan (2019)
considers a setting, in which agents linked a social network take binary actions, with the payoff
of each agent depending, in addition to the underlying state of the world, on the number of
her neighbors who take the sender-optimal action. Unlike Bramoull´
                                                                 e and Kranton (2007) and
Galeotti et al. (2010), we do not assume any externalities in actions and payoffs: this allows us to
concentrate on the impact of informational externalities that depend on the network structure.
   In a model of information diffusion in a development context, Akbarpour, Malladi and Saberi
(2018) demonstrate that the optimal seeding structure might target peripheral, rather than
centrally connected agents. In our model, information acquisition by a centrally connected agent
crowds out more incentives to acquire information than a similar acquisition by a peripheral
agent. (See Example 1 and Proposition 8.)


Propaganda.      In Gehlbach and Sonin (2014), citizens with heterogenous costs of accessing
information, receive it from the censored media. Choosing the level of censorship, the government
trades off the number of media customers and the impact on each agent. In our paper, citizens
might become direct receivers at a cost, yet there is an opportunity to receive information via
their network connections which affects the government ability to influence them.
   In Egorov, Guriev and Sonin (2009), while information manipulation is an instrument of
the dictator's survival, there is a cost in terms of the economic efficiency. Lorentzen considers
a similar efficiency vs. stability trade off in models of strategic protest restrictions (Lorentzen,

                                                 7
2013) and censorship (Lorentzen, 2014). In Shadmehr and Bernhardt (2015), the state does not
censor modestly bad news to prevent citizens from making inferences from the absence of news
that the news could have been far worse. Guriev and Treisman (2019) propose a theory of the
"informational autocracy", in which the dictator chooses between repression and propaganda.
(See also Chen, Lu and Suen, 2016 and Huang, 2018). Our model is the first, to the best of
our knowledge, theoretical exercise to interact a propaganda mechanism with a social network
structure.
    DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2010) and Prat and Str¨
                                                   omberg (2013) are two excellent surveys
on the role of persuasion in politics, with the emphasis on a democratic context. Adena et al.
(2015) and Voigtl¨
                 ander and Voth (2015) analyze the role of propaganda in the rise of Nazis.
Satyanath, Voigtl¨
                 ander and Voth (2017) explore empirically the role of social networks in the
rise of Nazis, but do not analyze the impact of the network structure. Yanagizawa-Drott (2014),
King, Pan and Roberts (2017, 2014), and Chen and Yang (2019) use experimental technique to
analyze empirically propaganda tactics of an authoritarian government. Chen and Yang (2019)
use data on the social network of college dorm roommates for their estimates, but do not use
specifics of the network structure.


Percolation.    The notion of (Bernoulli) percolation was introduced in Broadbent and Ham-
mersley (1957). Kesten (1980) completed characterization of critical probability in Zm , which
we use in Section 6. Van Der Hofstad (2010) and Duminil-Copin (2018) are recent mathematical
surveys that we refer to for basic definitions and results on percolation. Jackson (2008) describes
applications of percolation insights to economic issues. We use results from percolation theory
to demonstrate the limits that network structure puts on propaganda power of the government.


3    Setup

We consider an environment with a sender and multiple agents, potential receivers of the infor-
mation provided by the sender, connected via a network. The agents might acquire information
not only from the source controlled by the sender, e.g., a newspaper or a TV channel, directly,
but indirectly from other agents in the network. The network X consists of nodes x  X and
edges (x, y )  E (X ). We will assume that X is locally finite; that is, each node belongs to a
finite number of links.
    There are two possible states of the world, s  {0, 1}. Each agent x  X has to make,
ultimately, an individual action, ax  {0, 1} , and payoff of each agent depends on the state of


                                                8
the world and the agent's individual action:


                             ux (ax = 1, s = 1) = 1 - q,

                             ux (ax = 0, s = 0) = q,

                             ux (ax = 1, s = 0) = ux (ax = 0, s = 1) = 0,


where q  (0, 1). The common prior is P (s = 1) = µ < q, which guarantees that the default
action in the absence of information is ax = 0.
      Prior to taking action, each agent x decides whether or not to subscribe to the media that
provides signal s. The signal is structured so that

                                                              µ
                                   P (s = 1|s = 1) =                 ,
                                                        µ + (1 - µ) 
                                   P (s = 0|s = 0) = 1,


where  = P (s = 1|s = 0) is the control parameter of the sender. (Kamenica and Gentzkow,
2011 results guarantee that this is the optimal persuasion scheme in this setup.) There is a price
of subscription c, 0 < c < µ. If an agent is indifferent, she subscribes and acts.
      With probability p, each agent x gets information from any agent y such that (y, x)  E (X ).
This is modeled using the Erdos-R´
                                 enyi random graph approach (Jackson, 2008). Given network
X, each link disappears with probability 1 - p and information flows through the remaining
links. The original Erdos-R´
                           enyi random graph is a particular case of this construction when
X is a complete graph, i.e., each node is connected to every other node.2 We consider both
one-way and two-way flow links (Bala and Goyal 2000).

Definition 1. Given the sender's choice of , an equilibrium subscription set on network X
is defined by the subset of subscribers S (X ) such that no agent would want to change her
subscription choice: any x  S (X ) prefers subscription to no subscription, and any y  X \S (X )
prefers no subscription. Conditional on information, each agent x's action ax  {0, 1} maximizes
her expected utility.

      The sender wants to have the expected amount of action 1 per agent as high as possible.
We will specifically focus on sender-optimal pure strategy Bayes-Nash equilibria, the outcome
of the game with following timing. First, the sender commits to the level of propaganda , then
  2
    Sonin (2020) considers the setup when X is a complete network. In such a network, every subscriber and
every non-subscriber face the same incentive constraints, which grossly simplifies analysis.



                                                    9
everything is determined in an equilibrium given .
    We say that network X is linear if it has two vertices of degree 1 and every other vertex has
degree 2, and star if there exists a unique node x such that for any two distinct nodes y1 , y2 , all
three nodes y1 , y2 , and x belong to a linear network, and there is at most one node that belongs
to more than one link. (The network in Example 1 is both a linear and a star network.)
    Finally, |M | denotes the cardinality of set M.


4    Directed Networks

We start by analyzing economics of propaganda on directed networks, which are relatively
straightforward to study. We use this analysis to develop tools for the analysis of a more general
case, and also to demonstrate the important features of persuasion on networks.


One-way Linear Network. We start our analysis with the case of an infinite linear network,
in which information flows in one direction, X = Z+ = {0, 1, 2, 3, ...}.
    In the absence of information, agent x  X chooses ax = 0 and gets the expected payoff of
(1 - µ) q. With access to information, the agent's expected utility is µ (1 - q ) + (1 - µ) (1 -  ) q.
Thus, the value of information is


                                   V ( ) = µ (1 - q ) - (1 - µ) q.


    Agent x = 0 subscribes if and only if V ( )  c. Consider the decision by agent k  {1, 2, 3, ...}
when agent 0 is a subscriber and agents 1, ..., k - 1 do not subscribe. Buying subscription gives
the expected value of V ( ) - c. Not buying gives V ( ) with probability pk and 0 with probability
1 - pk . That is, agent k buys subscription if and only if V ( ) - c  V ( )pk , or, equivalently

                                                        1
                                           V ( )  c          .
                                                      1 - pk

    The right-hand side is decreasing in k, so there exists K such that

                                        1                  1
                                  c          V ( ) < c           .                                 (1)
                                      1-p K            1 - pK -1

    Conditions 1 define K such that agent x = K - 1 does not want to be a subscriber, yet agent
x = K does (Figure 4). Then K defines the equilibrium size of the "subscription cell". The set
of subscribers is S (X ) = {nK |n = 0, 1, 2, ...}. Naturally, the size of the cell K = K (, µ, q, c, p)


                                                  10
                  Figure 4: A symmetric equilibrium on a one-way linear network.


is increasing in c and  and is decreasing in µ and p.
    The expected action per agent in network X = Z+ is

                                    1                 1 - pK
                                      (µ + (1 - µ)  )        .                                   (2)
                                    K                  1-p

    If a network consists of a single agent, the sender-optimal slant can be derived from the
incentive compatibility constraint (V ( ) - c  0) :

                                                µ (1 - q ) - c
                                        max =                  .
                                                  (1 - µ) q

                                                                                         
    What is the optimal slant on X = Z+ ? It has to maximize (2) and satisfy 1 - pK         V (  ) =
c, so
                                                                      -1
                                        µ (1 - q ) - c 1 - pK
                                (Z+ ) =                                    .
                                                  (1 - µ) q
    Note that the optimal level of slant is strictly lower in the case of the linear network than in
the case of a single receiver:   (Z+ ) <  max for any p such that 0 < p < 1. It is intuitive: the
presence of other would-be subscribers forces the sender to scale down the slant. This result is
also very general: it extends to any network in which for each node x the probability that x is
reached from "the origin" is strictly positive and the set of subscribers is not a singleton. In such
a network, setting the slant at  max results in no other subscribers as each agent compares zero
informational rent if she subscribes to a positive cost of subscription. One-way tree networks
and any connected two-way networks are examples of such networks.
    The following proposition summarizes the above discussion about persuasion on one-way
linear network.

Proposition 1. Let X = Z+ be a one-way (directed) linear network.
    (i) Generically, there exists a unique optimal length of the "subscription cell" K  such that

                                                1
                              K  = arg max        µ 1 - pK - c                 .
                                        K N     K

                                                 11
                                                         
The optimal slant   =   (Z+ ) satisfies 1 - pK              V (  ) = c, and maximizes the average
amount of action in the network.
   (ii) The subscription cell length K  (p) and the optimal slant   (Z+ , p) are increasing func-
tions of p : the higher is the probability that the signal passes, the less often the agents buy
subscription, and the higher is the level of slant that the sender chooses.
   (iii) The optimal size of the subscription cell K  (c) and the level of slant   (Z+ , c) are
increasing functions of c : the higher is the cost of subscription, the less often it is bought, and
the higher is the sender-optimal level of slant.

   Technically, the comparative statics of parts (ii) and (iii) of Proposition 1 rely on Lemma A2
in the Appendix that demonstrates that (2) satisfies increasing differences condition in (K, p)
and (K, c) and provides the basis for comparative statics with respect to p and c (Milgrom
and Shannon, 1994). Substantively, Proposition 1 features the main trade-off that a sender of
propaganda faces: a higher edge probability results in a higher optimal slant. A higher p does
discourage subscription: the subscription cell becomes longer in equilibrium.


Tree Networks.         Consider the network X = Tr , a regular tree; that is, a directed graph with
each node having r > 1 outgoing links. In a study of persuasion, a tree network is interesting for
a number of reasons. First, it is a natural extension of directed path networks: each path through
a tree is isomorphic to a directed linear network. Second, it is a far more realistic approximation
of spread of information through a society than the directed linear network. Finally, this is the
simplest possible network in which, in contrast with the linear network case, there might be
infinitely many agents choosing ax = 1 even when p < 1 and there is a unique subscriber.
   What is the sender-optimal level of slant  in a tree network? Each directed path through
a tree is isomorphic to the directed linear network. Define K ( ) as in (1). Now, suppose that
  is the optimal level of . Then, the incentive compatibility constraint should be binding for
K (  ) :
                                                         1
                                       V (  ) = c               .
                                                    1 - pK (  )
   In the r-link network, the average action can be calculated as follows. For any K, the total
                                                               rK -1
number of agents at levels 0, ..., K - 1 from the root is       r-1 .   So, the problem is to maximize
the average actions:
                                  r-1 1             c       (rp)K - 1
                                            µ-                        .
                                 rK - 1 q        1 - pK       rp - 1
   The next Proposition 2 extends the logic of Proposition 1 to tree networks. Still, there is


                                                   12
an important new result that relates the optimal slant to the number of tree branches, i.e., the
agents that have a chance to receive information from a single agent (part (ii)).

Proposition 2. Let X = Tr . Suppose that rp > 1.
   (i) Generically, there exists a unique K  (r) such that

                                             (rp)K - 1           c/µ
                         K  (r) = arg max                 1-                    .
                                      K N      rK - 1          1 - pK

   (ii) The optimal length of the "subscription cell" K  (r) is an increasing function of r, the
number of outgoing links in each node of regular-tree network X. Also, K  is an increasing
function of c, the cost of subscription, and a decreasing function of µ, the ex ante probability of
the sender-desired state.

   Technically, the proof of Proposition 2 is similar to that of Proposition 1. If rp > 1, Lemma
A3 guarantees that (4) is single-peaked with respect to K. As in the linear network case, this
guarantees existence of an optimal K  . The comparative statics rely on Lemma A4, which
asserts that (4) satisfies increasing differences in (K, c), (K, -µ), and (K, r). While Lemma
A4 deals with a continuous function, the monotone comparative statics applies to the discrete
maximization as well.
   In addition to extending the results of Proposition 1, Proposition 2 establishes that that the
sender-optimal level of propaganda in an r-arnary tree network increases with r, the number of
outdoing links in each node. As in the case of the linear network in Section 4, the sender trades
off the frequency of subscribers, which requires less slant in the signal, against the impact of the
signal. Now that each subscriber affects r groups similar to one group of the linear network, the
sender chooses a higher slant, putting more weight on persuading those who are reached rather
than on having a higher rate of subscription.


Persuasion and Percolation on Regular Trees.               There is a critical difference between
spread of information on a directed linear network and a tree with r  2. In a linear network, the
probability that a single subscriber results in an infinite number of agents choosing the sender-
preferred action is 0 for any edge probability p < 1. In an r-arnary tree network, this probability
                                                                         1
depends on the relationship between p and r. Specifically, if p >       r-1 ,   then a single subscriber
at the root of X = Tr results in infinitely many actions with a non-zero (and non-vanishing!)
probability. Still, despite that there will be infinitely many agents receiving information, the
expected action per agent resulting from a single subscriber at the root of the tree will be zero.

                                                13
We will see a qualitatively different result, the infinitely many agents with a positive action per
agent resulting from a unique subscriber when the network is X = Z2 (see Section 6).


5    Two-Way Networks

In this Section, we start with a two-way flow infinite linear network X = Z, the simplest possible
two-way network. Then, we compare the cases X = Z and X = Z2 , which are dramatically
different in terms of sender-optimal persuasion.


Infinite Linear Network.       Fix any , 0     max . We will focus on symmetric equilibria
on two-way network X = Z; that is, equilibria that have the same number of non-subscribers
between each neighboring pair of subscribers. Proposition 3 establishes existence and provides
an estimate for the difference between the equilibrium with the minimum distance between
subscribers (which is sender-optimal with fixed  ) and the maximum.

Proposition 3. Let X = Z be a two-way network, and consider any slant .
    (i) There exist two integer thresholds a = a (p, , c) and b = b (p, , c) such that for any
integer d, a  d  b, S d = { dn| n  Z} is a symmetric equilibrium set of subscribers, and for
any d < a or d > b, S d is not an equilibrium set.
                                                                                                  b
    (ii) The threshold a that defines the sender-optimal equilibrium on X satisfies a             2   ,
where t denotes the integer part of a real number t.

    Part (i) of Proposition 3 is proved in the Appendix. Here we will prove part (ii) as the proof
provides insights into the source of multiplicity of symmetric equilibria in the two-way case.
    As in part (i), let a = a (p, , c) and b = b (p, , c) be the minimum and the maximum number
of non-subscribers between two subscribers in an equilibrium, respectively. Denote S b the corre-
                                                                           b
                                                                                    b
sponding set of subscribers, S b = { (b + 1) n| n  Z} . Observe that S 2 =          2   +1 n nZ
is an equilibrium set of subscribers as well. Indeed, if there were b + 1 agents between two
                                                                                              b
                         b+1
subscribers, the agent    2    would want to subscribe by construction of b. Since in S 2 every
                                                     b+1 th
subscriber is in exactly the same position as this    2        agent in S b , and the distance between
                                          b                b
any two other subscribers is closer in S 2 than in   Sb, S 2   defines a symmetric equilibrium. So,
                                  b
we just demonstrated that a       2   .
    Naturally, for each , the sender-optimal equilibrium set of subscribers is S a as this equilib-
rium features the highest frequency of subscribers. As every non-subscriber may receive infor-
mation from her neighbouring two subscribers only, the minimum distance between subscribers


                                                14
guarantees that the probability that information reaches non-subscribers is at the maximum.
                                                                       2
The optimal slant on X = Z satisfies c = V (  ) 1 - pa                     , where a = min {a ( )} . In higher
dimensions, the story will be very different as the specifics of one-dimensional case is that nobody
could receive any information but from their immediate neighbors (see Section 6).


Finite Linear Network. Part (ii) of Proposition 3 can be used to prove existence of an
equilibrium on a finite linear network, which is a less straightforward exercise. We will use the
same thresholds a = a (p, , c), the minimum number of non-subscribers between two subscribers
in a symmetric equilibrium on Z, and b = b (p, , c) , the maximum number. Proposition 3
                              b
established that a            2   .
        Consider a finite two-way linear network X and make the left-most agent a subscriber.
Choose b + 2th agent on X to be a subscriber, so that there is no agents who would want to
subscribe between the first and second subscriber. Suppose that there is no such subscriber, i.e.
the number of agents in X, |X |, does not exceed b + 1. If |X | is between a and b, making the
right-most agent a subscriber results in an equilibrium. If the length of the network X is less
                                                                   c
than a, and there exists d such that d < a, pd < 1 -             V ( ) ,   make the agent d + 1 a subscriber. If
there are non-subscribers to the right of d + 1 who want to subscribe, move the subscriber from
d + 1 right-ward. Since |X | < a, moving a final number of steps will be sufficient, and there
cannot be would-be subscribers in-between the two by construction of a.
        Now suppose that we made agents 1, b + 2, ..., l (b + 1) + 1 subscribers and l is the largest
such number satisfying l (b + 1) + 1  |X |. If |X | - l (b + 1) - 1 < d, this set of subscribers is
equilibrium. If |X | - l (b + 1) - 1  a, there is no problem as well: making the right-most agent
a subscriber completes the equilibrium set. If |X | - l (b + 1) - 1 < a, make agent with number
|X | a subscriber and move subscriber l (b + 1) + 1 to the left until |X | - l (b + 1) - 1 = a + 1.
                 b                                                                                     b
Since a          2   , the distance between l (b + 1) + 1 and |X | - l (b + 1) - 1 exceeds             2   . Thus, we
ended up with an equilibrium subscription set.3 Formally, one can state the following result.

Proposition 4. Let X be a finite two-way linear network. For any slant , there exists a
symmetric equilibrium on network X .


6        Persuasion and Information Percolation

In Sections 4 and 5, we built a theory of persuasion on linear networks, extended it to directed
tree networks, in which every path is isomorphic to the linear network, and then to two-way linear
    3
        A similar argument establishes that in any circular network, an equilibrium exists for any .


                                                          15
network. However, it appears that a small increase in network dimensionality leads to drastically
different results with respect to persuasion. This is a result of "percolation" (Broadbent and
Hammersley, 1957; Kesten, 1980), the effect that is not present on linear networks, yet plays an
important role whenever the network is similar (locally) to two-dimensional lattice.
   We will need some basic definitions and results from percolation theory (Duminil-Copin,
2018). For any (connected) network X and one subscriber x  X , we define the connected
component Cx , a random variable with the values in all subnetworks of X that contain x. The
observed value of Cx is the set of all agents who received information from agent x. Now we can
define the percolation function  (p) = P (|Cx | = ) , the probability that the connected cluster
that originated in x contains infinitely many agents.
   There is the following central result in the percolation theory: in many networks X , there
exists a critical probability pc = pc (X )  (0, 1) such that for any p < pc ,  (p) = 0 and for
any p > pc ,  (p) > 0 (Kesten, 1980). When the edge probability is lower than the critical
probability, the cluster that starts with a single subscriber is finite with probability 1. Yet when
the edge probability p exceeds the critical threshold pc (X ), the infinite cluster forms with a
positive probability  (p) > 0 which increases with p. For r-regular trees and multidimensional
integer lattices, the function  (p) is continuous on [0, 1] and is increasing on (pc , 1].


Persuasion in Higher Dimensions.             In linear networks, each subscriber's incentives are
determined by the distance to at most two other subscribers. Now, let us consider the following
important environment, in which this is not the case. Let X be an m-dimensional integer
lattice, in which information flows in both direction on each link. For each m, there exists a
threshold pc (Zm ) such that for any p < pc (Zm ) , the probability that a cluster that originates
with a subscriber is, in expectation, of a finite size. In this case, construction of a symmetric
equilibrium is relatively straightforward.

Proposition 5. Let X = Zm be an m-dimensional integer lattice, in which information flows
in both direction on each link and suppose p < pc (Zm ). For any , there exists a symmetric
equilibrium.

Proof. Let m = 2. A helpful observation is that if the structure is "symmetric" (see below),
than the value of non-subscription for each subscriber is the same.
   Suppose that V ( )  c. We will consider the sequence of sets of potential subscribers Sh ,




                                                  16
h  N. For each h, define the set

                             2
                            Sh = {(2hl1 , 2hl2 ) , (2hl1 + 1, 2hl2 + 1) |l1 , l2  Z} .

  2 is the right display in Figure 5.) First, for each x  S 2 , the alternative value of subscrip-
(S2                                                        h
tion (the amount of information that she receives from others), vh , is the same. Second, it
is decreasing in h, asymptotically approaching zero. (This is the place where the assumption
p < pc (Zm ) is used.) Thus, there exists h such that vh -1 > V ( ) - c and vh < V ( ) - c. To
                    2 is the equilibrium subscriber set, it is sufficient to demonstrate that any
show that S (X ) = Sh

       2 would not want to subscribe. Observe that for any x  X \S 2 , there exists at least
x  X \Sh                                                          h
                                                                           2
one subscriber who is closer than the distance between two subscribers on Sh  -1 .

                                     m in a similar way.
       The proof for any m > 2 uses Sh

       Let us connect the frequency of subscribers in the network with the sender-optimal slant.
To do this, we will look at networks Zm for different ms. Consider a sequence of lattices Zm ,
m = 1, 2, ..., with links {((x1 , ...xl , ..., xm ) , (x1 , ...xl + 1, ..., xm )) | (x1 , ...xl , ..., xm )  Zm } , and
the set of subscribers


               S m = {(2l1 , 2l2 , ..., 2lm ) , (2l1 + 1, 2l2 + 1, ..., 2lm + 1) |l1 , l2 , ..., lm  Z} .          (3)


(See Figure 5 for m = 1 and m = 2.)
       In the larger dimensions, each non-subscriber is connected to more subscribers. Thus, if the
frequency of subscribers is the same, the slant compatible with the subscription structure should
be lower in higher dimensions. In other words, a network of a higher density puts stricter limits
on the persuasion power of the sender, than a less dense one.

Proposition 6. Let X = Zm , let the set S m be defined by (3), and let m be the level of
propaganda that makes Sm the equilibrium subscriber set for each m and guarantees the same
average frequency of subscribers of 1
                                    2 . Then m is a (strictly) decreasing function of m.
                                                                                         4

                                                                                     1
       While Proposition 6 is formulated for the average frequency of subscribers of 2 , the results
should be true for other frequencies as well. The reason is that whenever n > m, each agent
has more links to receive information from in Zn than in Zm , and so the incentive compatibility
constraint is satisfied for a lower level of propaganda.
   4
    The incentive compatibility constraint for the non-subscriber is 1 - (1 - p)2m V ( ) < V ( ) - c, which is
impossible to satisfy simultaneously for every c > 0 and every m  N. That is, the fully rigorous statement
should be as follows. Let m = m (, c, p) = arg max m|c < V ( ) (1 - p)2m . Given c, , and p, k is a strictly
decreasing function for k  [0, m] .


                                                          17
Figure 5: Sets of subscribers S1 and S2 (solid blue) in Z and Z2 , respectively, result in the same frequency
                1
of subscribers, 2 , but the maximum level of slant consistent with S2 is lower.


The Impact of Percolation.              Consider again X = Zm . For p < pc (X ) , the probability that
one subscriber results in an infinite cluster is  (p) = 0, which means that the regular structure
described in Propositions 5 and 6 results in a higher expected average action than any one-
subscriber structure. For p > pc (X ) , the situation is different: with probability (p) > 0, the
cluster C (0) is infinite. In this case, it is possible that choosing  max results in a higher expected
average action than in any regular structure.
    Take m = 2, and consider the subscription structure S2 (see Figure 5). Each neighbor y of
any x  S2 receives information (not counting information from x) with probability 1 - (1 - p)3 .
Agent x receives information from y with probability p 1 - (1 - p)3 . Thus, agent x receives
information from someone with probability

                                                                        4
                                   f (p) = 1 - 1 - p 1 - (1 - p)3           ,


which is an increasing function of p with f (0) = 0 and f (1) = 1. The incentive compatibility
constraint of the subscriber is satisfied if f (p)V ( )  V ( ) - c, and the expected action per
           1
agent is   2   (1 + p) 1
                       q µ-
                                c
                              1-f (p)   , which is non-negative. So, whenever p < pc Z2 =            1
                                                                                                     2,   this
structure is preferable to that of a finite number of subscribers with  max .
    If p > pc Z2 = 1
                   2 , then S2 is stable as long as

                                                             4          c
                               1 - 1 - p 1 - (1 - p)3            1-         .                             (4)
                                                                      V ( )

Inequality (4) cannot be true for all pairs (c, p), c > 0, p > 0, yet for any p < 1, there exists a


                                                     18
threshold c(p) > 0 such that (4) holds (and so S2 is stable) for any c < c(p).
   When p is below the critical threshold pc Zd , there cannot be an equilibrium with a finite
number of subscribers for any  <  max . Indeed, each subscriber generates, almost surely, a
cluster of second-hand receivers of a finite size. Thus, there is always an agent far enough from
the any finite group of subscribers that would prefer to subscribe.
   When p is above the critical threshold pc Zd , it is possible to have a finite group of sub-
scribers when  <  max . Indeed, suppose that


                                         (p) V ( ) > V ( ) - c,                                  (5)

                                                                                         1
where  (p) is the probability that an infinite cluster forms;  (p) continuously maps     2, 1   onto
[0, 1]. As p > pc Zd , the ergodicity implies that for any node x  Zd ,  (p) is the probability
that x belongs to the cluster that originates with the single subscriber (Duminil-Copin, 2018).
That is, the probability that information reaches x is at least  (p) , which makes her unwilling
to subscribe. Therefore, we can state the following formal result.

Proposition 7. Let X = Zd , d  2, and suppose that p > pc Zd . Then, for any  such that
            c
V ( ) <   1-(p) ,   any equilibrium has a unique subscriber. Vice versa, for any x  X, S (X ) = {x}
is an equilibrium set of subscribers.

   Proposition 7 stands in a sharp contrast with the case of X = Z, in which a unique subscriber
is possible only when  =  max . In any network, if the choice of the sender is over equilibrium
structures with a unique subscriber, the sender-optimal choice is  max .
   If p > pc Zd , but (5) is not fulfilled, then finite equilibrium groups of subscribers with
 <  max might not exist for another reason. Indeed, suppose there is a finite number of
subscribers. Each of them generates an infinite cluster with probability  (p) . Because of the
Kolmogorov zero-one law, there exists, almost surely, exactly one infinite cluster. For any non-
subscriber x the probability of getting information is close to  (p) , the probability to belong to
the unique infinite cluster, which means that she will be willing to be another subscriber. Thus,
for any finite number of subscribers, there always exists a non-subscriber who would want to
subscribe. As a result, any equilibrium should include an infinite number of subscribers. Still,
this argument is correct if and only if subscribers cannot "block" each other; that is, there exist
infinite connected paths that consist of non-subscribers only. If this assumption is violated (as
in S2 on Picture 5), there might exist an equilibrium with infinitely many subscribers.




                                                  19
7    Optimal Propaganda

In this Section, we apply the results discussed in the previous sections to the issue of optimal
propaganda. Specifically, we will discuss the role of "influencers", the agents that have a high
degree of centrality in a network.


The Dictator's Preference over Network Characteristics.                    Our first observation about
propaganda is almost trivial. If the sender takes the probability p as given, his optimal choice
is a function of p. As Example 1 demonstrated, this choice is non-monotonic, resulting in the
maximum slant for very low or very high values of p and p. Thus, if the sender has a choice of
the edge probability p, atop of the optimal choice of slant after choosing p, then the optimal
choice of p is either p = 0 or p = 1, and the propaganda level is at its maximum:

                                                       µ (1 - q ) - c
                                        =  max =                      .
                                                         (1 - µ) q

    By choosing p = 0, the government forces everyone to buy subscription. Then, choosing
  =  max maximizes the expected average amount of individual action, which is equal to
                      c-µ(1-q )
µ +   (1 - µ) = µ +      q        =   1
                                      q   (µ - c) . This result is true regardless of whether or not the
network X is directed or undirected.
    Alternatively, p = 1, and in a two-way network there will necessary be a single subscriber.
Again, choosing   =  max maximizes the expected average amount of individual action, which
is the same as in the case of p = 0. In a directed (one-way) network, the result is more subtle:
it is still optimal to have p = 1, yet there should be an additional condition on the network
X : there must be a "root" for any infinite sequence of one-way links. (Otherwise, the one way
network X = Z is a counterexample: if p = 1, there is no pure-strategy equilibrium for any .)
In a one-way network, there might be more than one subscriber even if p = 1.
    Both of the two extreme edge probabilities, p = 0 or p = 1, result in a sender-optimal
equilibrium. Still, the regime of p = 0, under which the government chooses to shut up all
the channels of information exchange, forcing everyone to subscribe to propaganda, is different
from that of p = 1, the regime of unrestricted networking. Let us focus on a two-way network.
Suppose that the opportunity cost of subscription for each agent x  X is a random variable.
Then, with p = 0, choosing any   would result in a different fraction of agents becoming
subscribers. With p = 1, the impact of propaganda is higher: optimal   should maximize
the probability that the minimum of agents' costs is such that the incentive constraint for the



                                                     20
subscriber is satisfied.
    Even if the government chooses p, the impact is still limited by agents intrinsic aversion to
do the sender-preferred action a = 1, q, or by the ex ante probability µ that they attach to the
state when action a = 1 is receiver-preferred. Trivially, if the government has means to lower c,
the cost of subscription, the impact will always be higher.


The Role of a Centrally Connected Agent. Consider a simple star network, i.e., a tree
network with a single root and branches of length 1. Locally, any network in which there cannot
be more than one link between nodes is a star network. The naive intuition would suggest that
the sender always prefers that the central agent is a subscriber and then information is "spread"
to periphery. However, this argument does not take into account the negative externality: when
the central agent subscribes, this crowds out the peripherals' incentives to subscribe (and thus
diminishes the probability of action).

Proposition 8. Let X be a star network that connects r + 1 agents.
    (i) There exist thresholds 0 < pr  ...  p1 < 1 such that for any p  pk , pk-1 , there are
exactly k agents who subscribe in a sender-optimal equilibrium.
    (ii) The sender-optimal slant   (p) is strictly decreasing over each interval pk , pk-1 , k =
1, ..., r + 1. It is constant,   (p) =  max , on [p1 , 1] .
    (iii) The central agent is a subscriber in a sender-optimal equilibrium if and only if either
p  pr , or p  p1

    Part (i) implies that the set of subscribers in the sender-optimal equilibrium (weakly) shrinks
with p. When p is close to zero, the incentive compatibility constraint is not binding for every
subscriber. The first subscriber to have the constraint binding is the agent at the center of
the star X : so, the first threshold pr is determined by this constraint. Indeed, when all
peripheral agents is the set of subscribers, the probability that one peripheral agent receives
information from other r - 1 peripheral agents is p 1 - (1 - p)r-1 , where 1 - (1 - p)r-1 is
the probability that the central agent received a signal from these agents. So, the incentive
compatibility constraint for the subscriber yields the probability that the signal is s = 1 of
                    1               c
µ + (1 - µ)  =      q   µ-   1-p(1-(1-p)r-1 )
                                                , and the total expected amount of action is equal

to (r + (1 - (1 - p)r )) 1
                         q    µ-          c
                                   1-p(1-(1-p)r-1 )
                                                      . Then, the threshold pr is determined by the




                                                      21
equation
                                                                                         
                            c                                               c
           (r + 1) µ -              = (r + (1 - (1 - p)r )) µ -                          .      (6)
                         (1 - p)r                                 1 - p 1 - (1 - p)r-1

The left-hand side is the total expected action when all r + 1 agents are subscribers; the optimal
slant comes from the central agent's incentive compatibility constraint.
   Proposition 8 extends to any two-way tree. When p is close to 1, there is no chance to satisfy
the incentive constraint for more than one subscriber. In this situation, it is better to have
the central agent (the root) to subscribe. When p = 0, then everyone is a subscriber; with p
increasing from zero, the nodes with high centrality are the first to drop from the subscriber set.
   Proposition 8 challenges the conventional wisdom about targeting "influencers", agents with
a high degree of centrality. When p is low, they are the worst possible target for influence.
This effect is not confined to our particular setup: e.g., suppose that the government is choosing
to allocate one free subscription in a star network, and the cost of subscription cx is random,
say cx  U [0, 2c]. When p is high, the optimal allocation of the free subscription is the central
agent. However, if p is relatively low, the government has to take into account the crowding-out
effect. Allocating free subscription to a peripheral agent will have less of a crowding out effect:
there will be a higher probability that peripheral agents become subscribers on their own. This
result extends to any network: provided that an equilibrium exists, agents with high degree of
centrality may not be the optimal direct receivers from the sender's standpoint. Instead, she
would prefer to have agents with low degree of centrality to be the subscribers.


Discussion.     The above results allows to discuss the relationship between the network structure
and the government's ability to maintain support. Consider networks in Figure 3. In both
polities P1 and P1 each agent is connected to two others, yet the network architecture is different,
and the government's ability to maintain support depends on both the architecture and p. In
polities P2 and P2 , each agent has four connections. In a sender-optimal equilibrium, it is
typically, although not always, easier to influence agents' actions and maintain government
support in P1 and P2 . In particular, there exists a threshold p such that for any p > p, the
government survives for a wider range of parameters with polity P1 than with polity P1 and
with P2 rather than P2 . When p is high enough (not necessarily close to 1), each connected
component will have a unique subscriber and the sender-optimal level of propaganda will be
  (p) =  max in both in P1 and P2 . In contrast, for P1 , it is never optimal to have propaganda at


                                                 22
its maximum unless p = 1. For P2 , there exists another threshold p < 1, such that   (p) =  max
for any p > p.
    Galperti and Perego (2019) demonstrate that a "deeper" network worsens the designer ability
to manipulate beliefs of the networked receivers, with a complete network being the deepest
possible network. In our random graph setup, the impact of network's "depth" depends, non-
monotonically, on p. While for sufficiently high probabilities p, the sender prefers P1 (a locally
more deep network) to P1 and P2 to P2 , there is a range of ps for which the sender's preference
is reversed. If the government has the ability to alter the network architecture (keeping the
number of links constant), the following simple observation is true. For any p, there exists a
division of network P1 into m-nodes wheels (P2 consists of 3-nodes wheels) so that the resulting
structure (weakly) increases the amount of support that the government receives.
    Finally, our main results are robust to the amount of information about the structure of
network that the agents possess. In our model, the agents who make the subscription decision
know the exact structure of the network. However, the main insights will stay intact if agents
would know their own number of links and the distribution of links overall. (Such models are
discussed in, e.g., Galeotti et al., 2010 and Sadler, 2020.) Unlike in the local public goods
games (Bramoull´
               e and Kranton, 2007; Galeotti et al., 2010), agent's decision to subscribe in
equilibrium is not necessarily monotonic in the agent's degree. Still, when p is sufficiently low,
it is monotonic in the sender-optimal equilibrium, which looks as follows: all agents with a node
degree smaller than some threshold K  will be subscribers, those agents with node degrees higher
than K  will be non-subscribers, and the agents with the degree equal to K  will subscribe with
a certain probability. As in our main model, agents with a high degree of centrality are not
sender-preferred targets of propaganda.


8    Conclusion

We consider an environment in which agents that are influenced by a sender who has committed
to a certain information design face the following trade-off: subscribe, as a cost, to the news
source and be sure to receive payoff relevant information or rely on network neighbors which
might or might not pass the information. Our setup is the simplest possible model of Bayesian
persuasion with multiple receivers who are linked in a network. In equilibrium, a subscriber
crowds out the incentives to subscribe of those who could get information from her. A higher
slant chosen by the sender increases the probability that those who receive signal would do
what the sender wants, but further reduces agents' willingness to subscriber. When the network

                                               23
is dense, optimal propaganda needs to be less biased, because otherwise the subscription rate
would fall. The sender might be interested in peripheral, rather than centrally connected agents
subscribing to information. Adding the possibility that agents could strategically share their
signals or exchange information that is harmful to the sender would be an interesting extension,
yet will leave the main effects identified in our paper in place.




                                                24
References

Acemoglu, Daron, Munther A Dahleh, Ilan Lobel and Asuman Ozdaglar. 2011. "Bayesian
  learning in social networks." The Review of Economic Studies 78(4):1201­1236.

Adena, Maja, Ruben Enikolopov, Maria Petrova, Veronica Santarosa and Ekaterina Zhu-
  ravskaya. 2015. "Radio and the Rise of the Nazis in Prewar Germany." The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 130(4):1885­1939.

Akbarpour, Mohammad and Matthew O Jackson. 2018. "Diffusion in networks and the virtue
  of burstiness." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115(30):E6996­E7004.

Akbarpour, Mohammad, Suraj Malladi and Amin Saberi. 2018. "Just a few seeds more: value
  of network information for diffusion." Available at SSRN 3062830 .

Alonso, Ricardo and Odilon C^
                            amara. 2016. "Persuading voters." American Economic Review
  106(11):3590­3605.

Arieli, Itai and Yakov Babichenko. 2016. "Random extensive form games." Journal of Economic
  Theory 166:517­535.

Aumann, Robert J and M Maschler. 1966. "Game theoretic aspects of gradual disarmament."
  Report of the US Arms Control and Disarmament Agency 80:1­55.

Bala, Venkatesh and Sanjeev Goyal. 1998. "Learning from neighbours." The Review of Economic
  Studies 65(3):595­621.

Bala, Venkatesh and Sanjeev Goyal. 2000. "A noncooperative model of network formation."
  Econometrica 68(5):1181­1229.

Bardhi, Arjada and Yingni Guo. 2018. "Modes of persuasion toward unanimous consent."
  Theoretical Economics 13(3):1111­1149.

Bergemann, Dirk and Stephen Morris. 2013. "Robust predictions in games with incomplete
  information." Econometrica 81(4):1251­1308.

Bergemann, Dirk and Stephen Morris. 2019. "Information design: A unified perspective." Jour-
  nal of Economic Literature 57(1):44­95.

Bloedel, Alexander W and Ilya R Segal. 2018. "Persuasion with Rational Inattention." Available
  at SSRN 3164033 .

                                             25
Bramoull´
        e, Yann and Rachel Kranton. 2007. "Public goods in networks." Journal of Economic
  Theory 135(1):478­494.

Broadbent, Simon R and John M Hammersley. 1957. Percolation processes: I. Crystals and
  mazes. In Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society. Vol. 53 Cam-
  bridge University Press pp. 629­641.

Brocas, Isabelle and Juan D Carrillo. 2007. "Influence through ignorance." The RAND Journal
  of Economics 38(4):931­947.

Calv´
    o-Armengol, Antoni, Joan De Mart´
                                    i and Andrea Prat. 2015. "Communication and influ-
  ence." Theoretical Economics 10(2):649­690.

Candogan, Ozan. 2019. Persuasion in networks: Public signals and k-cores. In Proceedings of
  the 2019 ACM Conference on Economics and Computation. pp. 133­134.

Chan, Jimmy, Seher Gupta, Fei Li and Yun Wang. 2019. "Pivotal persuasion." Journal of
  Economic Theory 180:178­202.

Chen, Heng, Yang K Lu and Wing Suen. 2016. "The power of whispers: a theory of rumor,
  communication, and revolution." International Economic Review 57(1):89­116.

Chen, Yuyu and David Y Yang. 2019. "The impact of media censorship: 1984 or brave new
  world?" American Economic Review 109(6):2294­2332.

Chwe, Michael Suk-Young. 2000. "Communication and coordination in social networks." The
  Review of Economic Studies 67(1):1­16.

Crawford, Vincent P and Joel Sobel. 1982. "Strategic information transmission." Econometrica:
  Journal of the Econometric Society pp. 1431­1451.

DellaVigna, Stefano and Matthew Gentzkow. 2010. "Persuasion: empirical evidence." Annual
  Review of Economics 2(1):643­669.

Dewatripont, Mathias and Jean Tirole. 2005. "Modes of communication." Journal of Political
  Economy 113(6):1217­1238.

Duminil-Copin, Hugo. 2018.      "Sixty years of percolation." Proceeding of the International
  Congress of Mathematicians 4:2847­2874.



                                              26
Egorov, Georgy, Sergei Guriev and Konstantin Sonin. 2009. "Why resource-poor dictators allow
  freer media: A theory and evidence from panel data." American Political Science Review
  103(4):645­668.

Galeotti, Andrea, Sanjeev Goyal, Matthew O Jackson, Fernando Vega-Redondo and Leeat Yariv.
  2010. "Network games." The Review of Economic Studies 77(1):218­244.

Galperti, Simone and Jacopo Perego. 2019.           "Belief Meddling in Social Networks:     An
  Information-Design Approach." Available at SSRN 3340090 .

Gehlbach, Scott and Konstantin Sonin. 2014. "Government control of the media." Journal of
  Public Economics 118:163­171.

Gentzkow, Matthew and Emir Kamenica. 2014. "Costly persuasion." American Economic Re-
  view 104(5):457­62.

Golub, Benjamin and Matthew O Jackson. 2010. "Naive learning in social networks and the
  wisdom of crowds." American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 2(1):112­49.

Guriev, Sergei and Daniel Treisman. 2019. "Informational autocrats." Journal of Economic
  Perspectives 33(4):100­127.

Huang, Haifeng. 2018.      "The Pathology of Hard Propaganda." The Journal of Politics
  80(3):1034­1038.

Jackson, Matthew O. 2008. Social and Economic Networks. Princeton University Press.

Jackson, Matthew O, Brian Rogers and Yves Zenou. 2016. Networks: An Economic Perspective.
  In Oxford Handbook of Social Network Analysis. Oxford University Press.

Jackson, Matthew O and Leeat Yariv. 2011. Diffusion, strategic interaction, and social structure.
  In Handbook of Social Economics. Vol. 1 Elsevier pp. 645­678.

Kamenica, Emir. 2019. "Bayesian persuasion and information design." Annual Review of Eco-
  nomics 11:249­272.

Kamenica, Emir and Matthew Gentzkow. 2011. "Bayesian persuasion." American Economic
  Review 101(6):2590­2615.

Kesten, Harry. 1980. "The critical probability of bond percolation on the square lattice equals
  1/2." Communications in Mathematical Physics 74(1):41­59.

                                               27
King, Gary, Jennifer Pan and Margaret E Roberts. 2013. "How censorship in China allows
  government criticism but silences collective expression." American Political Science Review
  107(2):326­343.

King, Gary, Jennifer Pan and Margaret E Roberts. 2014.              "Reverse-engineering cen-
  sorship in China:    Randomized experimentation and participant observation." Science
  345(6199):1251722.

King, Gary, Jennifer Pan and Margaret E Roberts. 2017. "How the Chinese government fabri-
  cates social media posts for strategic distraction, not engaged argument." American Political
  Science Review 111(3):484­501.

Kolotilin, Anton. 2015. "Experimental design to persuade." Games and Economic Behavior
  90:215­226.

Kolotilin, Anton. 2018. "Optimal information disclosure: A linear programming approach."
  Theoretical Economics 13(2):607­635.

Kosterina, Svetlana. 2018. "Persuasion with unknown beliefs." Working Paper .

Lipnowski, Elliot and Evan Sadler. 2019.        "Peer-Confirming Equilibrium." Econometrica
  87(2):567­591.

Lipnowski, Elliot, Laurent Mathevet and Dong Wei. 2020. "Attention management." American
  Economic Review: Insights 2(1):17­32.

Lorentzen, Peter. 2013. "Regularizing rioting: Permitting public protest in an authoritarian
  regime." Quarterly Journal of Political Science 8(2):127­158.

Lorentzen, Peter. 2014. "China's strategic censorship." American Journal of Political Science
  58(2):402­414.

Mathevet, Laurent, Jacopo Perego and Ina Taneva. 2020. "On information design in games."
  Journal of Political Economy 128(4):1370­1404.

Matyskova, Ludmila. 2018. "Bayesian persuasion with costly information acquisition." CERGE-
  EI Working Paper Series (614).

Milgrom, Paul and Chris Shannon. 1994. "Monotone comparative statics." Econometrica: Jour-
  nal of the Econometric Society pp. 157­180.


                                                28
Milgrom, Paul R. 1981. "Good news and bad news: Representation theorems and applications."
  The Bell Journal of Economics pp. 380­391.

Ostrovsky, Michael and Michael Schwarz. 2010. "Information disclosure and unraveling in match-
  ing markets." American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 2(2):34­63.

Prat, Andrea and David Str¨
                          omberg. 2013. "The political economy of mass media." Advances in
  Economics and Econometrics 2:135.

Rayo, Luis and Ilya Segal. 2010. "Optimal information disclosure." Journal of Political Economy
  118(5):949­987.

Roberts, Margaret E. 2018. Censored: distraction and diversion inside China's Great Firewall.
  Princeton University Press.

Rozenas, Arturas and Denis Stukal. 2019. "How Autocrats Manipulate Economic News: Evi-
  dence from Russias State-Controlled Television." Journal of Politics 81(3):982­96.

Sadler, Evan. 2020. "Diffusion games." American Economic Review 110(1):225­70.

Satyanath, Shanker, Nico Voigtl¨
                               ander and Hans-Joachim Voth. 2017. "Bowling for fascism:
  Social capital and the rise of the Nazi Party." Journal of Political Economy 125(2):478­526.

Service, Robert. 2003. A history of modern Russia: From Nicholas II to Putin. Penguin.

Shadmehr, Mehdi and Dan Bernhardt. 2015. "State censorship." American Economic Journal:
  Microeconomics 7(2):280­307.

Shapiro, Judith. 2001. Mao's war against nature: Politics and the environment in revolutionary
  China. Cambridge University Press.

Sims, Christopher A. 2003. "Implications of rational inattention." Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics 50(3):665­690.

Sonin, Konstantin. 2020. "Networks and Limits on Propaganda." mimeo .

Sonin, Konstantin and Austin L Wright. 2019. "Information Operations Increase Civilian Secu-
  rity Cooperation." University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for Economics Working
  Paper (2019-130).

Spence, Michael. 1973. "Job Market Signaling." Quarterly Journal of Economics 87(3):355­374.


                                              29
Taneva, Ina. 2019.    "Information design." American Economic Journal: Microeconomics
  11(4):151­85.

Taylor, Philip M. 1999. British propaganda in the 20th century: Selling democracy. Edinburgh
  University Press Edinburgh.

Thaler, Richard H and Cass R Sunstein. 2009. Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth,
  and happiness. Penguin.

Van Der Hofstad, Remco. 2010. "Percolation and random graphs." New Perspectives in Stochas-
  tic Geometry pp. 173­247.

Voigtl¨
      ander, Nico and Hans-Joachim Voth. 2015. "Nazi indoctrination and anti-Semitic beliefs
  in Germany." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112(26):7931­7936.

Wang, Yun. 2015. "Bayesian persuasion with multiple receivers." Available at SSRN 2625399 .

Wei, Dong. 2018. "Persuasion under costly learning." Available at SSRN 3188302 .

Yanagizawa-Drott, David. 2014. "Propaganda and conflict: Evidence from the Rwandan geno-
  cide." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(4):1947­1994.




                                             30
Appendix

Algebra for Example 1

There are 3 possible cases.
   (1) If the central agent is a subscriber and the peripheral agents receive information from
her, then for the optimal level of propaganda   =  max , one has µ + (1 - µ)   =                1
                                                                                                q   (µ - c) ,
and the expected total action is
                                         1
                                           (µ - c) (1 + 2p) .                                          (A1)
                                         q
   (2) If the peripheral agents are subscribers, and the central agent is the second-hand receiver,
than the optimal amount of propaganda satisfies p2 V ( ) = V ( ) - c (otherwise, one of the two
peripheral agents would drop subscription) so that µ + (1 - µ)   =             1
                                                                               q   µ-     c
                                                                                        1-p2
                                                                                               . Then, the
expected total action is
                                   1           c
                                       µ-            (2 + (2 - p) p) .                                 (A2)
                                   q        1 - p2

(The central agent receives information with probability 1 - (1 - p)2 = (2 - p) p > p2 .).
   It is straightforward, that (A2) exceeds (A1) when p is low and vice versa if p is relatively
larger.
   (3) All three agents are subscribers. Then,  should be such that (2 - p) pV ( )  V ( ) - c
as the central agent is the least willing to subscribe. Then µ + (1 - µ)   =              1
                                                                                          q    µ-      c
                                                                                                    (1-p)2
                                                                                                             .
Then the expected amount of action is

                                        1             c
                                             µ-              3.                                        (A3)
                                        q         (1 - p)2

   Denote a = c/µ and compare three functions:


                              f1 (p) = (1 + 2p) (1 - a) ,
                                                                    a
                              f2 (p) = (2 + (2 - p) p) 1 -                 ,
                                                                  1 - p2
                                                     a
                              f3 (p) = 3 1 -                 .
                                                  (1 - p)2

Observe that f1 (0) < f2 (0) < f3 (0), f3 (p) < 0 for any p  (0, 1) , f2 (0) > 0, and that limp1 f2 =
limp1 f3 = - for any a [that satisfies the standard conditions in the model]. This implies
that there exist thresholds p1 and p2 such that for any p  (0, p1 ) , (A3) provides the highest
pay-off for the sender and for any p  (p2 , 1) , the sender's payoff is (A1).


                                                  A-1
    Let's consider p = 1
                       2 . The value of each of the three functions is a function of parameter a:


                                                  1
                                         f1                 = 2 - 2a,
                                                  2
                                                  1               11 11a
                                         f2                 =       -    ,
                                                  2               4   3
                                                  1
                                         f3                 = 3 - 12a.
                                                  2

                                                       3     9              1              1          1
It is straightforward to check that if a              100 , 200    , f2     2   > max f1   2   , f3   2           .


Algebra for One-Way Linear Network

To calculate the expected average action by all agents in X , take any m. Suppose, for now, that
m is a multiple of K, m = lK. Then the amount of action among m agents is

                                        m                 1 - pK
                                          (µ + (1 - µ)  )        .
                                        K                  1-p

Now, the expected average action is

                 1           m                 1 - pK                     1                 1 - pK
                lim            (µ + (1 - µ)  )                       =      (µ + (1 - µ)  )        .
              m- m           K                  1-p                       K                  1-p

                                              1                       1
(So, we effectively replaced limm-            m   by liml-           lK .   )

                                                                                    1
Lemma A1. Suppose that   (0, 1). Then function (t) =                                t    - pt is single-peaked on
[0, +).

Proof. Take a derivative:
                                                      -pt t ln p -  + pt
                                         (t) =                           .
                                                               t2
                                                      t
            -pt t ln p-+pt                    1
Let (t) =           pt       = -t ln p -      p           + 1. It is sufficient to show that there exists some t0
                                                                                                                          t
                                                                                                                      1
such that (t) > 0 for any t  [0, t0 ) and (t) < 0 for any t  (t0 , +). Since p < 1, 1 -                               p       is
a negative of an exponential function; it crosses y -axis at 1 -  > 0. The linear function -t ln p
                                                                                                          t
                                                                                                      1
crosses y -axis at 0 (below 1 - ) and then have a single crossing with 1 -                            p       .

                             1
Lemma A2. Function           t   µ 1 - pt - c satisfies increasing differences condition in (t, p) and
(t, c).




                                                            A-2
Proof.

                              1                              1
                                      µ 1 - pt - c      =      -µpt-1 t = -µpt-1 ,
                             p t                             t
                            2 1
                                      µ 1 - pt - c      = -pt-1 µ ln p > 0;
                            pt t
                              1                             1
                                      µ 1 - pt - c      = - ,
                             c t                            t
                            2 1                           1
                                      µ 1 - pt - c      = 2 > 0.
                            ct t                          t




Lemma A3. Suppose that rp > 1. Then there exists a threshold t  (0, 1) such that the function
            (rp)t -1         c/µ
 (t, r) =    (rt -1)   1-   1-pt     increases on 0, t and decreases on t, 1 .

Proof.

                       d (rp)t - 1          (rp)t - 1 (ln rp - ln r)
                                       =
                       dt (rt - 1)                 (rt - 1)
                                          (rp)t - 1 ln p
                                       =
                                             (rt - 1)
                d            c/µ                   pt ln p
                       1-              = - (c/µ)
                dt          1 - pt                (1 - pt )2
   d (rp)t - 1               c/µ            (rp)t - 1 ln p            c/µ          (rp)t - 1          pt ln p
                       1-              =                        1-             -             ( c/µ )
   dt (rt - 1)              1 - pt            (rt - 1)               1 - pt         (rt - 1)         (1 - pt )2

The above derivative is positive if and only if

                                              c/µ                                pt ln p
                       (rp)t - 1 ln p 1 -              - (rp)t - 1 (c/µ)                   >0
                                             1 - pt                             (1 - pt )2

as rt - 1 > 0 for any t > 0. This is equivalent to

                                             c/µ                                 pt
                        (rp)t - 1      1-             - (rp)t - 1 (c/µ)                  <0
                                            1 - pt                            (1 - pt )2

as ln p < 0. Finally, the above condition is equivalent to

                                             c/µ                   pt
                                       1-             - (c/µ)              <0
                                            1 - pt              (1 - pt )2




                                                       A-3
as long as (rp)t - 1 > 0, which in turn is true if and only if rp > 1.

                                        2
                               1 - pt       - (c/µ) 1 - pt - (c/µ) pt < 0
                                                                             2
                                                                    1 - pt       < c/µ.


The LHS is monotonically increasing in t (and asymptotically approach 1) on (0, 1) .

Lemma A4. Suppose that rp > 1. Then function (t) = (t|r, c, µ) satisfies increasing differ-
ences in (t, c), (t, -µ), and (t, r).

Proof. Let us demonstrate that

                                     d2    (rp)t - 1                   c/µ
                                                                 1-              > 0.
                                  dtd (c/µ) (rt - 1)                  1 - pt



      d (rp)t - 1             c/µ               (rp)t - 1 1
                          1-                 = - t
   d (c/µ) (rt - 1)          1 - pt              (r - 1) 1 - pt
    d2    (rp)t - 1             c/µ                d          (rp)t - 1 1
                          1-                 =            -
 dtd (c/µ) (rt - 1)            1 - pt              dt          (rt - 1) 1 - pt
                                                 (rp)t - 1 (ln rp - ln r) 1       (rp)t - 1 pt ln p
                                             = -                                -                      .
                                                        (rt - 1)         1 - pt    (rt - 1) (1 - pt )2

As rp > 1, we can divide by (rp)t - 1, multiply by rt - 1 and 1 - pt , so the above expression is
positive if and only if
                                                              pt ln p
                                                 - ln p -             >0
                                                              1 - pt
if and only if
                                            - ln p(1 - pt ) - pt ln p > 0,

which is in turn equivalent to
                                                        - ln p > 0,

which is always true.
   Let us prove that
                                     d2 (rp)t - 1                   c/µ
                                                              1-               > 0.
                                    dtdr (rt - 1)                  1 - pt




                                                           A-4
Calculate

      d (rp)t - 1           c/µ                       c/µ      d (rp)t - 1
                    1-                 =    1-
      dr (rt - 1)          1 - pt                    1 - pt    dr (rt - 1)
                                                      c/µ      d tp (rp)t-1
                                       =    1-
                                                     1 - pt    dr trt-1

                                                c/µ             tp (rp)t-1     rt - 1 - trt-1 (rp)t - 1
                                       =    1-
                                               1 - pt                               (rt - 1)2
                                                                  trt-1
                                       =   1 - pt - c/µ                   .
                                                                (rt - 1)2

Now

d                 trt-1                            trt-1
   1 - pt - c/µ                     = -pt ln p
dt              (rt - 1)2                        (rt - 1)2
                                                                                          2
                                                 t            rt-1 (t ln r + 1) rt - 1        - 2trt-1 rt - 1 rt ln r
                                       + 1 - p - c/µ
                                                                                       (rt - 1)4
                                                                                        t        t
                                                   trt-1                             t r - 1 + r + 1 t ln r
                                    = -pt ln p             + 1 - pt - c/µ r
                                                 (rt - 1)2                                    r (rt - 1)3

We will create another, sign-equivalent function:

                                                                   rt - 1 + rt + 1 t ln r
                     (r, t) = -pt t ln p + 1 - pt - c/µ
                                                                           rt - 1

                                                                         d2 (t,r)                           c
If 1 - pt - c/µ > 0, then  (r, t) > 0 which means that                     dtdr     > 0. But 1 - pt -       µ   > 0 is
                     c
equivalent to µ -   1-pt   > 0, which is always true (our model is solved when this assumption is
fulfilled).


Proof of Proposition 3

(i) We will prove that there exists an m  Z+ such that the set S m = {mn|n  Z} is an
equilibrium subscription set. We need to find m such that, if S m is a subscriber set, then, for
any x  S m , the IC constraint looks as follows:


                                      1 - (1 - pm )2 V ( )  V ( ) - c


or
                                             2pm - p2m  A,                                                       (A4)



                                                        A-5
if we denote A = 1 -         c
                           V ( )   and note that 1 - (1 - pm )2 = 2pm - p2m . If such m exists, we will
need to check whether or not the IC constraint is satisfied for every non-subscriber as well.
   Observe that the function  (x) = 2px - p2x is non-negative, single-peaked on [0, +) , and
is converging to 0 when x approaches +.
   Start with the case when A > arg maxm0 2pm - p2m . Then S 0 is an equilibrium sub-
scription set; everyone is a subscriber.
   Now, suppose that A  arg maxm0 2pm - p2m . The fact  (x) is converging to zero
guarantees that the set m|2pm - p2m  A is non-empty. Take m = min m|2pm - p2m  A .
                                                                                       
What remains to check is that if S m is the subscriber set, than for any x / S m , the incentive
constraint is satisfied.
   Suppose, on the contrary, that there exists an x  Z, 0 < x < m (so distance to the next
left-ward subscriber, 0, is x, and to the next right-ward subscriber, m, is m - x) such that
1 - (1 - p)x (1 - p)m-x = px + pm-x - pm  A. Without loss of generality x  m - x. Then
pm-x  px as p  1, and therefore pm-x (1 - pm-x )  px (1 - pm-x ) = px - pm-x . This yields


                                   2pm-x - p2(m-x)  px + pm-x - pm  A,


which contradics the choice of m as the minimal integer satisfying (A4).
   (ii) is demonstrated in the text.




                                                     A-6
