                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          INTEREST RATE UNCERTAINTY AND SOVEREIGN DEFAULT RISK

                                        Alok Johri
                                       Shahed Khan
                                     César Sosa-Padilla

                                     Working Paper 27639
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27639


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2020




We have benefited from comments and suggestions from the Fernando Broner, two anonymous
referees, as well as from Manuel Amador, Agustín Benetrix, Marinho Bertanha, Nathan
Converse, Ethan Ilzetzki, Hashmat Khan, Juan Carlos Hatchondo, Leonardo Martinez, Enrique
Mendoza, Juanpa Nicolini, Ananth Ramanarayanan, Zach Stangebye, Michal Szkup, Martín
Uribe, Stephen Williamson, and seminar participants at UBC, Saint's Mary, Western, Queen's,
Carleton, Notre Dame, Trinity College Dublin, European University Institute, McMaster,
Universidad Nacional de Tucum'an, the 2019 Midwest Macroeconomics Meeting, the 2019
Computing in Economics and Finance Annual Meeting, the 50th Anniversary of the Money,
Macro and Finance Conference, the 10th RCEA MMF Conference, the 2016 and 2017 Society
for Economic Dynamics Annual Meetings, and the 2015 Canadian Economic Association Annual
Meeting. All remaining errors are ours. This research was partially funded by a Social Science
and Humanities Research Council of Canada grant as well as internal Arts Research Board
funding from McMaster University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Alok Johri, Shahed Khan, and César Sosa-Padilla. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Interest Rate Uncertainty and Sovereign Default Risk
Alok Johri, Shahed Khan, and César Sosa-Padilla
NBER Working Paper No. 27639
August 2020
JEL No. E32,E43,F34,F41

                                            ABSTRACT

International data suggests that fluctuations in the level and volatility of the world interest rate (as
measured by the US treasury bill rate) are positively correlated with both the level and volatility
of sovereign spreads in emerging economies. We incorporate an estimated time-varying process
for the world interest rate into a model of sovereign default calibrated to a panel of emerging
economies. Time variation in the world interest rate interacts with default incentives in the model
and leads to state contingent effects on borrowing and sovereign spreads which resemble those
found in the data. The model delivers up to one-half of the positive comovement between the
level and volatility of world interest rate and the level of sovereign spreads seen in emerging
economies. Moreover, the model also delivers significant positive co-movements between the
volatility of the spread and the process for the world interest rate which is also consistent with the
data. Our model provides one potential source for the observed bunching in default probabilities
observed across nations, namely the world interest rate process. Our model generates a positive
and significant correlation (0.51) between the spreads of two nations with uncorrelated income
processes. This is close to the observed mean correlation in the data (0.61).

Alok Johri                                         César Sosa-Padilla
Department of Economics                            Department of Economics
McMaster University                                University of Notre Dame
1280 Main Street West                              3060 Jenkins Nanovic Hall
Hamilton, ON CANADA L8S 4M4                        Notre Dame, IN 46556
johria@mcmaster.ca                                 and NBER
                                                   csosapad@nd.edu
Shahed Khan
Department of Economics
University of Western Ontario
1151 Richmond Street N.
London, ON
CANADA
mkhan333@uwo.ca
1        Introduction

The emerging economy business cycle literature has shown that shocks to country spreads
play an important role in accounting for domestic business cycles. In addition, a large body
of empirical work has traced variation in emerging economy spreads and default risk to both
domestic and global factors.1 Motivated by this work, the sovereign default literature pro-
vides a framework in which time varying default probabilities generate endogenous variation
in sovereign yields.2 However, this literature has emphasized the role of domestic factors
with little attention to the global interlinkages highlighted by the empirical work.3 Our
paper addresses this gap by focusing on the relationship between uncertainty in the world
interest rate and sovereign default risk, while also retaining a role for domestic factors. Our
focus on variation in the world interest rate as a global factor is consistent with several
studies. For example, Gonz´
                          alez-Rozada and Levy Yeyati (2008) finds that movements in US
treasuries as well as in proxies for global risk explain about half of the long run volatility in
emerging economy interest rates.4
        Some recent episodes highlight the importance of the behavior of US interest rates for
world debt markets. A notorious example, usually referred to as the "taper tantrum," oc-
curred in May of 2013 when former US Fed chairman Ben Bernanke suggested the possibility
of a reduction in future bond purchases by the Fed. This triggered a sharp market adjustment
in emerging market economies featuring a reversal in capital flows and a spike in government
bond yields. On average, sovereign yields across emerging economies rose by 1% (Rai and
Suchanek, 2014). An example of policy makers' dislike of uncertainty about the world inter-
est rate occurred in 2015, as summarized by the following quotes reported in the Financial
    1
     See early work in Edwards, 1984, Cantor and Packer, 1996 and Eichengreen and Mody, 2000. For some
recent examples of studies that highlight global factors, see Hilscher and Nosbusch (2010), Gonz´ alez-Rozada
and Levy Yeyati (2008) Akinci (2013), and Maltritz (2012).
   2
     We use the terms "sovereign" and "government" interchangeably throughout the paper.
   3
     Below we discuss a few papers that do highlight the role of global risk aversion.
   4
     These findings are re-iterated using a variety of empirical methods and proxies for global risk, different
time periods, and different countries in other work. For example, Akinci (2013) uses a structural VAR on a
panel of emerging economies while Maltritz (2012) uses Bayesian model averaging on a panel of European
nations and both replace the high yield spreads used by Gonz´      alez-Rozada and Levy Yeyati (2008) (as a
measure of gloabl risk) with corporate bond spreads captured by BAA bonds. Hilscher and Nosbusch (2010)
add VIX as a measure of global uncertainty and find that it is statistically significant in explaining credit
default swap (CDS) spreads of Mexico, Turkey, and Korea.



                                                      1
Times (September 9, 2015):

   "We think US monetary policymakers have got confused about what to do. The uncer-
tainty has created the turmoil."
                         Mirza Adityaswara, Sr. Deputy Governor, Indonesia Central Bank.


   "The uncertainty about when the Fed hike will happen is causing more damage than the
Fed hike will itself."
                                                  Julio Velarde, Governor, Peru Central Bank.


   Motivated both by the empirical evidence on the importance of global factors in the
movement of emerging economies' sovereign spreads as well as recent events and policy
makers' concerns, we develop an equilibrium model of sovereign default (in the tradition of
Eaton and Gersovitz, 1981) to study the relationship between endogenous country spreads
and movements in both the level and the volatility of the world interest rate. To do so,
we introduce stochastic volatility into the process of the world interest rate (as modeled by
Fern´
    andez-Villaverde, Guerr´
                           on-Quintana, Rubio-Ram´
                                                 irez and Uribe, 2011) in an otherwise
standard quantitative model of long term sovereign debt (following Hatchondo and Martinez,
2009). We use the model to separate out the role that shocks to the level of the interest rate
play from the role that time-varying volatility in the world interest rate plays in explaining
both the level and the volatility of the sovereign spread, the borrowing levels chosen by the
sovereign, as well as the cross-country correlation in spreads induced by the world interest
rate process.
   Our model implies that the impact of shocks to the world interest rate are highly state
contingent and depend on income and existing debt levels, as well as on the state of world
interest itself (its level and volatility). In order to disentangle the implied co-movements
between the objects of interest in the model-generated data and in our emerging economy
data set, we regress the country spread on the level and volatility of the world interest rate
adding the debt-to-GDP ratio, income growth and a measure of risk-aversion (as well as
country fixed effects) as conditioning variables. We find that spreads are increasing in both


                                              2
the level and the volatility of the world interest rate in the model. As expected, they increase
with debt and fall with income growth and rise during periods of heightened risk aversion.
Our panel of emerging economies generates similar conditional co-movement patterns. Since
our model can be viewed as a mechanism that transmits shocks in the process for the world
interest rate into fluctuations in default probabilities and hence in sovereign spreads, we
can use the model to infer how much cross-country co-movement in spreads is generated by
this "global factor". We find that even when two economies face income processes that are
uncorrelated, the common world interest rate process generates a correlation of 0.51 between
their spreads. Interestingly, we find that the mean correlation between country spreads in
our data is 0.61.
   A number of observers have highlighted the importance of volatility in sovereign spreads
to the business cycle of emerging economies. Looking beyond the impact of the world interest
rate process on emerging economy spreads, we explore the implications for the volatility of
these spreads and compare the co-movement patterns with those in our panel data set.
Once more, the conditional co-movement patterns found in the data are close to those in
the model. Both the level and volatility of the world interest rate are positively correlated
with the volatility of the spread. Finally, in both model and data, borrowing is lower when
the world interest rate increases and also when its volatility increases. If all fluctuations
in the interest rate process could be eliminated, welfare in the average emerging country
would increase by 0.21% of permanent consumption. These findings emerge from a model
calibrated to the average dynamics observed in a panel of 66 emerging economies.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the related liter-
ature. Section 3 describes the model and defines the equilibrium. Section 4 discusses the
numerical solution and the calibration. Section 5 presents the results and section 6 con-
cludes. An appendix presents details about our data and computation, as well as robustness
exercises.




                                               3
2        Related Literature

There is ample evidence that movements in the international risk-free rate (usually proxied
by the US T-bill rate) have macroeconomic consequences for emerging economies. Neumeyer
and Perri (2005) report that real country interest rates in emerging economies are strongly
countercyclical and tend to lead the cycle. They also find that exogenous interest rate shocks
can account for up to 50 percent of the volatility of output in Argentina. Uribe and Yue
(2006) find a strong relationship between the world interest rate, the country spread and
emerging market fundamentals. In particular, they show that US interest rate shocks and
country spread shocks can explain the large movements seen in the aggregate activity of
emerging economies. Garc´
                        ia-Cicco, Pancrazi and Uribe (2010) also find that the country
spread shock is one of the most important drivers of emerging economies business cycles.
All these papers take the country spread as an exogenous variable with a time-invariant
volatility, while our work endogenizes both the level and the time-varying volatility of the
spread (as a result of default incentives on the part of the sovereign).5 There are also a
number of empirical papers that include U.S. monetary policy variables (including interest
rates) as determinants of sovereign spreads. We discuss these later in conjunction with our
own regression results.
        Fern´
            andez-Villaverde et al. (2011) study the impact of exogenous time-varying volatility
on the macroeconomic dynamics of a small open economy. They examine the effects on
the business cycles of Argentina, Ecuador, Venezuela, and Brazil. We follow Fern´
                                                                                andez-
Villaverde et al. (2011)'s approach to modeling the stochastic behavior of the world interest
rate, while departing from their approach to modeling the country spread: as already noted,
our model is one of endogenous spreads. Then, we explore the mechanism by which world
interest rate uncertainty affects the country spreads and default risk in emerging economies.
We see our work as complementary to theirs. Guimaraes (2011) highlights the importance of
shocks to the level of world interest rates in a theoretical sovereign default model. His work
differs from ours in that it does not consider time variation in the volatility of the world
    5
    In a recent study, Reyes-Heroles and Tenorio (2017) document the existence of two regimes in the
volatility of interest rates at which emerging economies borrow and show that these regimes are closely
related to the occurrence of sudden stops in these economies.


                                                  4
interest rate and does not carry out a quantitative evaluation of the model.
       Our paper builds on the quantitative literature on sovereign defaults (following Eaton
and Gersovitz, 1981, Aguiar and Gopinath, 2006, and Arellano, 2008). Lizarazo (2013)
explores how risk aversion on the part of international lenders influences debt and default
dynamics of the borrowing country and therefore how the risk premium affects sovereign
spreads. Verdelhan and Borri (2010) also explore the role of time-varying risk aversion
of lenders in a model with many small open economies that have endowments which are
partially correlated with the lender's endowment process. They also find that risk aversion
plays an important role in determining spreads and borrowing levels. Building on these two
papers, we incorporate risk aversion in our modeling of foreign lenders.
       Within the sovereign debt literature, our paper is particularly related to two recent stud-
ies. Seoane (2019) studies how changes in aggregate income volatility affect sovereign spreads
of Greece, Italy, Portugal, and Spain. He presents a model in the spirit of Arellano (2008)
and incorporates time-varying volatility of the income process which generates substantial
variability in spreads. Our work complements his: we keep the income process with a time-
invariant volatility and introduce time-varying volatility in the world interest rate process.
The second paper is the one by Pouzo and Presno (2016). They study the problem of a small
open economy that can default on its obligations in the presence of model uncertainty. In
their model, lenders fear that the probability model of the underlying state of the borrowing
economy is misspecified and hence may demand higher returns on their investments. Even
though our paper tackles a different type of uncertainty (i.e. time-varying volatility of the
world interest rate) the results are consistent: more uncertainty leads to higher and more
volatile spreads.6
       Finally, our paper is also related to the literature on uncertainty shocks in macroeconomic
models.7 For instance, Justiniano and Primiceri (2008) and Bloom (2009) study the effect
of changes in the volatility of technology shocks in general equilibrium models for closed
economies. Justiniano and Primiceri (2008) study the changes in volatility in postwar US
   6
     Another study in the sovereign debt literature that deals with time-varying volatility is Gu and Stangebye
(2017). They study costly information acquisition in a model of defaultable debt and show how this can
create time-varying volatility in the spread.
   7
     Fern´
         andez-Villaverde and Rubio-Ram´    irez (2013) and Bloom (2014) provide thorough accounts of the
growing literature dealing with uncertainty shocks and time-varying volatility in macroeconomics.


                                                      5
data by estimating a large-scale dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model allowing for
time variation in the structural innovations. They find that shocks specific to investment are
mostly responsible for the observed "great moderation." Bloom (2009), on the other hand,
shows that uncertainty shocks can generate short sharp recessions and recoveries.


3      Model

We consider a small open economy populated by a continuum of households. The economy
trades long-duration non-state-contingent bonds with a mass of competitive foreign lenders
and has no commitment to repaying its debts. The world interest rate (which matters for
bond prices) is time-varying. Time is discrete and goes on forever: t = 0, 1, 2, ...


3.1     Domestic Economy

There is a single tradable good. As is standard in the sovereign default literature, the
economy receives a stochastic endowment stream of this good yt , where


                                  log(yt ) = y log(yt-1 ) + y
                                                            t                              (1)

with |y | < 1, and y        2
                   t  N (0,  ). The government's objective is to maximize the expected

life-time utility of the representative agent in the economy, namely

                                              
                                         E0          t u(ct )                              (2)
                                              t=0


where E denotes the expectation operator, ct is consumption,   (0, 1) denotes the subjec-
tive discount factor, and the u(·) is a period utility function which satisfies u > 0, u < 0.
      Each period, the government makes two decisions. First, it decides whether to default.
Second, it chooses the number of bonds that it purchases or issues in the current period.
      The government has access to an international financial market where it trades long-
duration non-contingent bonds with competitive foreign investors at a price qt .        As in
Hatchondo and Martinez (2009), we assume that a bond issued in period t promises an
infinite stream of coupons, which decrease at a constant rate  . In particular, a bond issued


                                                    6
in period t promises to pay one unit of the good in period t + 1 and (1 -  )s-1 units in period
t + s, with s  2. Let bt (bt+1 ) denote the number of outstanding coupon claims at the
beginning of the current (next) period. A positive value of bt implies that the government
was a net issuer of bonds in the past. The number of bonds issued by the government is
given by [bt+1 - (1 -  )bt ]. The resource constraint for the repayment case is then given by:


                                   ct + bt = yt + qt [bt+1 - (1 -  )bt ] .                                 (3)

       If the government declares a default, it is excluded from financial markets and remains in
financial autarky for a stochastic number of periods. While the government is in default, it
cannot issue debt and domestic aggregate income is reduced by (y ). As in Arellano (2008)
and Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012), we assume that it is proportionally more costly to
default in good times ((y )/y is increasing in y ).8 Following most studies of sovereign
default, the income-cost of defaulting is not a function of the size of the default.9 Thus,
when the government defaults, it does so on all current and future debt obligations. As
argued in Hatchondo, Martinez and Sosa-Padilla (2016), this is consistent with the behavior
of defaulting countries.10 Following previous studies, we also assume that the recovery rate
for debt in default is zero. The resource constraint for the default case is given by:


                                              ct = yt - (yt ) .                                            (4)
   8
      Arellano (2008) and Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012) show that this property is important in accounting
for the dynamics of the sovereign debt interest rate spread. Mendoza and Yue (2012) show that this property
of the cost of defaulting arises endogenously in a setup in which defaults affect the ability of local firms to
acquire a foreign intermediate input good.
    9
      See Sosa-Padilla (2018) for a model of endogenous default costs, where the output-cost-of-default is a
function of the amount of debt that is defaulted upon.
  10
      Sovereign debt contracts often contain acceleration and cross-default clauses. These clauses imply that
after a default event, future debt obligations become current. The type of acceleration clauses depend on
the details of each bond contract and on the jurisdiction under which the bond was issued (see IMF, 2002).
For instance, in some cases it is necessary that creditors holding a minimum percentage of the value of the
bond issue request their debt to be accelerated for their future claims to become due and payable. In other
cases, no such qualified majority is needed.




                                                      7
3.2      Foreign Lenders

Foreign creditors are risk averse and their stochastic discount factor is given by:

                                                  y
                          mt,t+1 = e-rt+1 -y (t+1 +0.5y  ) ,
                                                            2
                                                                   with y  0.                              (5)


This formulation introduces a positive risk premium because bond payoffs are more valuable
to lenders in states in which the government is more likely to default (i.e., in states in which
income shocks in the domestic economy, y , are low). Here, r is the time-varying world
interest rate, and y is the parameter governing the magnitude of the risk premium. A
higher value of y can be seen as capturing how correlated the small open economy is with
respect to the lenders' income process, or alternatively, the degree of diversification in foreign
lenders' portfolios.11
       Bonds are priced in a competitive market inhabited by a large number of identical lenders,
which implies that bond prices are pinned down by a zero expected profit condition. The
price per bond is then given by:


                             qt = Et {mt,t+1 (1 - dt+1 ) [1 + (1 -  )qt+1 ]}                               (6)

where dt+1 and qt+1 represent the government's default decision and equilibrium bond price
in period t + 1, respectively.


3.3      Law of Motion for the World Interest Rate

Following Fern´
              andez-Villaverde et al. (2011) we specify the international risk-free rate faced
by investors as:


                                                rt = r
                                                     ¯ + r,t                                               (7)
  11
     This modeling of risk-averse foreign lenders follows Vasicek (1977) and has been used recently in the
sovereign debt literature (Arellano and Ramanarayanan, 2012, Bianchi and Sosa-Padilla, 2020, etc.). The
functional form for the lenders' stochastic discount factor (SDF) makes it explicit that the variance of the
domestic income matters, but it is less clear that the variance of rt also affects the SDF through the level of
rt (see equation 8). Since rt is time-varying its volatility will induce additional time variation in the SDF.
The appendix shows that our results are robust to using a richer specification for (5) (one that explicitly
includes the variance of rt ).


                                                      8
      where r
            ¯ is the mean of world risk-free real rate, and r,t represents deviations from this
mean. In particular, we assume the following AR(1) behavior for r,t :


                                      r,t = r r,t-1 + er,t ur,t                                    (8)

      where ur,t is a normally distributed shock with mean zero and unit variance. The crucial
ingredient in this stochastic process is that the standard deviation (r,t ) is not constant but
time-varying, and itself follows another (independent) AR(1) process:


                              r,t = (1 - r )¯r + r r,t-1 + r ur ,t                                 (9)

      where ur ,t is a normally distributed shock with mean zero and unit variance. We further
assume that ur,t and ur ,t are independent of each other. The parameters ¯r and r measure
the degree of mean volatility and stochastic volatility in the international risk free rate. A
high ¯r corresponds to a high mean volatility and a high r corresponds to a high degree of
stochastic volatility in the international risk free rate.


3.4     Timing

The timing of events, for a government that is not excluded from financial markets, is as
follows. The government starts with an initial bond position bt and observes the realizations
of the income level (yt ), the world interest rate level (rt ) and the interest rate volatility (r,t ),
and then decides whether to repay its outstanding debt. If it decides to repay, it chooses
bt+1 subject to the resource constraint, taking the bond price schedule qt (bt+1 ; yt , rt , r,t ) as
given. Finally, consumption takes place.
      On the other hand, if the government decides to default it gets excluded from financial
markets and suffers a direct income loss. In case of default, there is no other decision to
be made as the level of consumption equals the (reduced) income level. The government
will re-access financial markets in the following period with probability µ (and it will remain
excluded from financial markets with probability 1 - µ).




                                                  9
3.5      Recursive Equilibrium

We now turn to recursive notation, where primes denote next-period value of the variables.
Let s = {y, r, r } denote the aggregate exogenous state. Given a number of outstanding
coupon claims at the beginning of the next period b and a realization of s, the price of a
bond satisfies:


                       q (b , s) = Es   |s   m(s , s)(1 - d ) 1 + (1 -  )q (b , s )                      (10)

       where d is the next-period default decision, and b is the next-period debt choice. The
optimal default decision is taken as:


                              v 0 (b; s) = max        (1 - d)v c (b; s) + dv d (s)                       (11)
                                             d{0,1}

       where d equals 1 (0) if the government chooses to (not to) default. Under no-default, the
government solves the following problem:


              v c (b; s) = max u (y + q (b ; s)(b - (1 -  )b) - b) +  Es             |s   v 0 (b ; s )   (12)
                          b

       Under default, the value function is given by:


                     v d (s) = u(y - (y )) +  Es         |s   µv 0 (0; s ) + (1 - µ)v d (s )             (13)

       where, in order to keep the environment as simple as possible, we assume that when the
government gains re-access to financial markets it does so with no debt obligations (i.e. it
gets a "fresh start").12 Next, we define the recursive equilibrium of this economy.


Definition 1. The recursive equilibrium for this economy is characterized by

   1. a set of value functions v 0 , v c , and v d ,

   2. a default policy rule d and a borrowing policy rule b ,
  12
   For studies with positive recovery rates and renegotiation between sovereigns and lenders, see for example
Yue (2010), D'Erasmo (2011), and Hatchondo et al. (2016).



                                                        10
     3. a bond price function q ,

such that:

 (a) given the default and borrowing policy functions, v 0 , v c , and v d satisfy equations (11)
        ­ (13) when the government can trade bonds at q ;

    (b) given the default and borrowing policy functions, the bond price function q is given by
        equation (10);

    (c) the default and borrowing policy functions d and b solve the dynamic programming
        problem defined by equations (11) ­ (13) when the government can trade bonds at q .


4      Numerical Solution

We solve the model numerically using value function iteration with a discrete state space.
We focus on Markov-perfect equilibria. We solve for the equilibrium of the finite-horizon
version of our economy, and we increase the number of periods of the finite-horizon economy
until value functions and bond prices for the first and second periods of this economy are
sufficiently close. We then use the first-period equilibrium objects as the infinite-horizon
economy equilibrium objects.
     The functional form for the period utility is:

                                                    c1-
                                           u(c) =                                           (14)
                                                    1-

where  is the coefficient of relative risk aversion. As in Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012),
we assume a quadratic loss function for income during a default episode:


                                    (y ) = max{0, d0 y + d1 y 2 }                           (15)

     As explained by Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012), this functional form for the income
loss (y ) is flexible enough to accommodate many cases. If d0 > 0 and d1 = 0, then
the cost is proportional to income; if d0 = 0 and d1 > 0, then the cost increases more
than proportionately with income; if d0 < 0 and d1 > 0, then the cost is zero in a region

                                                 11
                              Table 1: Parameters of Full Model Economy

       Household risk aversion                           2   Standard value
       Household's discount factor                     0.96 Standard value
       Mean int'l risk-free rate                r
                                                ¯      0.01 Standard value
       Income autocorrelation coefficient       y      0.933 Estimated
       Std. dev. of income innovations                 0.027 Estimated
       Probability of re-entry                  µ     0.0385 Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012)
       Coupon decay rate                              0.0341 Average debt duration
       Lenders' risk aversion                   y      2.5      Calibrated to fit targets
       Default cost parameter                   d0    -0.14     Calibrated to fit targets
       Default cost parameter                   d1    0.24      Calibrated to fit targets


(0 < y < -d0 /d1 ) and then increases faster than income (for y > -d0 /d1 ). This last case is
similar to Arellano (2008)'s cost-of-default function.


4.1      Calibration

We define the "full model" as one in which all the shocks are present. This full model is
calibrated to a quarterly frequency using data from a panel of 66 emerging economies for
the period 1990 -- 2017.13 Table 1 summarizes the parameter values.
       We estimate equation (1) using quarterly real GDP for our panel of countries. The
re-entry probability µ is set to 0.0385 according to Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012).14
       We assume the representative agent in economy has a coefficient of relative risk aversion 
of 2, the typical value in the literature. The average risk-free rate and the domestic discount
factor (¯
        r = 0.01 and  = 0.96) are standard in quantitative business cycle and sovereign
default studies. We set  = 3.41%. With this value and the targeted level of sovereign
spread, sovereign debt has an average duration of 5.6 years in the simulations, which is close
to the average duration found in previous literature.15
  13
     As is common in the sovereign default literature, we focus on time series that exclude default crises. The
appendix has details of the country coverage.
  14
     This value for µ implies an average financial exclusion of 6.5 years. Gelos, Sahay and Sandleris (2011)
report an average exclusion of 4.7 years for emerging economies. Uribe and Schmitt-Groh´      e (2017) find an
average exclusion of 8 years.
  15
     We use the Macaulay definition of duration that, with the coupon structure in this paper, is given by
D = (1 + i )/( + i ), where i denotes the constant per-period yield delivered by the bond. Using a sample
of 27 emerging economies, Cruces, Buscaglia and Alonso (2002) find an average duration of 4.77 years, with
a standard deviation of 1.52 years. Bai, Kim and Mihalache (2017) report an average debt duration of 6.7



                                                      12
                        Table 2: Estimates of the World Interest Rate Process

                       Autocorrelation risk-free rate               r       0.908
                       Mean volatility of int'l risk-free rate      ¯r     -6.2869
                       Autocorrelation interest vol. shock          r       0.8742
                       Stochastic vol. of int'l risk-free rate      r       0.2632



      We are left with three parameters to assign values to: the parameter controlling the
risk premium, y , and the coefficients of the default cost function, d0 and d1 . We calibrate
these three parameters to the median values of the debt-to-income ratio (48%), the sovereign
spread (3.4%), and the standard deviation of the spread (1.5%). All the data counterparts
are the medians observed in our panel of emerging economies.
      Table 2 presents the parameterization of the stochastic processes that govern the behav-
ior of the world interest rate. We estimate equations (8) and (9) using data on the real
international risk free rate for the period 1990 -- 2017.16 We obtain this rate by subtracting
expected inflation from the quarterly US T-bill rate. Following Neumeyer and Perri (2005)
and Fern´
        andez-Villaverde et al. (2011), we compute expected inflation as the average of the
US CPI inflation in the current quarter and in the 3 preceding quarters. Parameter values
in Table 2 correspond to the median of the posterior estimates. These posterior estimates
imply annualized average standard deviations for the risk-free interest rate of 74 basis points
(with only mean volatility) and 97 basis points with both mean and stochastic volatility.


4.2     Model fit

Having calibrated the model, we first verify its ability to reproduce basic features of emerging
economy business cycles and that the targets used in calibration are closely approximated.
Table 3 reports several key moments in the data and in our simulations of the full model.17
years in a panel of 11 emerging economies.
   16
      We use the stochvol R package, which implements an efficient algorithm for Bayesian estimation of
stochastic volatility models via MCMC methods. See Kastner (2016) for more details on the estimation
procedure.
   17
      As in previous studies, we report results for pre-default simulation samples. We simulate the model for
500 samples of 1,500 periods each. We then discard the initial 1,000 periods of each sample as a burn-in and
from the remaining data we extract 500 samples of 26 consecutive years before a default. 26 years (or 104
quarters), is the length of the time series for the US T-bill rate used to estimate the process of the world
interest rate.


                                                     13
                    Table 3: Model fit ­ targeted and non-targeted moments

                                                    Data   Full Model
                           Debt/y (in %)             48         48
                           Spread (in %)             3.4       3.4
                           SD (Spread) (in %)        1.5       1.5
                           sd(c)/sd(y )             1.2       1.3
                           corr(c, y )               0.7       1.0
                           corr(tb/y, y )           -0.4      -0.6
                           corr(Spread, y )         -0.4      -0.7

Note: the standard deviation of a variable x is denoted by sd(x) and the correlation between
two variables x and z is denoted by corr(x, z ). We detrend (the log of) income (y ), (the log of)
consumption (c) and the trade-balance (tb/y ) using the Hodrick-Prescott filter, with a smoothing
parameter of 1,600. We report deviations from the trend.



    The moments reported in Table 3 are chosen to illustrate the ability of the full model
to replicate distinctive business cycle properties of economies with sovereign risk. This
table shows that the full model approximates well the moments used as targets (the debt-to-
income ratio, and the level and volatility of the sovereign spread) and it is broadly consistent
with non-targeted moments in the data: consumption is procyclical and more volatile than
income; the trade balance is countercyclical; and the sovereign spread is also countercyclical.


5    Results

First, we study the effects of introducing time variation in both the level and the volatility of
the world interest rate on default risk, sovereign spreads and debt levels. Having presented
the key mechanisms through which the model operates, we then turn to our main results and
compare the co-movement patterns seen in the model to those found in the data by running
identical panel regressions on simulated data from the model as well as on our data set of
emerging economies. Finally, we compare our model's predictions with those of an otherwise
identical model but with a constant world interest rate: we highlight differences in long-run
moments and measure the welfare cost of interest rate uncertainty.




                                               14
                              1.25

                               1.2

                              1.15

                               1.1

                              1.05

                                 1

                              0.95

                               0.9

                              0.85

                               0.8
                                     0   0.1   0.2     0.3    0.4     0.5    0.6




Figure 1: Default sets. The solid blue line corresponds to a high level of r and the red dashed line
is for a low level of r. Each line is the respective default set contour: the government defaults south
of the line. The figure assumes that the volatility of the world interest is at its average value.


5.1      Effects of Uncertainty about the World Interest Rate

In this first subsection we present the mechanisms and intuition underlying our main results
(which are discussed next, in section 5.2). Specifically, we show how shocks to the level
and volatility of the world interest rate interact with the dynamics typically studied in
the sovereign default literature. We examine these effects in the following order : default
incentives, sovereign spreads, and borrowing decisions. Throughout this section we refer to
`low' and `high' values of r and r to illustrate the state-contingent nature of the effects.18


Default incentives. Figure 1 shows the effect of different levels of r on default incentives,
holding the volatility state at its mean. The graph shows combinations of debt and income
states, and divides the space into two regions. To the north of the default contour, the
sovereign chooses to repay outstanding claims while it chooses to default at or south of the
contour. We plot contours for two levels of the world interest rate, low and high. The
message from the figure is clear: other things equal, the default set is increasing in the level
of the world interest rate.
       In order to understand this result first note from equations (5) and (6) that if lenders face
  18
       Low and high values of r and r refer to values that are 4 standard deviations below and above mean.



                                                     15
a higher r, then the lenders' stochastic discount factor (mt,t+1 ) and the bond price (q ) will
mechanically fall (implying higher sovereign yields). In addition to this purely mechanical
pass-through of higher borrowing costs (from the lenders to the borrower), there will be
additional effects due to the equilibrium response of the sovereign.
    The higher yields change the default incentives of the sovereign through two main forces.
First, higher borrowing costs imply that more consumption must be sacrificed in order to
roll-over existing debt, ceteris paribus, which lowers the desire to repay. Second, since r
follows a persistent process, higher borrowing costs today are likely to remain in place in the
near future. This makes the threat of financial exclusion less severe, as the periods in which
the sovereign would be unable to borrow would likely be periods of high borrowing costs.
Both forces go in the same direction and make the default set larger when r is high.
    Figure 2 presents the effect of shifts in the volatility state (r ) on default incentives.
Panels (a) and (b) of this figure show the default set for two different values of the volatility
of the world interest rate (r ), conditional on facing either a low level of r (panel a) or a high
level of r (panel b). Comparing panels, we see that the effect of volatility is state contingent.
 1.25                                                   1.25

  1.2                                                    1.2

 1.15                                                   1.15

  1.1                                                    1.1

 1.05                                                   1.05

   1                                                      1

 0.95                                                   0.95

  0.9                                                    0.9

 0.85                                                   0.85

  0.8                                                    0.8
        0   0.1   0.2   0.3    0.4   0.5    0.6                0   0.1   0.2   0.3     0.4   0.5   0.6



                   (a) Low r                                              (b) High r

Figure 2: Effect of volatility on default incentives. The left panel is for a low level of r and the right
panel is for a high level of r. The solid blue line corresponds to the high r and the red dashed
line to the case of low r . Each line is the respective default set contour: the government defaults
south of the line.


    As discussed above, we know that when r is low q will be high (panel a). Since it is
cheap to borrow, the government wants access to the markets which requires repayment.

                                                   16
This incentive to repay is stronger if the volatility of r is high because a higher volatility
state means it is more likely (compared to the low volatility state) that rates are going to
increase, making borrowing in the near future more expensive. As a result, the sovereign
will want to borrow now therefore it is less willing to default. When rates are high today
(panel b), the opposite is true, and volatility now enlarges the default set since it is a good
time to default, ceteris paribus. We showed in Figure 1 that a high level of r increases the
incentive of the government to default. Panel b of Figure 2 shows that if the country faces
both a high level and a high volatility of r, then default incentives are even higher.
                           6



                           5



                           4



                           3



                           2



                           1



                           0
                               0   0.1    0.2     0.3     0.4    0.5     0.6




Figure 3: Spread-debt menus. The solid blue line corresponds to a high level of r and the red
dashed line is for a low level of r. The figure assumes that the volatility of the world interest and
the domestic income level are at their mean values.


Spreads-debt menus. The effects we just described affect as well the equilibrium spread-
debt menus facing the small open economy. Figure 3 shows the menu of spreads and next-
period debt choices offered by lenders to the sovereign, for two levels of the world interest
rate (while keeping the volatility at its mean). As expected, for both high (solid blue line)
and low r (dashed red line) choosing more debt comes with higher spreads. At high enough
debt levels, spreads rise so much as to act as an effective endogenous debt limit. Comparing
lines, we see that a higher level of r leads to lower debt capacity: the steeply rising part of
the spread-debt menu moves to the left in the solid blue line when compared with the dashed
red line (low r). For all debt levels we obtain a quite natural result: when r is higher, the

                                                 17
 6                                                     6



 5                                                     5



 4                                                     4



 3                                                     3



 2                                                     2



 1                                                     1
 0.2          0.3         0.4        0.5               0.2       0.3          0.4        0.5



                    (a) Low r                                          (b) High r

Figure 4: Effect of volatility on spreads. The left panel is for a low level of r and the right panel is
for a high level of r. The solid blue line corresponds to the high r and the red dashed line to the
case of low r . Both panels are for the mean income level.


economy faces worse borrowing opportunities. At the median debt level in the simulations
(roughly 48% of income), the spread is more than 200 bps higher under a high r.
     Figure 4 shows that the effect of r on spreads is highly state contingent. Panel (a) is for
a low value of the level of r: in this case, we see that higher volatility translates into lower
spreads. Similarly to our intuition for the results in Figure 2, when facing a low interest
rate the government finds it cheaper to repay and is more incentivized to do so if volatility
is high: there is a higher chance that rates are increasing in the future and therefore the
economy chooses to `lock-in' favorable rates today. Panel (b) shows the effect in the opposite
case (when the rate is high today). It naturally goes the other way: now higher volatility
worsens the borrowing terms.


Borrowing decisions. Figure 5 shows the effect of different levels of the world interest
rate on borrowing decisions, holding volatility at its average value. It is clear from this
figure that the small open economy borrows more when lenders face a low world interest
rate compared to when lenders face a high interest rate. The b function for the low r level
lies consistently above the one for high r level. Recalling that the spread facing the economy
rises with r, it is not surprising that when facing better terms the government's reaction is
to lever up and take advantage of the lower borrowing costs.

                                                  18
                           0.55




                            0.5




                           0.45




                            0.4




                           0.35
                              0.35       0.4        0.45       0.5        0.55




Figure 5: Borrowing policy functions for different levels of r. The solid blue line corresponds to the
case of a low level of r while the red dashed line is for the case of a high level of r. Both lines are
for the mean volatility (r ) and the mean income level.


   The figure also highlights a well known aspect of borrowing decisions in this class of
models. At low levels of debt, the policy rules lie above the 45 degree line and at high
levels they lie below the 45 degree line. This occurs because spread-debt menus offered by
lenders imply spreads increase in the amount of debt chosen. The sovereign realizes this
and optimally chooses to lower debt when it is relatively high. Note also that the debt level
at which borrowing is curtailed is lower in the solid blue line when interest rates are high.
Relatedly, we see that the solid blue line "disappears" before the end of the graph: this
indicates that for those levels of initial debt (over 52% of mean income) the government
is defaulting (and hence not borrowing that period, due to financial exclusion). This is a
manifestation of the bigger default sets associated with higher r discussed above.
   Figure 6 presents the effect of varying the volatility of the world interest rate on borrowing
choices. Panels (a) and (b) of this figure each show the borrowing policy functions for two
different values of the volatility of the world interest rate (r ), conditional on facing a low
level of r (panel a) or a high level of r (panel b). The main takeaway from the two panels
is that the effect of r on borrowing choices is highly state contingent and quantitatively
small. With low r, a higher volatility state involves marginally more borrowing than the
low volatility state: the solid blue line sits above the dashed red line at most points in debt
to mean income space, but their difference is rather small. We also see that the sovereign

                                                  19
 0.55                                                   0.55




  0.5                                                    0.5




 0.45                                                   0.45




  0.4                                                    0.4




 0.35                                                   0.35
    0.35      0.4       0.45      0.5       0.55           0.35   0.4        0.45     0.5      0.55



                    (a) Low r                                           (b) High r

Figure 6: Effect of volatility on the borrowing policy functions. The left panel is for a low level of
r and the right panel is for a high level of r . The solid blue line is for high r while the red line is
for low r . Both panels are for the mean income level.


prefers to increase its debt level for most values of initial debt: when interest rates are low,
there is a strong incentive to "lock in" the good times. This incentive is marginally stronger
when the volatility is higher (as it is more likely that in the future the level of r will increase).
    In the right panel of Figure 6, the state contingent nature of the sovereign's decisions
become further clarified. Before discussing the impact of volatility, note that the presence
of a high level of r shifts the borrowing rules `down and to the right,' making the sovereign
more likely to lower debt when compared to the left panel and this is true for both volatility
regimes. Turning to the impact of volatility, we see that the location of the two lines is
reversed: the red dashed line (low volatility) sits uniformly above the solid blue line (high
volatility). At higher debt levels, both volatility states lead to lower borrowing but the
effect is more pronounced in high volatility states. The explanation for this is similar to the
previous paragraph: the sovereign sees that rates are unfavorable today so a high volatility
regime implies a higher chance (given the high r ) that rates will decrease in the near future
compared to the chance in a low volatility state. As a result, it is optimal for the sovereign
to wait for better times and consequently to inter-temporally substitute current borrowing
for future borrowing, when interest rates are lower. Coupled with the desire to avail of lower
spreads, the sovereign lowers borrowing more in the high volatility state.




                                                   20
5.2      Main results: comparing model implications to the data

From our discussion so far it is clear that the sovereign's responses to variation in the level
and volatility of the world interest rate are highly state contingent. As a result, looking at
raw first and second moments such as correlations can be misleading. Our approach to this
issue is to tease out conditional co-movement patterns in the data and model using panel
regressions that include the level and volatility of the world interest rate along with the debt-
to-GDP ratio and output growth. We begin with spread levels, followed by spread volatility
and end with the relationship between debt accumulation and the level and volatility of r.


Effect on sovereign spreads. We begin this subsection by exploring the co-movement
patterns between the international risk-free rate and sovereign debt spreads for our panel of
66 emerging economies and compare them with the patterns that emerge from our model.
In particular, we are interested in uncovering the conditional correlations between the level
of emerging economies' sovereign spreads and the level and volatility of world interest rates
as proxied by the real U.S. 3 month treasury yield. Beyond the level of sovereign spreads,
we are also interested in the relationship between the volatility of spreads and the dynamics
of the world interest rate which we also tease out using a panel regression.
       Table 4 presents the results of our regressions on the level and volatility of sovereign
spreads for a panel of 66 nations in columns 1 and 3, and for a panel of simulated data from
our model in columns 2 and 4.19 In column 1 we see that a higher world interest rate is
positively associated with higher emerging economy spreads. A similar positive association
is seen between our estimated time series on the volatility of the world interest rate and
the level of emerging nation spreads. Our regression includes country fixed effects and uses
the debt-to-GDP ratio, output growth and a risk aversion dummy (based on the VIX) as
conditioning factors since these elements are also present in our model. Spreads increase
with debt and risk aversion and fall with output growth. All five estimated coefficients
  19
     The spread, the world interest rate and its volatility are measured in annualized percentage points.
The volatility of the spread is measured as 3-year rolling standard deviations, also expressed in annualized
percentage points. Similar results hold if we measure the volatility as the absolute deviation from mean.
The risk aversion dummy is an indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if the year is labeled as a high
risk aversion year: this is based on the VIX (for the data) and the foreign lenders' stochastic discount factor
(for the model). Details of the construction of all variables and country coverage are in the appendix.


                                                      21
                                Table 4: Spread regressions: data and model

              Dep. variable:                             Spread             Spread volatility
                                                 Data         Model         Data        Model
              rw                                0.26          0.09         0.10         0.06
                                                (0.05)        (0.02)       (0.02)       (0.01)
              rw volatility                      0.79         0.36         0.35         0.17
                                                 (0.39)       (0.07)       (0.12)       (0.03)
              Debt/GDP                          0.02          0.43          0.01        0.12
                                                (0.01)        (0.02)       (0.003)      (0.01)
              GDP growth                       -0.20          -0.10        -0.03       -0.06
                                                (0.04)         (0.01)      (0.02)       (0.01)
              Risk aversion dummy               1.07           0.13        0.39         0.06
                                                (0.19)         (0.07)      (0.08)       (0.04)
              No. of countries/samples             66              66        66           66
              Adjusted R2                         0.78            0.96      0.59         0.68

Note: All specifications include country/samples fixed effects. rw stands for the world interest rate. Robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses.  p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.


are significant at conventional levels. In column 2, we present the results of an identical
regression using a panel of model-simulated data. As in column 1, our model displays a
positive association of the spread with the level and the volatility of world interest rates,
debt and the risk aversion dummy and a negative association with output growth. Once
again, all coefficients are statistically significant.
       The model implies that a one percentage point increase in the world interest rate will
increase the spread by 9 basis points while a one percentage point increase in volatility
will increase the spread by 36 basis points: these effects are between 1/3 and 1/2 of the
mean effects seen in the data. When comparing the quantitative response of the model to
the empirical patterns, we see that both feature spreads that are more positively correlated
with interest rate volatility than with interest rate levels. Overall, these results are broadly
consistent with the empirical literature on spreads (see discussion below), and as such justify
the worries of emerging economy policy makers regarding a rise in uncertainty around the
world interest rate (driven, for example, by uncertainty regarding US monetary policy).20
  20
       The results in columns 2 and 4 of table 4 are not very sensitive to using risk neutral (instead of risk



                                                         22
Effect on the volatility of sovereign spreads. Columns 3 and 4 of Table 4 turn at-
tention to the volatility of sovereign spreads. This measure is regressed on the same five
variables as before: the level and volatility of U.S. interest rates, the debt to GDP ratio,
output growth, and the risk aversion dummy. We find that both higher and more volatile
world interest rates are associated with more volatile sovereign spreads. The estimated rela-
tionship between spread volatility and the volatility of the U.S. interest rate is again larger
than that with the volatility of the interest rate. Higher debt levels and periods of higher
risk aversion are also associated with a rise in volatility of sovereign spreads, while GDP
growth lowers the volatility. All coefficients except that of GDP growth are significantly
estimated at conventional levels. Once again we explore the ability of our model to deliver
these empirical patterns with identical regressions using model-simulated data in column 4.
Our model predicts that a rise in the level and volatility of the world interest rate lead to a
rise in the volatility of the spread. A rise in debt as well as periods of heightened risk aversion
are associated with increases in the volatility of the sovereign spread. Output growth has
a negative (and significant) coefficient in the model regression. All model based coefficients
have the same sign as in the emerging economy data. Comparing columns 3 and 4, we note
that the model generates roughly half of the positive co-movement between spread volatility
and the (level and volatility of the) world interest rate estimated from our panel of emerging
economies.
    Our empirical results are consistent with existing studies that explore these relationships.
Arora and Cerisola (2001) explore the empirical determinants of sovereign spreads using data
from 11 emerging economies with special emphasis on US monetary policy with controls
typical in the literature. Like us, they find that the level of spreads is increasing in the level
of the interest rate as well as a proxy of volatility. Unlike us, they use the federal funds rate
as their measure of interest rate and their volatility proxy is constructed from the estimated
values of the conditional standard error from an ARCH model for the difference between
the three-month U.S. treasury bill yield and the federal funds rate. Despite these differences
the results are strikingly similar with one difference being that we find a larger relationship
between volatility and spread than between level of the US interest rate and spread. Foley-
averse) foreign lenders. Results for this case are available upon request from the authors.


                                                     23
Fisher and Guimaraes (2013) also find that an unexpected increase in US inflation-indexed
bond yields increases sovereign spreads. Longstaff, Pan, Pedersen and Singleton (2011) and
Fender, Hayo and Neuenkirch (2012) also include a measure of US interest rates in their
study of the determinants of sovereign CDS data. Like us, they also control for the impact
of global risk appetite (as measured by VIX).


International comovement in sovereign spreads. Time variation in the world interest
rate not only increases the level and volatility of sovereign spreads, but can potentially create
comovement between the spreads of various countries. To illustrate and quantify this natural
implication we do the following exercise: (i) we draw multiple random (and independent)
samples for the income process, (ii) we select the two samples that have the lowest correlation
(in absolute value), (iii) we feed these sequences of shocks into our full model along with the
a common (and independent) sequence of shocks to the world interest rate, (iv) finally, we
compare the time series profile of spreads between these two samples, which may be thought
of as symbolizing two countries.
       Since the correlation between the income processes hitting our simulated economies is
essentially zero (1.17 × 10-6 ), if these economies were to face a constant interest rate, then
the correlation between their spreads should not be significantly different from zero.21 In
contrast, when these economies face a common and time-varying world interest rate, the
correlation between their spreads should increase (driven by the common global factor).
Indeed we find that the correlation between spreads is significant and equal to 0.51.22
       Using data from a quarterly panel of emerging economies, we find that the mean pairwise
correlation in sovereign spreads is 0.61.23 This simple exercise highlights the importance of
global shocks (in this case the world interest rate) in explaining the observed comovement
between sovereign spreads.
  21
     We confirm this insight by running this same exercise in our `basic model' with a constant r (explained
below in section 5.3) and indeed find a correlation between the spreads of 0.03 (and insignificant).
  22
     This behavior is reminiscent of the waves of insolvency problems in `periphery countries,' as documented
by Kaminsky and Vega-Garc´     ia (2016).
  23
     For this exercise we use quarterly spread data from Longstaff et al. (2011). The appendix has the details
of the data as well as a complete spread correlation matrix.




                                                     24
Effect on debt accumulation. We are also interested in understanding how the behavior
of the world interest rate correlates with the amount that emerging economies are able to
borrow. We regress the growth rate of the debt-to-GDP ratio on the level and the volatility
of the U.S interest rate. Table 5 presents results for both the emerging economy panel and
the model-simulated data. We find that both the level and volatility of the world interest
rate have negative coefficients which are significant at conventional levels. Simulated data
from our quantitative model also displays this negative association.

                                Table 5: Debt regressions: data and model

                                        Dep. variable: Debt growth
                                                         Data                 Model
                         rw                                  -0.020         -0.004
                                                              (0.006)       (0.0005)
                         rw volatility                       -0.178          -0.01
                                                              (0.032)        (0.002)
                         N. of countries/samples                66              66
                         Adjusted R2                           0.12            0.07

Note: we include country/samples fixed effects. rw stands for the world interest rate. Robust standard
errors are reported in parentheses.  p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.




5.3      Keeping r constant: the basic model

Having shown that both the level and the volatility of the world interest rate have important
influences on the debt and default dynamics of our "full model", we now compare the average
properties of this model to a "basic model" where the world interest rate is constant (i.e.
we set ur = ur = 0 while leaving all other parameters unchanged at their values in the full
model). We simulate and compute statistical moments from the basic model in the same
way as we did for the full model.24
       Table 6 reports the main moments of interest for both models. It highlights three clear
results: on average, shocks to the world interest rate lead to (i) higher spreads, (ii) more
volatile spreads, and (iii) lower debt carrying capacity.
  24
    Additional decomposition exercises where the full model and basic model are compared to an intermediate
case with shocks to the level of world interest rates but no shocks to the volatility are available in the appendix.


                                                        25
       The average level of the sovereign spread is 10% higher (roughly 30bps) and 15% more
volatile (roughly 20bps) in the full model compared to the basic model. As we showed in
section 5.1, uncertainty about the world interest rate can in some cases decrease borrowing
and increase it in others. Table 6 shows that the precautionary forces dominate, on average.25

                      Table 6: Main moments of interest: Full and basic models


                                                  Full Model     Basic Model
                         Debt/y (in %)                   48            50
                         Spread (in %)                   3.4           3.1
                         SD(Spread) (in %)               1.5           1.3

Note: the moments' computation and de-trending method are the same as those described in the
footnote to Table 3. There is no recalibration in the basic model.



Comparing borrowing opportunities. Panel (a) in Figure 7 shows the spread-debt
menus in both economies.26 This figure shows that uncertainty regarding the world interest
rate shrinks the opportunity set for the small open economy: the spread-debt menu shifts
`up and to the left.'
       The figure also provides an illustration of the main differences between the two models
highlighted in Table 6. For the mean debt level (roughly 48% of income), the equilibrium
spread in the full model would be about 100 basis points higher than in the basic model
(even with r and r at their means). The figure also shows the equilibrium choices of
the government in the two models: the precautionary forces dominate and the government
chooses a lower debt level (and yet pays a higher spread).


Welfare effects.        Having established that our quantitative model is able to replicate the
broad patterns of interest rates and debt levels, we turn to a natural question to ask: what
is the welfare cost of being exposed to shocks to the world interest rate? Or equivalently,
what are the welfare gains for the average emerging nation that borrows on world markets of
  25
     These results are, as expected, consistent with the findings in regression tables 4 and 5.
  26
     This relates to the findings in section 5.1, except that it compares the spread-debt menus between the
full model and the basic models.


                                                    26
    5                                                    0.35


                                                          0.3
    4

                                                         0.25

    3
                                                          0.2


                                                         0.15
    2


                                                          0.1
    1
                                                         0.05


    0                                                      0
        0   0.1    0.2   0.3    0.4    0.5    0.6          0.7   0.8   0.9   1    1.1   1.2   1.3   1.4



              (a) Spread-debt menus                                     (b) Welfare

Figure 7: Comparison between "full" and "basic" models. Panel (a) shows the spread-debt menus
(computed for mean values of {r, r } in the full model, and the mean income level for both models).
Panel (b) shows welfare gains of moving from the full to the basic economy. The solid green line is
for zero initial debt and the dashed black line assumes the initial debt level equals the average in
the simulations.


getting rid of the world interest rate uncertainty? Panel (b) in Figure 7 plots these gains as
a function of the income level. The gains are expressed as the constant proportional change
in consumption that would leave a consumer indifferent between living in the full model or
the basic model where r is constant. We present results for two scenarios. In scenario 1,
initial debt is zero while in scenario 2, the economy starts at the mean level of debt.
   When initial debt is zero (solid green line), the average (across income levels) welfare gain
is 0.21% of permanent consumption. Note that in this case the welfare gains are decreasing
in the income level. For the case with positive initial debt (dashed black line), there are
some interesting non-monotonicities at work. At low income levels, the welfare gains are
particularly low since default is more likely and the value of defaulting (v d (s)) under no
interest rate uncertainty is not dramatically higher than with uncertainty. However, for
intermediate levels of income, the welfare gains are higher because it is precisely in these
states where the basic model implies that the government is able to repay existing debt and
also borrow at cheaper rates than in the full model. The average welfare gain of eliminating
all uncertainty about the world interest rate in this case (with initial debt equal to the mean
level observed in the simulations) is equal to a 0.20% constant increase in consumption.



                                                    27
6    Conclusions

We have introduced time-varying volatility in the world interest rate in a standard sovereign
default model with long term debt. The process for the world interest rate follows the work
of Fern´
       andez-Villaverde et al. (2011) and includes both mean volatility (i.e. shocks to the
level of the interest rate) and stochastic volatility (i.e. shocks to the volatility of the interest
rate). Time variation in the world interest rate interacts with default incentives and its effect
on borrowing and sovereign spreads is state contingent.
    We disentangle these state contingent effects by running panel regressions using both
actual and model-simulated data (recall our model is calibrated to a panel of emerging
economies). We include the level and the volatility of the world interest rate as regressors
along with model relevant covariates (i.e., debt levels, output growth and a measure of risk-
aversion). We find, both in the data and in the model, significant positive relationships
between the level and the volatility of the world interest rate and the level of sovereign
spreads. We also uncover a positive association between the volatility of spreads and the
level and volatility of the world interest rate. Consistent with the data, the model implies
that debt growth is decreasing in both variables.
    In our model, the common process for the world interest rate acts as a global factor with
the potential to generate international comovement in sovereign spreads. We quantify this
by comparing simulations from the basic and full models: independent economies featuring
uncorrelated spreads under the basic model would produce times series for their spreads
that have a positive and significant correlation under the full model (i.e., with a common
stochastic process for the world interest rate). The estimated correlation (0.51) is close to
the cross-country spread correlation found in international data (0.61).
    The welfare gains from eliminating uncertainty about the world interest rate amount
to a 0.21% percent permanent increase in consumption. Put differently, our work helps to
understand the concerns expressed by policy makers in the face of an increase in uncertainty
about the path of the world interest rate.




                                                28
References
Aguiar, Mark and Gita Gopinath, "Defaultable debt, interest rates and the current account,"
 Journal of International Economics, 2006, 69, 64­83.
        ¨
Akinci, Ozge , "Global financial conditions, country spreads and macroeconomic fluctuations in
 emerging countries," Journal of International Economics, 2013, 91 (2), 358­371.

Arellano, Cristina, "Default Risk and Income Fluctuations in Emerging Economies," American
 Economic Review, 2008, 98(3), 690­712.

   and Ananth Ramanarayanan, "Default and the maturity structure in sovereign bonds,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 2012, 120 (2), 187­232.

Arora, Vivek and Martin Cerisola, "How does US monetary policy influence sovereign spreads
 in emerging markets?," IMF Staff papers, 2001, 48 (3), 474­498.

Bai, Yan, Seon Tae Kim, and Gabriel Mihalache, "The payment schedule of sovereign debt,"
 Economics Letters, 2017, 161, 19 ­ 23.

Bianchi, Javier and C´   esar Sosa-Padilla, "Reserve Accumulation, Macroeconomic Stabiliza-
  tion, and Sovereign Risk," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

Bloom, Nicholas, "The impact of uncertainty shocks," Econometrica, 2009, 77 (3), 623­685.

  , "Fluctuations in uncertainty," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2014, 28 (2), 153­76.

Cantor, Richard and Frank Packer, "Determinants and impact of sovereign credit ratings,"
 Economic Policy Review, 1996, 2 (2).

Cat~
   ao, Luis AV and Rui C Mano, "Default premium," Journal of International Economics,
 2017, 107, 91­110.

Chatterjee, Satyajit and Burcu Eyigungor, "Maturity, Indebtedness, and Default Risk,"
 American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (6), 2674­99.

Cruces, Juan Jos´ e, Marcos Buscaglia, and Joaqu´  in Alonso, "The Term Structure of Coun-
  try Risk and Valuation in Emerging Markets," 2002. manuscript, Universidad Nacional de La
  Plata.

D'Erasmo, Pablo, "Government Reputation and Debt Repayment," 2011. Manuscript, Univ. of
  Maryland.

Eaton, Jonathan and Mark Gersovitz, "Debt with potential repudiation: theoretical and
  empirical analysis," Review of Economic Studies, 1981, 48, 289­309.

Edwards, Sebastian, "LDC Foreign Borrowing and Default Risk: An Empirical Investigation,
 1976-80," American Economic Review, 1984, 74 (4), 726­734.

Eichengreen, B. and A. Mody, What Explains the Changing Spreads on Emerging Market
  Debt?, University Of Chicago Press, 2000.



                                               29
Fender, Ingo, Bernd Hayo, and Matthias Neuenkirch, "Daily pricing of emerging market
  sovereign CDS before and during the global financial crisis," Journal of Banking & Finance,
  2012, 36 (10), 2786­2794.

Fern´
    andez-Villaverde, Jes´ us and Juan F Rubio-Ram´       irez, "Macroeconomics and Volatility:
  Data, Models, and Estimation," in "Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Tenth World
  Congress," Vol. 3 Cambridge University Press 2013, p. 137.

  , Pablo Guerr´ on-Quintana, Juan F Rubio-Ram´       irez, and Martin Uribe, "Risk Matters:
  The Real Effects of Volatility Shocks," American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (6), 2530­2561.

Foley-Fisher, Nathan and Bernardo Guimaraes, "US real interest rates and default risk in
  emerging economies," Journal of money, credit and banking, 2013, 45 (5), 967­975.

Garc´
    ia-Cicco, Javier, Roberto Pancrazi, and Mart´     in Uribe, "Real Business Cycles in
 Emerging Countries?," American Economic Review, 2010, 100, 2510­2531.

Gelos, Gaston, Ratna Sahay, and Guido Sandleris, "Sovereign borrowing by developing
 countries: What determines market access?," Journal of International Economics, 2011, 83 (2),
 243­254.

Gonz´
    alez-Rozada, Mart´  in and Eduardo Levy Yeyati, "Global factors and emerging market
 spreads," Economic Journal, 2008, 118, 1917­1936.

Gu, Grace Weishi and Zach Stangebye, "The Pricing of Sovereign Risk under Costly Infor-
 mation," 2017. Unpublished manuscript.

Guimaraes, Bernardo, "Sovereign default: which shocks matter?," Review of Economic Dynam-
 ics, October 2011, 14 (4), 553­576.

Hatchondo, Juan Carlos and Leonardo Martinez, "Long-duration bonds and sovereign de-
 faults," Journal of International Economics, 2009, 79, 117­125.

  , , and C´ esar Sosa-Padilla, "Debt dilution and sovereign default risk," Journal of Political
  Economy, 2016, 124 (5), 1383­1422.

Hilscher, Jens and Yves Nosbusch, "Determinants of sovereign risk: Macroeconomic funda-
  mentals and the pricing of sovereign debt," Review of Finance, 2010, 14 (2), 235­262.

IMF, "The Design and Effectiveness of Collective Action Clauses," 2002.

Justiniano, Alejandro and Giorgio E Primiceri, "The Time-Varying Volatility of Macroeco-
  nomic Fluctuations," The American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (3), 604.

Kaminsky, Graciela Laura and Pablo Vega-Garc´        ia, "Systemic and idiosyncratic sovereign
 debt crises," Journal of the European Economic Association, 2016, 14 (1), 80­114.

Kastner, Gregor, "Dealing with Stochastic Volatility in Time Series Using the R Package
 stochvol," Journal of Statistical Software, Articles, 2016, 69 (5), 1­30.

Kopecky, Karen A and Richard MH Suen, "Finite state Markov-chain approximations to
 highly persistent processes," Review of Economic Dynamics, 2010, 13 (3), 701­714.

                                              30
Lizarazo, Sandra Valentina, "Default risk and risk averse international investors," Journal of
  International Economics, 2013, 89 (2), 317­330.

Longstaff, Francis A, Jun Pan, Lasse H Pedersen, and Kenneth J Singleton, "How
  sovereign is sovereign credit risk?," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2011, 3 (2),
  75­103.

Maltritz, Dominik, "Determinants of sovereign yield spreads in the Eurozone: A Bayesian ap-
 proach," Journal of International Money and Finance, 2012, 31 (3), 657­672. Financial Stress
 in the Eurozone.

Mendoza, Enrique and Vivian Yue, "A General Equilibrium Model of Sovereign Default and
 Business Cycles," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 127, 889­946.

Neumeyer, Pablo. and Fabrizio Perri, "Business cycles in emerging economies: the role of
 interest rates," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2005, 52, 345­380.

Pouzo, Demian and Ignacio Presno, "Sovereign default risk and uncertainty premia," Ameri-
  can Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2016, 8 (3), 230­66.

Rai, Vikram and Lena Suchanek, "The effect of the federal reserve's tapering announcements
 on emerging markets," Bank of Canada Working Paper, 2014.

Reyes-Heroles, Ricardo and Gabriel Tenorio, "Interest Rate Volatility and Sudden Stops:
 An Empirical Investigation," 2017.

Seoane, Hern´  an D, "Time-Varying Volatility, Default, And The Sovereign Risk Premium," In-
  ternational Economic Review, 2019, 60 (1), 283­301.

Sosa-Padilla, C´ esar, "Sovereign Defaults and Banking Crises," Journal of Monetary Economics,
  2018, 99, 88­105.

Tauchen, George, "Finite state markov-chain approximations to univariate and vector autore-
  gressions," Economics letters, 1986, 20 (2), 177­181.

Uribe, Martin and Stephanie Schmitt-Groh´
                                        e, Open economy macroeconomics, Princeton
 University Press, 2017.

Uribe, Mart´in and Vivian Yue, "Country spreads and emerging countries: Who drives whom?,"
 Journal of International Economics, 2006, 69, 6­36.

Vasicek, O., "An equilibrium characterization of the term structure," Journal of financial eco-
  nomics, 1977, 5 (2), 177­188.

Verdelhan, Adrien and Nicola Borri, "Sovereign Risk Premia," Technical Report 2010.

Yue, Vivian, "Sovereign default and debt renegotiation," Journal of International Economics,
 2010, 80, 176­187.




                                              31
                                  Online Appendix

A     Data
A.1    Time and country coverage
For our empirical analysis (calibration targets and regressions) we use annual data from a panel of
66 emerging economies for the period 1990 -- 2017. The list of countries is the following:

        1.    Algeria                 23.   Ethiopia        45.   P. N. Guinea
        2.    Angola                  24.   Fiji            46.   Pakistan
        3.    Argentina               25.   Gabon           47.   Panama
        4.    Azerbaijan              26.   Georgia         48.   Peru
        5.    Barbados                27.   Ghana           49.   Philippines
        6.    Belarus                 28.   Guatemala       50.   Poland
        7.    Belize                  29.   Honduras        51.   Romania
        8.    Brazil                  30.   Hungary         52.   Russian Federation
        9.    Bulgaria                31.   India           53.   Senegal
        10.   Chile                   32.   Indonesia       54.   Slovakia
        11.   China                   33.   Jamaica         55.   South Africa
        12.   Colombia                34.   Jordan          56.   Sri Lanka
        13.   Congo                   35.   Kazakhstan      57.   Tanzania
        14.   Costa Rica              36.   Latvia          58.   Thailand
        15.   Cot^e d'Ivoire          37.   Lebanon         59.   Trinidad and Tobago
        16.   Croatia                 38.   Lithuania       60.   Tunisia
        17.   Czech Rep.              39.   Malaysia        61.   Turkey
        18.   Dominican Republic      40.   Mexico          62.   Ukraine
        19.   Ecuador                 41.   Mongolia        63.   Uruguay
        20.   Egypt                   42.   Morocco         64.   Venezuela
        21.   El Salvador             43.   Mozambique      65.   Vietnam
        22.   Estonia                 44.   Nigeria         66.   Zambia




A.2    World interest rate (r)
We obtain this rate by subtracting expected inflation from the quarterly US T-bill rate. Following
Neumeyer and Perri (2005) and Fern´   andez-Villaverde et al. (2011), we compute expected inflation
as the average of the US CPI inflation in the current quarter and in the 3 preceding quarters. Both
of these time series are obtained from FRED for the period January 1990 - March 2017.
    As explained in the main text, we estimate equations (8) and (9) using the stochvol R package,
which implements an efficient algorithm for Bayesian estimation of stochastic volatility models via
MCMC methods. Our measure for the `volatility of the world interest rate' in the regressions is
exp(r,t ).



                                               A-1
    The process for r is estimated at a quarterly frequency. We obtain annualized time series by
taking the year's mean of both rt and r,t (but all results hold if we use the median, or the last
quarter's value).

A.3       Other variables' definitions
As is common in studies of emerging economies, we exclude crisis years. Whenever possible, we
take the data from the online appendix of Cat~  ao and Mano (2017). We also follow them in terms
of variable definitions for debt, spreads, and crisis years. Here, we provide a brief description of
these variables:27

   1. Gross Domestic Product (GDP): as reported in IMF's International Financial Statistics.
      `GDP growth' is defined as the three-year moving average of the growth rate of GDP.

   2. Debt: we focus on external debt. The source is the World Bank's Global Development
      Finance database.

   3. Spreads: the main source for emerging market spreads is JP Morgan's EMBI spreads. The
      volatility of the country spread is measured as its standard deviation in three-year rolling
      windows.

   4. Risk aversion dummy: is an indicator variable taking a value of 1 if the VIX is above its
      mean in a given year, and taking a value of 0 otherwise. The VIX is the commonly used
      volatility index.

   5. Crisis years: these are defined as years in which a given country experienced a "credit event."
      These events are defined as all the years in between the initial default and full (or near full)
      settlement of arrears as per the Standard and Poor's definition.

A.4       Model-generated data used in the regressions
As mentioned in the main body of the text we use pre-default samples of 104 quarters (26 years).
Here are some details about the time series used in the model regressions:

   1. GDP growth: similarly to the panel data, it is defined as the three-year moving average of
      the growth rate of annual GDP.
                                                                          t
   2. Annualized debt-to-GDP in quarter t: bannualized
                                            t          = bt /             j =t-3 yj .

                                                                   4
                                                           1+i
   3. Annualized spread in quarter t: sannualized
                                       t          =        1+idf
                                                                       - 1, where i is the constant yield-to-
         maturity implicit in the sovereign bond price and idf is the constant yield-to-maturity of a
         default free bond with identical coupon structure.

   4. Risk aversion dummy: an indicator variable that takes a value of 1 if the expected stochastic
      discount factor (SDF) of the international lenders (Et mt,t+1 ) is below its mean, and zero
      otherwise. A low expected SDF correlates with a higher degree of risk aversion.




  27
       See Cat~
              ao and Mano (2017)'s data appendix for further details.


                                                     A-2
B      A different specification for the lender's SDF
As anticipated in section 3.2 of the main body of the text, we also solve the model allowing for
a richer specification of the lenders' stochastic discount factor (SDF). In particular, we allow the
lenders' SDF to be affected by rt , the innovations to GDP (y t ), the variance of innovations to GDP
( 2 ), as well as the variance of the innovations to the world interest rate.

    The conditional variance of the innovations to the world interest rate is given by:

                           V ar(et+1 ut+1 | t ) = (µ~  2
                                                      ) × exp(2r )  t+1
                 t+1 |  ) and  measures the degree of stochastic volatility in the international risk
where µ ~  E (e         t       r
free rate (see section 3.3 in the paper). Therefore, our new SDF is:

                     mt,t+1 = exp - rt+1 + y y          2
                                             t+1 + 0.5y  + r t+1                   ,

where now {y , r } control the degree of risk aversion. Since we now have an additional param-
eter (r ) we recalibrate our model targeting one additional moment (the unconditional default
frequency). The table below shows that the calibration of the model with the `new SDF' produces
almost identical simulated moments.28

                Table A1: Model comparison ­ targeted and non-targeted moments

                                                Data     Benchmark      New SDF
                    Debt/y (in %)                48          48            48
                    Spread (in %)                3.4        3.4           3.4
                    SD (Spread) (in %)           1.5        1.5           1.5
                    Defaults per 100 years       1.7        1.9           1.7
                    sd(c)/sd(y )                 1.2         1.3            1.3
                    corr(c, y )                  0.7         1.0            1.0
                    corr(tb/y, y )               -0.4        -0.6           -0.6
                    corr(Spread, y )             -0.4        -0.7           -0.7

Note: table 3's footnote applies here. The default frequency is computed using all simulation
periods. The benchmark model's calibration does not target the default frequency ().


    In order to illustrate that all our results are robust to using this richer SDF, we expand regression
table 4 to include columns estimated with simulated data from this new model. The table below
shows that almost all the coefficients of interest are still significant and are of similar magnitude
across the models.
  28
    The re-calibration is such that: y = 3.25 and r = 3.0. All other parameters are unchanged. The
default frequency is computed using data for default events from Cat~
                                                                    ao and Mano (2017).




                                                  A-3
                Table A2: Spread regressions: comparison between model specifications

Dep. variable:                                  Spread                                Spread volatility
                                 Data        Benchmark       New SDF         Data       Benchmark       New SDF
rw                              0.26           0.09            0.11         0.10          0.06            0.07
                                (0.05)         (0.02)          (0.02)       (0.02)        (0.01)          (0.01)
rw volatility                    0.79          0.36            0.31         0.35          0.17            0.08
                                 (0.39)        (0.07)          (0.05)       (0.12)        (0.03)          (0.03)
Debt/GDP                        0.02           0.43            0.45          0.01         0.12            0.13
                                (0.01)         (0.02)          (0.02)       (0.003)       (0.01)          (0.01)
GDP growth                     -0.20          -0.10           -0.08          -0.03       -0.06            -0.05
                                (0.04)         (0.01)          (0.01)        (0.02)       (0.01)           (0.01)
Risk aversion dummy             1.07            0.13            0.05        0.39           0.06             0.04
                                (0.19)          (0.07)         (0.07)       (0.08)         (0.04)          (0.04)
No. of countries/samples           66             66             66            66            66             66
Adjusted R2                       0.78           0.96           0.96          0.59          0.68           0.66

Note: All specifications include country/samples fixed effects. rw stands for the world interest rate. Robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses.  p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.




                                                    A-4
C     Comovement of sovereign spreads in the data
As explained in section 5.2 of the main body of the text, we compute the cross country pairwise
correlations in sovereign spread using quarterly data from Longstaff et al. (2011).29 Using quarterly
data for this particular exercise is more appropriate since low frequency data (like annual data)
could mask the true comovement between spreads.
    As can be seen in the figure below, every time the pairwise correlation is significant it is also
positive, as our model predicts. The mean (median) is 0.61 (0.68).




                                                                       SouthAfrica




                                                                                                                                        Philippines
                           Venezuela




                                                                       Argentina




                                                                                                                                                                        Colombia
                                       Malaysia




                                                                                                                                        Thailand
                                                                                              Bulgaria




                                                                                                                                                               Panama
                                                                                                            Ukraine
                                                                                                                      Croatia
                                       Mexico


                                                     Poland




                                                                                              Russia




                                                                                                                                                      Turkey
                                                                                                                                Korea
                   China




                                                                                     Brazil
                                                               Chile




                                                                                                                                                                                   Peru
                                                                                                                                                                                           1
         Hungary   0.65    0.8         0.63   0.74   0.77     0.66     0.71 -0.23 -0.17 0.29         0.6    0.72 -0.09 -0.15 -0.22              0     0.01     0.25       0        0.01


               China       0.69        0.73   0.85   0.8      0.87     0.89 -0.16 0.17        0.63   0.79   0.73      0.27      0.32    0.28   0.36   0.42     0.53     0.35       0.41
                                                                                                                                                                                          0.8
              Venezuela                0.88   0.91   0.91     0.84     0.87   0.23   0.31     0.59   0.79   0.79      0.2       0.21    0.21   0.41   0.48     0.65     0.45       0.47


                      Mexico                  0.93   0.92     0.91     0.89   0.32   0.57     0.77   0.88   0.84      0.31      0.39    0.44   0.67   0.71     0.87     0.71       0.73
                                                                                                                                                                                          0.6
                           Malaysia                  0.96     0.96     0.96   0.07   0.35     0.79   0.94   0.92      0.38      0.44    0.43   0.55   0.62     0.74     0.54       0.6


                                          Poland              0.93     0.93   0.05   0.39     0.75   0.9    0.89      0.36      0.39    0.38   0.46   0.6      0.7      0.55       0.58
                                                                                                                                                                                          0.4
                                                     Chile             0.95   0.09   0.45     0.78   0.91   0.85      0.39      0.46    0.46   0.53   0.69     0.76     0.6        0.66


                                               SouthAfrica                    0.08   0.35     0.8    0.93   0.87      0.42      0.42    0.39   0.53   0.6      0.75     0.57       0.61
                                                                                                                                                                                          0.2
                                                              Argentina              0.66     0.14   0.03 -0.07        0        0.06    0.21   0.52   0.41     0.55     0.59       0.49


                                                                              Brazil          0.54   0.38   0.22      0.37      0.49    0.65   0.66   0.82     0.76     0.89       0.88
                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                 Russia              0.93   0.83      0.79      0.82    0.8    0.79   0.84     0.84     0.78       0.85


                                                                                     Bulgaria               0.95      0.59      0.62    0.59   0.65   0.71     0.79     0.63       0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                          -0.2
                                                                                               Ukraine                0.5       0.49    0.44   0.54   0.55     0.68     0.48       0.55


                                                                                                       Croatia                  0.87    0.8    0.61   0.63     0.51     0.59       0.65
                                                                                                                                                                                          -0.4
                                                                                                                      Korea             0.93   0.69   0.81     0.58     0.64       0.73


                                                                                                                      Thailand                 0.74   0.87     0.65     0.75       0.84
                                                                                                                                                                                          -0.6
                                                                                                                           Philippines                0.79     0.89     0.86       0.86


                                                                                                                                              Turkey           0.86     0.89       0.95
                                                                                                                                                                                          -0.8
                                                                                                                                               Panama                   0.92       0.92


                                                                                                                                                      Colombia                     0.96
                                                                                                                                                                                          -1




Figure A1: Correlation matrix for spreads. Non-white cells denote pairwise correlations that are
statistically significant at the 5% level.


  29
     We take Longstaff et al. (2011)'s monthly data and use quarter-end observations to obtain quarterly
time-series. Results are similar if we use quarter averages.


                                                                                              A-5
D     The `intermediate' model
As pointed out in section 5.3, one could do a further de-composition of the effect of a time-varying
world interest rate. To illustrate this we define the `intermediate model' as the one that features a
time-varying level of the interest rate but with a constant volatility. Essentially, what we do is to
set ur,t = 0 and rewrite the process for the world interest rate as

                                        rt = r + r,t
                                      r,t = r r,t-1 +  ur,t

where  is given by
                                                        1 2
                                                            /(1-2
                                      E [et ] = e¯+ 2           )   ,
and represents the unconditional mean volatility of the world interest rate in the full model. Defining
the intermediate model in this way guarantees that both models, full and intermediate, face the
same mean volatility of r (even when the intermediate model does not have stochastic volatility).

                     Table A3: Model comparison: basic, intermediate and full

                                               Basic     Intermediate     Full
                       Debt/y (in %)            50            49           48
                       Spread (in %)            3.1           3.4         3.4
                       SD (Spread) (in %)       1.3           1.5         1.5
                       sd(c)/sd(y )             1.35          1.33        1.33
                       corr(c, y )              0.98          0.96        0.96
                       corr(tb/y, y )           -0.77        -0.57       -0.56
                       corr(Spread, y )         -0.76        -0.71       -0.70

    The table above presents simulation moments for all three versions of the model: full, inter-
mediate and basic. The main take away from this cross-model comparison of simulation moments
is that mean volatility in the world interest rate (present in both full and intermediate models) is
quantitatively more important than stochastic volatility (present only in the full model), on av-
erage. This is not to say that the time-variation in the volatility of the world interest rate is not
important. On the contrary, our paper shows that the effect of volatility is highly state contingent
(see discussions in sections 5.1 and 5.2). Moreover, this is also evident when comparing the full
model against the intermediate model, as the figure below shows.




                                                 A-6
   6                                                                6


 5.5                                                            5.5


   5                                                                5


 4.5                                                            4.5


   4                                                                4


 3.5                                                            3.5


   3                                                                3


 2.5                                                            2.5


   2                                                                2
       0.46   0.47   0.48   0.49   0.5   0.51   0.52   0.53             0.46   0.47   0.48   0.49   0.5   0.51   0.52   0.53



                      (a) Low r                                                       (b) High r

Figure A2: Spread-debt menus across the three different models. The left panel is for a low level
of r and the right panel is for a high level of r . The solid blue line is for the full model, the
dotted black line is for the intermediate model and the red dashed line is for the basic model. Both
panels are for the mean income level and mean level of r. The solid dots are the median debt levels
observed in the simulation of each model.

    Figure A2 shows the spread-debt menus for the full and intermediate models for two cases: low
and high r (the basic model is also shown, for completeness).30 When r is low the full model
actually features less volatility in r than the intermediate model.31 The left panel shows that in
this case, the spread-debt menu is more favorable in the full model. The right panel shows the
opposite case: then r is high, then the full model faces uniformly worse borrowing terms.




  30
    We zoom into the relevant debt range in order to highlight better the differences across models.
  31
    Recall the intermediate model was constructed so that it features the same unconditional volatility in
r seen in the full model. So, if the full model is in a low r state it effectively becomes a mean-preserving
contraction of the intermediate model, and naturally features less uncertainty (in that period).


                                                              A-7
E     Robustness to using finer grids
We solve our model numerically using value function iteration on a discrete grid. We use Tauchen
(1986)'s method to discretize the income shock and Rouwenhorst's method to discretize the interest
rate level shock and the interest rate volatility shock (as suggested by Kopecky and Suen, 2010).32
Our benchmark calibration is done on a state space of the following dimension: N b = 300, N y = 50,
and N r = N rvol = 7.
    In this section of the appendix we show that the average behavior of our model is robust to using
finer grids. To do so we increase each dimension of the state space by 50%, one at a time. Lastly,
we increase all grid sizes by 50% at the same time. Throughout this exercise we keep parameter
values unchanged. As table A4 shows, our results are very robust to increasing grid sizes.

                                   Table A4: Robustness to finer grids

                 Case                       Benchmark          1        2         3       4
                 Nb                            300            450      300      300      450
                 Ny                             50            50       75        50       75
                 N r = N rvol                    7             7        7        11       11
                 Debt/y (in %)                    48          48       48       48       48
                 Spread (in %)                    3.4         3.5      3.5      3.5      3.5
                 SD (Spread) (in %)               1.5         1.5      1.5      1.5      1.4
                 sd(c)/sd(y )                    1.3           1.3   1.3   1.3   1.3
                 corr(c, y )                     0.96         0.96 0.96 0.96 0.96
                 corr(tb/y, y )                 -0.56         -0.58 -0.58 -0.57 -0.58
                 corr(Spread, y )               -0.70         -0.71 -0.72 -0.71 -0.72

    Finally, we show that the main regressions results are also robust: these results are presented
in table A5. As can be see from this table, our main regression results are very similar across cases.
The only noticeable changes are that the coefficient on r is slightly larger as we increase grid sizes
and the coefficient of r volatility is slightly smaller, but both remain significant at the 1% level
throughout all cases.
  32
     In their numerical examples, Kopecky and Suen (2010) show that a 5-point grid (their benchmark value)
provides a good approximation to persistent AR (1) process using Rouwenhorst's method. Our simulations
never use less than 7 points for the interest rate process, and never less than 50 points for the income process.




                                                        A-8
                        Table A5: Spread regressions: robustness to finer grids

       Panel A ­ Dependent variable: Spread
                                  Benchmark         Case 1       Case 2        Case 3       Case 4
      rw                            0.09           0.13          0.12         0.13          0.12
                                    (0.02)         (0.02)        (0.02)       (0.02)        (0.02)
      rw volatility                 0.36           0.33          0.30         0.28          0.29
                                    (0.07)         (0.06)        (0.05)       (0.05)        (0.07)
      Debt/GDP                      0.43           0.49          0.47         0.47          0.47
                                    (0.02)         (0.03)        (0.03)       (0.03)        (0.03)
      GDP growth                   -0.10          -0.09         -0.10        -0.08         -0.11
                                    (0.01)         (0.01)        (0.02)       (0.02)        (0.02)
      Risk aversion dummy            0.13           0.14          0.10         0.12          0.07
                                     (0.07)         (0.07)       (0.06)        (0.07)       (0.07)

       Panel B ­ Dependent variable: Spread volatility
      rw                            0.06           0.08          0.07         0.09          0.08
                                    (0.01)         (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)
      rw volatility                 0.17           0.11          0.10         0.09          0.11
                                    (0.03)         (0.03)        (0.03)       (0.03)        (0.04)
      Debt/GDP                      0.12           0.15          0.14         0.14          0.14
                                    (0.01)         (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)
      GDP growth                   -0.06          -0.05         -0.05        -0.05         -0.06
                                    (0.01)         (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)
      Risk aversion dummy            0.06           0.09         0.09           0.03         0.05
                                     (0.04)         (0.04)       (0.04)        (0.04)       (0.04)

Note: All specifications include country/samples fixed effects. rw stands for the world interest rate. Robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses.  p<0.1;  p<0.05;  p<0.01.




                                                    A-9
