                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       MOLECULAR GENETICS, RISK AVERSION, RETURN PERCEPTIONS, AND
                     STOCK MARKET PARTICIPATION

                                          Richard Sias
                                          Laura Starks
                                         Harry J. Turtle

                                      Working Paper 27638
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27638


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020




We thank seminar participants at the 2019 Wharton Rodney White Conference on Financial
Decisions and Asset Markets, the 2019 Western Finance Association Meetings, the 2019 Miami
Behavioral Finance Conference, the 2019 Colorado Front Range Seminar, the 2019 Northern
Finance Association Meetings, the 2019 Asian Bureau of Finance and Economic Research
Meetings, CUNY, Filene, and especially Henrik Cronqvist, Stephen Dimmock, Joseph
Engelberg, Diego Garcia, Campbell Harvey, Jonathan Hartley, David Ikenberry, Ron Masulis,
Elena Pikulina, and Stephen Siegel for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Richard Sias, Laura Starks, and Harry J. Turtle. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Molecular Genetics, Risk Aversion, Return Perceptions, and Stock Market Participation
Richard Sias, Laura Starks, and Harry J. Turtle
NBER Working Paper No. 27638
August 2020
JEL No. D87,G11,G41,G51

                                         ABSTRACT

We show that molecular variation in DNA related to cognition, personality, health, and body
shape, predicts an individual's equity market participation and risk aversion. Moreover, the
molecular genetic endowments predict individuals' return perceptions, most of which we find to
be strikingly biased. The genetic endowments also strongly associate with many of the investor
characteristics (e.g., trust, sociability, wealth) shown to explain heterogeneity in equity market
participation. Our analysis helps elucidate why financial choices are heritable and how genetic
endowments can help explain the links between financial choices, risk aversion, beliefs, and other
variables known to explain stock market participation.


Richard Sias                                    Harry J. Turtle
McClelland Hall 315Q                            Department of Finance and Real Estate
1130 E Helen St                                 College of Business
Tucson, AZ 85721                                Colorado State University
sias@email.arizona.edu                          Fort Collins, CO 80523
                                                USA
Laura Starks                                    harry.turtle@colostate.edu
McCombs School of Business
University of Texas at Austin
2110 Speedway
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
laura.starks@mccombs.utexas.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27638
          MOLECULAR GENETICS, RISK AVERSION, RETURN PERCEPTIONS,

                            AND STOCK MARKET PARTICIPATION

                      "Oh there ain't no other way, Baby I was born this way"

                                                               -Lady Gaga



                                            I. INTRODUCTION

    An often-cited puzzle in financial markets derives from the fact that individuals' investment

choices vary from the predictions of traditional utility maximizing theory. This theory prescribes

that investors should hold at least some portion of their wealth in equity markets (e.g., Merton,

1969, 1971) and in fact, for most investors, almost all savings should be invested in equity (e.g.,

Heaton and Lucas, 1997). Moreover, the extensive heterogeneity across these choices has been

linked to biological attributes (e.g., neurochemical activity), personality (e.g., trust), demographics

(e.g., education), and physical (e.g., health) characteristics (Harlow and Brown 1990; Guiso,

Sapienza, and Zingales 2008; Cole, Paulson, and Shastry 2014; Rosen and Wu 2004). A separate

vein of research demonstrates the important role of genetic influences by estimating through "twin

studies" how much of the heterogeneity in financial decisions for the Swedish population is

heritable (e.g., Barnea, Cronqvist, and Siegel 2010; Cesarini, et al. 2010). However, little work

exists to unify these findings and their implications.

    Recent advances in molecular genetics allow us to use DNA variation across individuals to

provide novel insights into how and why an individual's genome influences their financial choices

and how these influences are related to previous research. 1 Thus, because we can now identify

specific DNA variations associated with many observable characteristics or traits, we provide

unification and linkages between two disparate literatures explaining individuals' financial

decisions: heterogeneity in investor characteristics and heritability. Using a large panel data set

from the Health and Retirement Study that includes financial, psychosocial, demographic, and

1
 These advances include low cost genotyping and the development of consortium-based large scale Genome Wide
Association Studies (GWAS).
genetic data for 5,130 individuals across time, we examine the role of specific genetic endowments

in financial decisions. We focus on eight genetic endowments related to cognition (Educational

Attainment and General Cognition), personality (Neuroticism and Depressive Symptoms), health

(Myocardial Infarctions and Coronary Artery Disease) and body type (Height and BMI) and

examine how these endowments help shape observed heterogeneity in financial decisions. 2

    Because the genome is determined at conception, and our sample consists of individuals aged

50 to 80, genetic endowments are established long before observation of an individual's stock

market participation. Thus, we begin by hypothesizing relationships between individuals' genetic

endowments and their equity market participation and test whether these endowments can predict

heterogeneity in equity market participation more than half a century later. Consistent with our

hypotheses, individuals with higher genetic endowments associated with Educational Attainment,

General Cognition, and Height are more likely to invest in equity markets (and in addition invest

a larger fraction of their wealth in risky assets) while individuals with higher genetic scores

associated with Neuroticism, Depressive Symptoms, Myocardial Infarction, Coronary Artery

Disease, and BMI exhibit lower equity market participation. Moreover, the effect sizes are

substantial--a one standard deviation higher genetic endowment for Neuroticism predicts a 3.7%

lower probability of holding any equity.

    The balance of our study focuses on understanding how and why these eight genetic

endowments predict equity market participation, and on how the heritability literature links to the

investor characteristics literature. We first examine whether the genetic endowments predict

heterogeneity in risk aversion and return beliefs--the factors driving heterogeneity in equity

exposure within the traditional utility maximizing framework. The evidence supports the

hypothesis that the genetic endowments predict stock market participation, at least in part, because

they predict heterogeneity in individuals' risk aversion and return beliefs. For example, a higher


2
 Because we examine both genotypes (information from the genome) and phenotypes (observed traits), we capitalize
genotype variables to reduce confusion, e.g., "Height" refers to the genetic endowment associated with height, often
measured by a polygenic score (PGS), while "height" refers to an individual's observed height.

                                                         2
genetic endowment for Neuroticism predicts both greater risk aversion and more bearish beliefs

regarding equity returns.

   However, we also establish that the genetic endowments' ability to explain equity market

participation does not derive solely through their ability to predict risk aversion and return beliefs.

After accounting for these two channels, we find that most of the eight genetic endowments

continue to predict equity market participation choices on their own. For example, after controlling

for risk aversion and beliefs, a person with a one standard deviation larger genetic endowment for

Neuroticism is still 2.8% less likely to hold any equity (as compared to 3.7% before controlling

for risk aversion and beliefs). We propose that the genetic endowments continue to predict stock

market participation after accounting for heterogeneity in risk aversion and beliefs across

individuals because these biological metrics measure heterogeneity in risk aversion or beliefs

beyond what is captured by an individual's self-reported values, and because they predict

heterogeneity in circumstances (unrelated to risk aversion or beliefs) that impact stock market

participation. For example, the genetic endowment for Cognition could predict the individual's

current financial position and consequently their participation costs.

   We next focus on the role of genetic endowments in linking the existing heritability literature

with the existing literature tying investor characteristics to stock market participation. Examining

this linkage allows us to help explain individuals' stock market participation choice through not

only showing how the heritability literature connects to the investor characteristic literature but

also showing the channels through which these genetic endowments predict stock market

participation. Specifically, we take 11 previously identified investor characteristics--wealth,

income, education, cognition, trust, sociability, optimism, growing up poor, height, BMI, and

health--that help explain heterogeneity in stock market participation and examine their links to

the eight genetic endowments. These characteristics are nearly uniformly hypothesized to impact

heterogeneity in equity market participation via influencing heterogeneity in risk aversion, beliefs,

or factors outside of classical models (i.e., heterogeneity in circumstances). For instance,

Malmendier and Nagel (2011) hypothesize that an individual's life experience (e.g., experiencing
                                                  3
an economic event such as a depression) impacts an individual's risk aversion and return beliefs

and, as a result, the individual's equity market participation.

   After documenting that the 11 investor characteristics explain stock market participation in the

directions expected from prior work, we examine the relation between the investor characteristics

and heterogeneity in risk aversion and return beliefs to understand the channels linking these

variables to equity market participation. Because previous work tends to focus on risk aversion (as

data regarding heterogeneity in beliefs has been scarce), our tests provide evidence, often for the

first time, that most of these 11 explanatory variables are meaningfully associated with

heterogeneity in both risk aversion and beliefs.

   In a first step toward linking the heritability literature (i.e., twin studies) with the investor

characteristics literature, we test whether the genetic endowments predict the investor

characteristics that, in turn, help explain heterogeneity in the economic outcomes (equity market

participation, risk aversion, and beliefs). Some of the links are obvious and direct--variation in a

genetic predisposition for Height should predict variation in height, and taller individuals have

been found to be more likely to participate in equity markets (Addoum, Korniotis, and Kumar,

2017). Even in less direct cases, however, intuition and previous work suggests genetic

endowments should play a significant role in driving heterogeneity in these characteristics, e.g.,

higher neuroticism is associated with lower trust (Evans and Revelle, 2008) and lower trust is

associated with lower equity market participation (Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales, 2008).

Consistent with the explanation that the molecular genetic endowments associated with cognition,

personality, health, and body shape help determine these characteristics, each of the 11 investor

characteristic variables is meaningfully related to at least three of the eight genetic endowments

and the average characteristic is meaningfully related to 5.7 of the eight genetic scores. Moreover,

the results are intuitive and consistent with phenotypic evidence--for example, an individual's

self-rated health assessment is positively predicted by the two genetic endowments associated with

cognition, but negatively predicted by five of the genetic endowments associated with personality,

health, and body shape.
                                                   4
   We investigate the specific channels through which each of the eight genetic endowments

predicts the economic outcomes with a straightforward approach--we perform a sensitivity

analysis of whether the predictability of a genetic endowment is subsumed by the inclusion of an

investor characteristic. For example, we find that the genetic endowment for Height no longer

predicts stock market participation once accounting for an individual's realized height, suggesting

that the genetic endowment for Height predicts stock market participation because it predicts actual

height and taller individuals are more likely to hold equities. For five of the eight genetic

endowments, however, none of the 11 characteristics fully subsumes the genetic endowments'

predictive ability, reflecting an independent effect, which could result from the failure of the

observed investor characteristics to completely capture the important respondent phenotypes

resulting from the particular genetic endowment. For instance, the genetic endowment for

Neuroticism continues to predict less stock market participation after accounting for sociability.

These tests not only help explain the channels linking genetic endowments to economic outcomes,

but they also provide a direct linkage between the investor characteristics literature and the

heritability literature. The fact that some portion of the ability of these eight genetic endowments

to predict economic outcomes remains unexplained suggests additional, as yet unidentified,

phenotypes or combinations of phenotypes link individuals' genetic endowments to their stock

market participation, risk aversion, and return beliefs.

   Our final set of tests estimate the relative magnitude of these eight genetic endowments in

linking stock market participation to risk aversion and beliefs as well as the 11 investor

characteristics we examine. It is important to understand how these tests differ from twin studies

as each approach (twin studies and molecular genetics) has advantages and limitations. The goal

of a twin study is to estimate phenotypic "heritability" (i.e., the percentage of the phenotype that

is due to nature versus nurture). For example, twin study estimates suggest that unknown genetic

endowments account for 20% of variation in risk preferences in Sweden (Cesarini, et al., 2009).

However, twin studies cannot estimate the "genetic portion" of a subject's phenotype or provide

evidence regarding why a phenotype is heritable. In contrast, molecular genetics is (arguably)
                                                  5
poorly suited to estimate phenotypic heritability (due to the "missing heritability" issue discussed

in the next section). Yet, because molecular genetic endowments are established for each

individual in our sample, we can estimate links between phenotypes and specific genetic

endowments. As a result, molecular genetics allows one to examine both how, and how much of,

the relation between phenotypes may be attributed to specific genetic endowments. Thus, for

example, we can establish the role of these eight genetic endowments in linking risk aversion to

stock market participation. In short, molecular genetics provide a connection between specific

genetic underpinnings and financial behavior, in contrast with the latent variable approaches

available in twin studies.

    Consistent with financial economic theory, we show that equity market participation is

positively related to risk tolerance and more bullish beliefs. We partition risk aversion and return

beliefs into the portion predicted by the eight genetic endowments and the portion explained by

everything else (i.e., the residual) to examine the importance of the eight genetic endowments in

linking risk aversion and beliefs to equity market participation. Our estimates suggest that the eight

genetic endowments associated with cognition, personality, health, and body shape can explain

about a third of the relation between a person's risk aversion and return beliefs and their equity

market participation.

    We similarly estimate the role of the genetic endowments in linking the investor characteristics

to the economic outcomes. Specifically, we estimate the relation between each of the economic

outcomes and the portion of the characteristic (e.g., trust) predicted by the individuals' eight

genetic endowments versus the portion explained by everything else. We find that a substantial

amount of the relation between economic outcomes and investor characteristics can be attributed

to the portion of the characteristic predicted by this set of genetic endowments. For instance, the

portion of trust predicted by the eight genetic scores accounts for 43% of the R2 in a regression of

stock market participation on the variation in trust predicted by the eight genetic endowments and

the variation in trust attributed to everything else.


                                                   6
    Our results have a number of implications. First, our tests help explain how and why stock

market participation, risk aversion, and return beliefs have heritable components--all of these

economic outcomes are related meaningfully to genetic endowments associated with cognition,

personality, health, and body shape. Further, the genetic endowments link the heritability literature

with the investor characteristics literature as all of the investor characteristic variables previously

shown to explain stock market participation are predicted by the genetic endowments. Thus, stock

market participation heritability arises, at least in part, because the genetic endowments influence

the realized characteristics and the characteristics help explain variation in risk aversion, equity

market beliefs, and stock market participation. For example, a higher genetic endowment for

Neuroticism predicts lower levels of trust and lower levels of trust are associated with greater risk

aversion, more bearish beliefs, and lower stock market participation--all of which will therefore

exhibit heritability (as will trust).

    Our work also provides the first evidence that heterogeneity in beliefs regarding the

distribution of equity returns is related to many of the investor characteristics known to explain

stock market participation and has a genetic component. 3 Importantly, we consider not only an

individual's expectation that the market will increase over the next year (which reveals little about

one's beliefs regarding the shape of the distribution of expected returns), but also beliefs regarding

the likelihood of a market crash (<-20% return) and a market boom (>20% return). On average,

expectations regarding the distribution of expected equity returns are remarkably biased and these

biases are related to genetic endowments. Further, these equity market return perceptions help

explain why both genetic endowments and investor characteristics are related to market

participation.

    Our results also add to the understanding of genetics and individuals' financial decisions by

using a different approach as well as a different sample from previous work in this area. (We

compare our work to related work linking financial decisions and genetics in the next section.)
3
 In an important paper investigating wealth inequality, Barth, Papageorge, and Thom (2018) provide evidence that a
genetic endowment for Educational Attainment is associated with financial sophistication (including return beliefs),
and ultimately, retirement wealth. We discuss this paper in the next section.

                                                         7
These differences are important because a trait's heritability is not a biological constant--rather it

varies from one population to another and over time. 4

    Finally, our work adds to our understanding of non-economic (behavioral economic)

motivations. Cesarani, Johannesson, Magnusson, and Wallace (2012) point out that evidence of a

genetic component associated with economic outcomes helps overcome the criticism that

behavioral economics often lacks theory to explain heterogeneity across individuals. Related, our

results can help explain why individuals respond differently to the same stimuli. For instance,

consistent with previous work, we find growing up poor is inversely related to stock market

participation. Nonetheless, a higher genetic endowment for Neuroticism still predicts stock market

participation once controlling for growing up poor. Moreover, by investigating specific genetic

endowments, we provide potential guidance/support for theory. For instance, our results tying

genetic endowments associated with Neuroticism and Depressive Symptoms to risk aversion,

return beliefs, and market participation, provide support for Caplin and Leahy's (2001) model that

adds anxiety to the utility function. Economic choices, health, and genetics may also be related.

For instance, the link between genetic scores (e.g., associated with Neuroticism and Depressive

Symptoms), risk aversion, and equity return distribution beliefs is consistent with at least a

partially genetic explanation for the link between reductions in stock values and increases in

hospital admissions for anxiety and panic disorders (Engelberg and Parsons, 2016). From a

Darwinian perspective, our results provide empirical support for the notion that biological

heterogeneity in decision making, although suboptimal for a given agent, may improve the

likelihood of survival for a species (e.g., Brennan and Lo, 2011, 2012; Brennan, Lo, and Zhang,

2018). Long before financial markets developed, it may have been optimal for species success to

have portions of the population with innate high risk aversion and dour (bearish) outlooks and to

have portions of the population with innate low risk aversion and overly optimistic outlooks.


4
 As pointed out by Campbell (2006), this may be especially important in contrast with a relatively homogenous culture
such as Sweden where all households were exposed to a national financial education campaign in the late 1990s as
part of the Swedish pension system reformation.

                                                         8
                                                  II. BACKGROUND

    Understanding the factors underlying individuals' financial decisions have long been sought,

with focuses on both individual characteristics and biological explanations. In an early study

investigating biology and risk preferences, Harlow and Brown (1990) establish a relation between

risk tolerance and participants' blood enzymes. Further analyses of the role of biology in an

individual's financial decisions arise in twin studies and molecular genetics research. In this

section we provide brief overviews of the previous stock market participation and closely related

research, along with specific focus on the literature based on twin studies and molecular genetics.



II.A. Equity Market Participation, Risk Aversion, and Expected Return Distribution Perceptions

    Traditional economic theory holds that if investors are rational, utility is solely a function of

wealth, and risk aversion determines the shape of the utility function, an individual's investment

decisions are (Brennan and Lo, 2011), "... completely determined by utility functions, budget

constraints, and the probability laws governing the environment." Moreover, given the historical

distribution of equity returns, traditional economic theory finds that most individuals should hold

nearly 100% of their savings in equity (e.g., Heaton and Lucas, 1997). In contrast to the theoretical

predictions, however, equity participation rates in the U.S. over the last four decades have averaged

31% when excluding IRAs, and 43% when including IRAs (Giannetti and Wang, 2016). Rates

tend to be even lower for most European countries (e.g., Georgarakos and Pasini, 2011). The

variation in equity market participation is usually attributed to heterogeneity in risk preferences,

heterogeneity in the beliefs regarding the distribution of expected equity returns, or heterogeneity

in circumstances such as trading frictions or uninsurable background risk. 5


5
 Because traditional theory suggests investors use the same model of expected returns and incorporate all available
historical information when forming expectations (e.g., see discussions in Vissing-Jorgensen, 2002; Malmendier and
Nagel, 2011), investors, theoretically, have identical expectations. Previous empirical work suggests, however, that a
number of factors may contribution to heterogeneity in beliefs including for example, life experience (see Benartzi,
2001; Kaustia and Knupfer, 2008; Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick, 2009; Malmendier, Tate, and Yan, 2011;
Malmendier and Nagel, 2011, 2016; Cameron and Shah, 2015; Bharath and Cho, 2016; Giannetti and Wang, 2016;
Knupfer, Rantapuska, and Sarvimaki, 2017; Bernile, Bhagwat, and Rau, 2017; and Anagol, Balasubramaniam, and
Ramadorai, 2018; Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer, 2020).

                                                          9
    This equity non-participation (or under-participation) puzzle has led to a large literature

examining investor characteristics that explain heterogeneity in equity market participation.

Consistent with individuals facing a fixed cost associated with investing in equities (e.g., Vissing-

Jorgensen, 2002), stock market participation is positively related to wealth and income. Grinblatt,

Keloharju, and Linnainmaa (2011) suggest, however, that fixed costs can only explain a small

portion of the observed levels of non-participation. Advances in the past two decades demonstrate

that equity market participation is associated with a number of additional characteristics including,

for example, education, cognitive ability, trust, sociability, optimism, negative early life economic

experiences, body shape, health, race, political preferences, political activism, knowing your

neighbors, credit score, and ambiguity aversion. 6

    Empirical evidence also suggests investors engage in a number of presumably irrational

behaviors (e.g., loss aversion). As noted in the introduction, however, theoretical models posit that

innate biological differences may help explain behavioral heterogeneity--including behaviors that

are irrational for the individual but optimal for species survival. For example, the objectively

irrational choice to invest no wealth in equities, may seem rational to the person whose, at least

partially innate, neuroticism causes them to believe equity investments are both extremely risky

and have a negative risk premium.



II.B. Genetics and Individuals' Financial Decisions ­ Twin Studies

    In the last 50 years, at least 2,700 twin studies infer the role of genetics in more than 17,800

traits by comparing phenotype differences between monozygotic ("identical") twins who have,

essentially, identical DNA, and dizygotic ("fraternal") twins who, the same as any other siblings,



6
  As noted above, the equity market participation literature is very large (Google Scholar reports more than 8,000
results for "stock market participation"). We examine the most prominent variables for which we can obtain data. For
evidence regarding other important characteristics--race, political preferences, political activism, knowing your
neighbors, credit score, and ambiguity aversion--see, respectively, Vissing-Jorgensen (2002), Kaustia and Torstila
(2011), Bonaparte and Kumar (2013), Brown, Ivkovic, Smith, and Weisbenner (2008), Bricker and Li (2017), and
Dimmock, Kouwenberg, Mitchell, and Peijnenburg (2016).

                                                        10
share approximately 50% of the DNA that varies across humans. 7 Although requiring "some

strong assumptions" (Benjamin et al., 2012), most twin studies use an established methodology to

partition a phenotype's variance into three latent components--genetic, shared environment, and

a residual (the non-shared environment component). 8 The genetic component estimate is denoted

as the phenotype's "heritability."

    In recent years, a series of studies employ Swedish Twins Registry data to estimate heritability

for various financial phenotypes. Estimates of heritability from these studies include

approximately 20% of risk preferences, 16-34% of overconfidence, 25% of portfolio risk choices,

33% of the variation across savings rates, and 33% of the variation in equity market participation. 9

    Although twin study results are usually presented as "nature versus nurture," the impact of

genetic endowments do not remain constant because they interact with environmental effects

(Dick, 2011). Therefore, heritability (usually reported as a point estimate) varies across

populations and time due to these interactions. Guo (2005) points out, for example, that twins study

estimates of cognitive development heritability in a society that provides equal access to education

will differ greatly from the estimate of cognitive development heritability in a society where only

the wealthy have access to education.

    In summary, these important heritability studies estimate the proportion of an economic

outcome that can be attributed to genetics for the Swedish population. We have a different goal as


7
  See Polderman et al. (2015) for a review of twin studies. Most DNA (>99%) is identical across all humans. Thus, of
the DNA that is not identical across humans, dizygotic twin siblings share approximately 50% (known as
concordance).
8
  There is debate regarding the validity of heritability estimates computed from twin studies. Specifically, twin studies
require an "equal environment" assumption and no assortative mating (e.g., individuals with high cognitive skills are
not more likely to mate with other high cognitive skill individuals). In addition, the standard twins study methodology
is typically built on the assumptions that gene effects are linear, there are no gene-gene interactions, and there are no
gene-environment interactions (see Benjamin et al. (2012) and Zuk, Hechter, Sunyaev, and Lander (2012) for
additional discussion). See Kamin and Goldberger (2002), and Joseph (2013) for detailed critiques of twin study
inferences in the social and behavioral sciences.
9
  See Cesarini, Dawes, Johannesson, Lichtenstein, and Wallace (2009), Cesarini, Johannesson, Lichtenstein, and
Wallace (2009), Cesarini, Johannesson, Lichtenstein, Sandewall, and Wallace (2010), Barnea, Cronqvist, and Siegel
(2010), Cesarini, Johannesson, Magnusson, and Wallace (2012), Cronqvist and Siegel (2014), Calvet and Sodini
(2014), and Cronqvist and Siegel (2015). Twin studies, including studies using Norwegian twins, have also examined
other economic outcomes from parental and environmental factors (captured by birth weight) versus inherited
attributes, e.g., Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2007).

                                                           11
discussed in the introduction, which is to use molecular genetics to investigate how and why

genetics influence financial choices. An analogy is moving from understanding that heterogeneity

in life experiences can influence stock market participation (i.e., the variation in participation not

due to genetics) to understanding how and why life experience influences stock market

participation (e.g., living through a depression is associated with greater risk aversion).



II.C. Molecular Genetics

     The human genome--the genetic information needed to build and maintain a human--is

contained in 23 pairs of chromosomes (46 total, 23 from each parent) within the nucleus of each

human cell. 10 Each chromosome is a tightly packed DNA molecule of the familiar double helix

shape. Genes are particular regions of DNA (humans have an estimated 20,000 genes) that "code"

(i.e., contain the information needed to make) proteins. 11,12 In fact, most DNA (>98%) is so-called

noncoding DNA. The "rungs" of the DNA "ladder" consist of pairs of four nitrogenous bases--

adenine, thymine, cytosine, and guanine, typically referred to as A, T, C, and G, where A always

pairs with T, and C always pairs with G. Focusing on one side of the DNA "ladder," a single

nitrogenous base (combined with the "rail" of the ladder) is denoted a nucleotide. Genome

sequencing is the process of ordering these nucleotides in the genome (e.g., ATTGAC). Although

the human genome contains approximately 3.2 billion base pairs, only about 0.6% vary across

individuals and account for the genetic differences across individual humans. 13

10
   Except red blood cells (that do not have a nucleus) and germline (sperm and egg) cells that contain 23 chromosomes.
11
   For simplicity we refer to genes as the coding regions of DNA (the "classic definition"). Advances in genomic
research, however, reveal that genes include non-coding portions as well (e.g., introns). As a result, there is a lack of
consensus on the exact definition of a gene. An alternative, for example, is (see Keller and Harel, 2007), "A gene is a
locatable region of genomic sequence, corresponding to a unit of inheritance, which is associated with regulatory
regions, transcribed regions and/or other functional sequence regions."
12
   Phenotypes are also influenced by environment within the body that can, in turn, be impacted by the environment
outside the body. Specifically, epigenetics examines "gene expression," i.e., which genes are activated and to what
extent. In a simple analogy, DNA is hardware and epigenetics is software. Epigenetics are impacted by many factors
including nutrition, sleep, aging, and exercise. Evidence suggests epigenetic impacts can be heritable. In a landmark
study, for example, Katti, Bygren, and Edvinsson (2002) found that when grandfathers had excess food supply during
their "slow growth period" (typically ages 9-12) just prior to puberty, grandsons suffered from increased death from
heart disease and diabetes.
13
   The human genome can have other differences including insertions (extra nucleotide base pairs), deletions (missing
nucleotide base pairs), copy number variants (parts of the genome include repeating patterns that can vary in the

                                                           12
    The places where genetic sequencing differs across two individuals are known as single

nucleotide variation (SNV). For instance, at a specific location within the genome (known as a

locus or, plural loci), an A may be replaced with a C. When at least 1% of the population exhibits

a pattern, the location is denoted a Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP, pronounced "snip").

SNPs occur, on average, about once every 300 nucleotides yielding approximately 10 million

SNPs in the human genome. The more common variation is denoted the major allele (e.g., adenine,

A) while the less common variation is the minor allele. Because individuals have two of each

chromosome (one from each parent), an individual can have 0, 1, or 2 minor alleles.

    Although early molecular genetics research focused on candidate gene studies, the vast

majority of current molecular genetics research focuses on Genome-Wide Association Studies

(GWAS). 14,15 Despite being a relatively new approach (the first GWAS was published in 2005

(Klein et al., 2005)), it has proven highly successful: a recent review of the method in the American

Journal of Human Genetics, concludes that "...the empirical results [associated with GWASs]

have been robust and overwhelming..." (Visscher et al., 2017). Broadly, a GWAS takes an

atheoretical approach and examines the relation between the phenotype and (approximately) the

entire variation in the genome. This approach recognizes that most characteristics are associated

with many loci that individually have small effects on the phenotype. That is, in most cases,

number of repeats), and aneuploidy (extra or missing chromosomes). These variants are also associated with
phenotypes, e.g., Down syndrome, a type of aneuploidy, results from three (rather than the usual two) copies of
chromosome 21.
14
   Early molecular genetics work employed the candidate gene approach in which a researcher proposes a theoretical
argument as to why specific SNPs will be related to a phenotype and then examines the relation between the phenotype
(such as height) and a small set of SNPs. Unfortunately, the candidate gene approach is largely viewed as a failure as
such studies suffer from an extremely high rate of false positives. One of the major limitations of candidate gene
studies in social sciences is that although some rare diseases (such as sickle cell anemia) are associated with a single
locus (known as a Mendelian trait), nearly all traits of interest to social scientists (e.g., neuroticism) and most medical
conditions (e.g., most heart diseases) are complex and associated with many SNPs across many genes (as well as
environmental factors and interactions between the two). Benjamin et al. (2012) provide an excellent summary of the
pitfalls associated with the candidate gene approach. The authors reference a study by Obeidat et al. (2011), for
example, that was only able to replicate results from one of 104 published candidate gene studies based on an
independent sample.
15
   Most GWAS are consortium-based partnerships of multiple universities and research organizations that allow
sharing of analysis for meta-analysis across samples (with pre-defined protocols) without sharing protected genotype
or clinical information (see Bush and Moore (2012) for additional detail). Our discussion of meta-analysis consortium
GWAS is necessarily brief and incomplete. For fuller descriptions see Visscher et al. (2017) and Evangelou and
Ioannidis (2013).

                                                            13
outcomes are related to hundreds or thousands of SNPs. For instance, although height is highly

heritable, there is no "height gene"--rather the GWAS used for height identifies 697 statistically

significant SNPs across the genome. 16

    As a specific example of a GWAS, the Social Science Genetic Association Consortium (see

Okbay et al., 2016) investigated 9.3 million SNPs on a discovery sample of 293,723 individuals

and a replication sample of 111,349 individuals to examine the relation between the genome and

educational attainment. Because the number of potential independent variables, 9.3 million, is

much greater than the number of observations, researchers cannot estimate a multiple regression.

As a result, a GWAS begins by regressing the phenotype on each individual SNP (and controls)

and then weights the SNPs by effect size to form a single quantitative measure of the relation

between the genome and a phenotype--this measure is known as a Polygenic Score (PGS, also

known as polygenic risk score, genetic risk score, or genome-wide score) associated with the

phenotype.

    Although GWAS-based molecular genetics has become the focus of modern genetics research,

interestingly, molecular genetics can only account for a fraction of heritability estimated via twin

studies. Work suggests that this "missing heritability" arises from failing to adequately capture the

information contained in the genome (e.g., Girirajan, 2017) and/or mismeasuring heritability in

twin studies (see, e.g., Vineis and Pearce, 2011). Regardless, the missing heritability question is

endemic to genetics research when comparing results from twin and molecular genetics studies.

    In an important study that touches on molecular genetics and stock market participation, Barth,

Papageorge, and Thom (2018) examine the relation between an Educational Attainment PGS and

wealth inequality for participants in the 2006 and 2008 waves of the Health Retirement Study

(HRS). 17 Although the focus of their study is understanding the relation between an Educational

16
   Because the number of examined SNPs is so large, to correct for the false positive problem, the statistical
significance, or p-value, for a SNP is typically adjusted using a Bonferroni approach that requires rejection at the
critical value associated with p<5x10-8. That is, the height GWAS identifies 697 SNPs with p-values less than
0.00000005. Quick interpretations of GWAS studies usually occur with a Manhattan plot where the vertical axis is
given in log10 scale with a critical value of 7.3 (=log10(5x10-8)).
17
   Shin, Lillard, and Bhattacharya (2018) examine the relation between a PGS for Alzheimer's Disease and saving
behavior. The authors conclude that the Alzheimer's Disease PGS does not impact savings behavior or asset allocation

                                                        14
Attainment PGS and wealth inequality, the authors also find that the link between Educational

Attainment and wealth inequality arises, in part, because their Educational Attainment PGS is

positively related to stock market participation, inversely related to a measure of risk aversion, and

positively associated with more accurate (i.e., smaller deviation from the historical average) beliefs

regarding the likelihood of a positive market return.

    Our contribution differs fundamentally from Barth, Papageorge, and Thom (2018). First, we

examine a set of molecular genetic endowments associated with cognition, personality, health, and

body shape and their relation with traditional economic outcomes including equity market

participation, risk aversion, and beliefs regarding the distribution of equity returns. In addition, we

examine the channels through which these genetic endowments can influence individuals'

financial decisions. In particular, the broad range of genetic endowments--cognition, personality,

health, and body shape--that we examine are plausibly associated with investor characteristics

previously shown to impact equity market participation, and we focus on linking the heritability

(i.e., twin studies) and investor characteristic (e.g., trust) literatures, i.e., understanding the

channels that underlie stock market participation heritability, risk aversion heritability, and beliefs

heritability. As a result of these differences, there is minimal overlap in the studies. For example,

of the more than 1,100 coefficient point estimates we report in our empirical tests (Tables III-IX),

only five overlap with estimates reported by Barth, Papageorge and Thom. 18



                                                      III. DATA

III.A. Health Retirement Study

    To obtain data on individuals' DNA as well as their life circumstances, we employ the Health

and Retirement Study (HRS) survey data panel of Americans age 50 and older. 19 This age cohort

decisions after accounting for age. Brown and Sias (2019) examine the relation between technology adoption and the
same PGSs we examine in this study.
18
   Specifically, both studies demonstrate an Educational Attainment PGS is positively related to stock market
participation and wealth, and inversely related to risk aversion. In addition, both studies demonstrate that the relation
between the Educational Attainment PGS and stock market participation is robust to inclusion of wealth and income.
19
   The Health and Retirement Study data is sponsored by the National Institute on Aging (grant number
U01AG009740) and is conducted by the University of Michigan.

                                                           15
is important in financial markets as it accounts for at least 74% of the value of stocks and 64% of

the financial assets held by individuals. 20 The HRS surveys are administered bi-annually (HRS

interview "waves") between 1992 and 2016. Moreover, the sample increases over time to add new

respondents (HRS "cohorts"). For example, the most recent cohort (in our data) includes

individuals born between 1954 and 1959 (the "Mid Baby Boomers") while the previous cohort

(the "Early Baby Boomers") includes individuals born between 1948 and 1953. Beginning in 2006,

HRS selected one-half of the interviewee households (in that wave) for an "Enhanced Face-to-

Face Interview" that included saliva collection (the raw source for the genetic data) as well as a

"Leave-Behind Questionnaire" that included "Psychosocial and Lifestyle" questions. The 50%

random enhanced face-to-face sample is rotated in every wave, i.e., Leave-Behind Questionnaire

respondents in 2006 are also selected for enhanced face-to-face interviews in 2010 while those not

selected in 2006 are selected for 2008 (and again for 2012, and the sample includes any new

cohorts added). We use the April 2018 version (HRS v2) of the HRS PGS data that incorporates

DNA from HRS participants in the extended face-to-face samples from 2006-2012 and answers

by these participants to HRS surveys between 2010 and 2016. We limit our sample to respondents

between ages 50 and 80. In addition, as detailed below, questions identifying an individual's

beliefs regarding the distribution of stock returns (i.e., likelihood of a return less than -20% or

greater than +20%) did not begin until 2010, and therefore our sample includes four HRS waves

(2010, 2012, 2014, and 2016).

     For households consisting of partners (e.g., husband and wife), both partners are questioned.

Only one person (the household's "financial respondent"), however, answers the household

financial data questions. Although some variables are measured at the household level (e.g.,

wealth, stock market participation), the majority of the other variables of interest, the genetic

endowments, risk aversion, beliefs regarding the distribution of expected equity returns, and most

of the 11 investor characteristics used in previous work (e.g., trust) are measured at the individual
20
  Using 2016 values from the Survey of Consumer Finances (https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/scfindex.htm),
these figures are based on estimates (Tables 6-89 and 1-01-16) for individuals age 55 and older (i.e., the SCF age
breakpoint).

                                                       16
level. Therefore, we limit our analysis to financial respondents. Nonetheless, in the Internet

Appendix, we repeat our tests incorporating genetic endowments for both spouses when examining

(household) stock market participation and find similar results. 21



III.B. Outcomes ­ Stock Market Participation, Risk Aversion, and Expected Return Distribution

Perceptions

     We select three economic outcomes that result from, or influence, individuals' financial

decisions: equity market participation, risk aversion, and return beliefs. To measure equity market

participation we generate two variables from the HRS data--an indicator for holding equity (either

directly or in retirement/IRA/Keogh accounts) and the fraction of financial wealth in equities (both

directly held and in retirement/IRA/Keogh accounts). 22 Note that given the structure of the HRS

interviews, in some cases we can observe if the respondent participates in equity markets, but

cannot estimate the fraction of wealth invested in equity. 23 Appendix A provides details of the

construction of these measures.

     We assess risk aversion through the following question asked in the 2014 and 2016 HRS

waves: "Are you generally a person who tries to avoid taking risks or one who is fully prepared to

take risks? Please rate yourself from 0 to 10, where 0 means `not at all willing to take risks' and

10 means `very willing to take risks.'" To compute our risk aversion measure (used for the 2010-


21
   One concern may be whether surveys adequately capture individual characteristics, beliefs, and behaviors. For
example, in assessing individual beliefs regarding the likelihood of a positive or negative stock market return,
individuals tend to report round numbers (e.g., 30% rather than 29%) when estimating probabilities. Similarly,
measures of individual characteristics, such as trust, are generated via responses to a series of questions regarding trust
(as one cannot view "trust"). Nonetheless, because most of the characteristics used to help explain heterogeneity in
equity market participation are measured with error (e.g., trust, sociability), work in this area is necessarily based on
less than perfect measures. As a robustness check, we also estimate our primary test based on the average outcome for
each individual, e.g., the average predicted probability of the market falling by more than 20% for each individual. As
detailed in the Internet Appendix, our results remain nearly identical. We thank Stephen Siegel for suggesting this
test.
22
   Because much of the work in equity market participation focuses on earlier surveys that lack sufficient data to infer
equity holdings in retirement (pension/IRA/Keogh) funds, as a robustness test, we repeat our analysis focusing only
on direct holdings (i.e., excluding retirement funds). Results, reported in the Internet Appendix, are essentially
unchanged.
23
   For example, a respondent may report they have direct holdings in equity, but when queried about the value, they
may respond they do not know, or refuse to answer.

                                                            17
2016 sample period), we average each respondent's score to this question over years 2014 and

2016 and subtract the average from 10 (so that higher values indicate greater risk aversion). As

detailed below, we use a standardized (i.e., rescaled to zero mean, unit variance) version of this

measure in our empirical tests for ease of interpretation. 24

    We use three questions to measure respondent beliefs about the distribution of expected

returns. Starting in 2002, the HRS asked respondents, "We are interested in how well you think

the economy will do in the future. By next year at this time, what is the percent chance that mutual

fund shares invested in blue chip stocks like those in the Dow Jones Industrial Average will be

worth more than they are today?" 25 Beginning in 2010, HRS added two questions regarding the

distribution of expected stock returns. Specifically, the first question asks, "By next year at this

time, what is the percent chance that mutual fund shares invested in blue-chip stocks like those in

the Dow Jones Industrial Average will have gained in value by more than 20 percent compared to

what they are worth today?" The second question asks the probability for the other side of the

distribution, i.e., the percent chance stocks "... have fallen in value by more than 20 percent ...?" 26




24
   As detailed in the Internet Appendix, we also consider a measure of relative risk aversion (inferred from "income-
gamble" questions asked in earlier waves) and find similar results. We focus on self-rated risk aversion because (1)
research suggests such questions better capture risk aversion (Kapteyn and Teppa, 2011; and Guillemette, Finke, and
Gilliam, 2012) relative to income gamble questions, and (2) the income gamble questions are asked between 1998 and
2006 and therefore exclude 40% of our sample.
25
   HRS has a section devoted to expectations. To ensure respondents understand the meaning, the section is introduced
by "Next we would like to ask your opinion about how likely you think various events might be. When I ask a question,
I'd like for you to give me a number from 0 to 100, where `0' means that you think there is absolutely no chance, and
`100' means that you think the event is absolutely sure to happen. For example, no one can ever be sure about
tomorrow's weather, but if you think that rain is very unlikely tomorrow, you might say that there is a 10 percent
chance of rain. If you think there is a very good chance that it will rain tomorrow, you might say that there is an 80
percent chance of rain."
26
   One concern regarding probability questions is that individuals sometimes answer 50% to convey a lack of
confidence in their response (see Fischhoff and Bruine de Bruin, 1999; Lillard and Willis, 2001). During our sample
period, respondents who answered 50% to the question regarding the likelihood the market will increase in the next
year, were asked a follow up question of whether their 50% answer meant that they believed "it is about equally likely
that these mutual fund shares will increase in worth as it is that they will decrease in worth by this time next year, or
are you just unsure about the chances." For those that answer they are "just unsure," HRS does not ask the latter two
questions regarding the likelihood of a greater than 20% decline and a greater than 20% increase. Because our sample
is limited to individuals with data for equity market participation, risk aversion, and beliefs, we exclude these
individuals from our main analysis. As shown in the Internet Appendix, however, our results are essentially identical
when including these individuals in the sample.

                                                           18
III.C. Molecular Genetic Data

     We employ the polygenic scores (PGSs) computed by HRS to measure each individual's

genetic predisposition for a particular trait:
               J
     PGSi =  W j Gi , j                                                                                           (1)
              j =1


where PGSi is the polygenic score (for a given phenotype) for individual i, Wj is the consortium

meta-analysis GWAS weight (based on the odds ratio or beta estimates from the GWAS) for SNP

j, and Gi,j is HRS individual i's genotype (i.e., number of reference alleles--0, 1, or 2) for SNP j.27

In most cases, the GWAS weights are computed without HRS data, i.e., the HRS PGSs are out of

sample estimates. 28,29 HRS scales the PGSs to zero mean and unit variance.
     Because most of the GWAS weights are based on European ancestry samples (see Ware,

Schmitz, Gard, and Faul, 2018) and PGSs may not be directly applicable across ancestry groups

(e.g., Martin et al., 2017), we limit our sample to European ancestry individuals. 30 In addition,

even within a given ancestry, "population stratification" can contaminate results. Population

stratification occurs when individuals in the same sample differ in SNP frequency, e.g., because

SNPs are hereditary, Southern Europeans may exhibit a SNP more often than Northern Europeans

(the underlying cause is non-random mating usually driven by physical separation between the

groups). This can lead to complications when environmental factors impact phenotypes. The most

27
   Beauchamp et al. (2011) point out that both theory and evidence from animal breeding and behavioral genetics
supports the use of the simple linear additive model that has become standard in molecular genetics research.
28
   HRS participates in several of the GWAS consortiums. In almost all of these cases, however, HRS data are excluded
prior to generating the weights used to compute the HRS PGSs. Per correspondence with HRS, the PGS associated
with BMI is the only PGS that includes the HRS sample in computing the GWAS weights used by HRS. The HRS
sample, however, contributes less than 3% of the BMI GWAS observations (see Ware, Schmitz, Gard, and Faul,
2018).
29
   We use the PGSs computed by HRS. All PGSs are a function of the sample and weights computed by the consortium
(e.g., better PGSs for a given phenotype will be found over time as the consortium sample size increases). Moreover,
computation of the PGS requires the researcher (in this case, HRS) to make a number of decisions regarding the
method, e.g., whether to include only highly statistically significant SNPs, or all SNPs. HRS, for example, includes
all available SNPs in their estimate as recent work (e.g., Simonson, Willis, Keller and McQueen, 2011; Abraham,
Kowalczyk, Zobel, and Inouye, 2013; Abraham and Inouye, 2014; Goldstein, Yang, Salfati, and Assimes, 2015;
Abraham et al., 2016; Ware et al., 2017) suggests that doing so produces better (out of sample) predictions. Because
PGSs depend on both the consortium sample and the construction method, our HRS computed Educational Attainment
PGS is different than the Educational Attainment PGS used by Barth, Papageorge, and Thom (2018).
30
   In addition, the outcome variable of risk aversion has been found to vary across populations (Falk, Becker, Dohmen,
Enke, Huffman, and Sunde, 2018).

                                                         19
popular way to solve this issue is to include SNP principal components in the analysis that,

theoretically, capture within sample variation in SNPs. As such, HRS provides the first 10 principal

components for the HRS European ancestry sample. Following the guidance in Ware, Schmitz,

Gard, and Faul (2018), we include all 10 HRS SNP principal components in our tests.

     A related concern is that, by definition, an individual's DNA is correlated with their parents'

DNA and therefore the PGSs may capture variation in social circumstances. However, because the

PGSs are based on weights computed out of sample, this would only be a valid concern if the

phenotype is related to the same genotypes across different parents--this could occur if the

underlying genetic population stratification is correlated with phenotypic social stratification. For

example, perhaps immigrants sharing a common ancestry are more likely to have lower

educational attainment due to a bias against their ancestry group. Note that, at least theoretically,

the principal components should capture these effects. Perhaps more important and inconsistent

with the hypothesis that the PGSs capture social stratification, work suggests that the ability of

PGSs to predict variation across individuals is largely unchanged even when controlling for family

fixed effects. Domingue et al. (2015) report, for example, that an Educational Attainment PGS's

ability to discriminate among siblings is approximately the same magnitude as its ability to

discriminate across non-related individuals.

     Although the HRS data include PGSs for 29 phenotypes, we focus on a smaller set based on

previous evidence of relations between individual characteristics (i.e., phenotypes) and equity

market participation. 31,32 We select two PGSs from each of the four broad genetic classifications

we examine (cognition, personality, health, and body shape). First, given evidence that cognition

metrics (both measured cognition and realized education levels) are positively related to equity

market participation (e.g., Kezdi and Willis, 2003; Benjamin, Brown, Shapiro, 2013; Christelis,

Jappelli, and Padula, 2010; Grinblatt, Keloharju, and Linnainmaa, 2011; Cole, Paulson and

31
  For completeness, the Internet Appendix provides our primary tests for the additional 21 PGSs.
32
  Because risk aversion and beliefs are complex characteristics, they are likely related to multiple genetic
endowments. See Kamstra, Kramer, and Levi (2012) for discussion of the evidence linking risk aversion to depression
and Nicholson, Soane, Fenton-O'Creevy, and Willman (2005) for evidence linking risk aversion to neuroticism.

                                                        20
Shastry, 2014), we include each respondent's genetic endowments related to cognition (the

Educational Attainment PGS and the General Cognition PGS). Second, given personality traits

such as trust, sociability, and optimism are associated with equity market participation (e.g., Hong,

Kubik, and Stein, 2004; Puri and Robinson, 2007; Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales, 2008; Heimer,

2014; Balloch, Nicolae, and Philip, 2015; Giannetti and Wang, 2016), we include two genetic

endowments related to personality characteristics (the Neuroticism PGS and the Depressive

Symptoms PGS). Third, given observed health is positively associated with equity market

participation (e.g., Rosen and Wu, 2004; Yogo, 2016) and that heart disease is the leading cause

of death in the U.S., we include the two genetic endowments associated with heart disease (the

Myocardial Infarction PGS and the Coronary Artery Disease PGS). Finally, given evidence that

body shape is associated with equity market participation (BMI is negatively associated with

market participation and height is positively associated with participation; Addoum, Korniotis, and

Kumar, 2017), we include participant's BMI PGS and Height PGS. Appendix A provides details

regarding the construction of the HRS PGSs.33



III.D. Investor Characteristics Previously used to Explain Stock Market Participation

    Beyond the genetic endowment variables we also consider 11 investor characteristics that

previous work suggests can help explain equity market participation (via their impact on risk

aversion, beliefs, or circumstances): wealth, income, education, cognitive ability, trust, sociability,

optimism, negative early life economic experiences, height, BMI, and health. Although a number

of previous studies use HRS data, the survey has evolved over time, and because we focus on

recent data our measures are often more direct than earlier measures, e.g., more recent surveys

include psychosocial questions directly focused on measuring trust and optimism. Appendix A

33
   A reader may logically ask why we focus on genetic endowments for cognition, personality, health, and body shape
rather than estimating genetic endowments for equity market participation, risk aversion, and beliefs directly. As
detailed above, a GWAS requires a very large sample size due to the highly polygenetic nature of most phenotypes,
i.e., our sample size is much too small to estimate a PGS. For instance, the Educational Attainment GWAS is based
on a sample size of more than 405,000 individuals. In addition, by focusing on GWAS weights estimated over different
(i.e., non-HRS) data, our PGSs are out-of-sample estimates.

                                                        21
provides details regarding the construction of each of these 11 characteristics as well as a brief

description of the proposed mechanism (from previous studies) linking the characteristic to equity

market participation, risk aversion, and beliefs (and at least one associated reference). We also

include control variables in our analyses. Specifically, we include indicators for HRS waves,

respondent age, gender, retired, and married. Appendix A provides details regarding construction

of the control variables.



III.E. Descriptive Statistics

   For an individual's observations to be included in the sample requires data on the respondent's

genetic endowment, stock market participation, risk aversion, return beliefs, household wealth and

income, age, gender, and marital and retirement status. Our final sample consists of 5,130

individuals and 13,200 individual-year observations over four HRS waves (2010, 2012, 2014, and

2016). Our respondents are approximately equally likely to be male or female, the average age is

66, 49% are retired, and 61% are married.

   Tables I and II report descriptive statistics and correlation coefficients for the economic

outcome variables, the genetic data (PGSs), and the 11 investor characteristics used in previous

studies. Some of the variables, such as PGSs, are observed at the respondent level while others,

such as stock market participation are overserved at the respondent-survey wave level (see

Appendix A). The values in Tables I and II are based on the pooled sample used in our analysis,

i.e., there are 5,130 unique Neuroticism PGS observations and the average respondent's equity

market participation and beliefs regarding the distribution of expected equity returns is observed

in 2.6 survey waves implying 13,200 total observations.

                                [Insert Tables I and II about here]

   Panel A in Table I reports the descriptive statistics for the economic outcome variables and

shows that 59% of the respondents in our sample hold some equities and the average household in




                                                22
our sample has 37% of their financial assets in equities. 34,35 The third row reveals substantial

variation in self-rated risk aversion with a standard deviation of 2.06 on a scale of 0 to 10. As noted

above, we use a standardized version (fourth row) of this variable throughout the empirical analysis

for ease of interpretation. The last three rows report respondent beliefs regarding the likelihood

that the market will increase, rise by at least 20%, and fall by at least 20% over the next year. 36

Although a broad literature examines equity participation and a number of studies also evaluate

risk aversion, comparatively little work focuses on understanding heterogeneity in beliefs

regarding the distribution of expected equity returns because, prior to our sample period, few

surveys questioned individuals regarding their beliefs (especially perceptions related to the

likelihood of an extreme gain or loss). Consistent with previous work, however, the values reported

by respondents differ greatly from the historical distribution of equity returns. 37 Specifically,

between 1927 and 2016, rolling 12-month U.S. equity returns averaged 11.9% with a standard

deviation of 21.3%. Nearly identical to the expected values under a normal distribution, 73.9% of

the historical annual returns were positive, 33.8% were greater than 20%, and 6.6% of the

observations were less than -20%. The typical individual, however, is much too bearish relative to

the historical distribution--the average individual greatly underestimates the likelihood of the

market increasing (mean estimate of 47% versus 74% historically) and greatly overestimates the

likelihood of a 20% or greater decline in stock prices (mean estimate of 30% versus less than 7%

34
   As shown in Table I, a few individuals have more than 100% of their financial wealth invested in equities which
typically occurs when individuals have retirement savings invested in equity, but non-retirement financial wealth (e.g.,
debt) is negative. As detailed in Appendix A, we winsorize the fraction of wealth held in equities at the 99% level.
35
   We find that 30% of respondents hold equity directly (i.e., excluding retirement funds) consistent with estimates
reported in earlier studies using the survey questions on direct holdings (e.g., Addoum, Korniotis, and Kumar (2017)
report 29% of HRS households hold equity based on the 1992-2008 HRS waves). Consistent with recent evidence
(e.g., Giannetti and Wang, 2016), the results demonstrate that equity market participation estimates are substantially
greater (at least in recent years) when including equities held in retirement accounts.
36
   We treat beliefs regarding the likelihood of a greater than 20% fall in equity prices as a measure of an individual's
view of the perceived riskiness of equity investing. We recognize, however, that such beliefs may also relate to risk
aversion or ambiguity. For example, as Malmendier and Nagel (p. 381, footnote 6, 2011) point out, an investor with
optimistic beliefs might also naturally report less risk aversion. Dow and Werlang (1992) examine how ambiguity can
impact portfolio decisions.
37
   Several studies find that individuals tend to underestimate the likelihood of the market increasing in the next year,
e.g., Dominitz and Manski (2007, 2011), Hurd and Rohwedder (2012), Hurd, van Rooij, and Winter (2011). In
addition, Goetzmann, Kim, and Shiller (2017) show that both individual and institutional investors greatly
overestimate the likelihood of an extreme one-day stock market crash.

                                                          23
historically). Individuals, on average, are closer to the historical value for the likelihood of a 20%

or greater market gain (mean estimate of 27% versus 34% historically).

     Panel B of Table I reports the correlations between the economic outcome variables. Consistent

with theory, equity market participation (first column) is inversely related to risk aversion,

positively related to an individual's beliefs regarding the likelihood that markets will rise, and

inversely to beliefs regarding the likelihood of a market crash, but less strongly related to beliefs

regarding the likelihood of a market boom. Consistent with recent work (Lee, Rosenthal, Veld,

and Veld-Merkoulova, 2015), risk aversion is inversely related to individual's beliefs regarding

the expected likelihood of a positive market return.

     Panels C and D in Table I report descriptive statistics and correlations for the genetic data. By

construction, the HRS PGS scores are standardized. 38 As expected, the "pairs" of PGS measures

are related, yet not redundant, e.g., the correlation between the General Cognition PGS and the

Educational Attainment PGS is 0.27.

     Table II reports descriptive statistics and correlations for the 11 investor characteristics. Many

of the factors known to explain equity market participation are strongly related to each other. For

example, consistent with Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2008), trust is positively associated with

sociability and consistent with Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2004), sociability is positively related to

education.



              IV. PGSS, EQUITY MARKET PARTICIPATION, RISK AVERSION, AND BELIEFS

IV.A. Do Genetic Endowments Predict Economic Outcomes?

     We begin by examining whether the eight molecular genetic endowments for cognition,

personality, health, and body shape help explain variation in the economic outcome variables. Our

hypotheses are based on extant literature that relates heterogeneity in investor characteristics to


38
  The PGSs provided by HRS are standardized. Because, however, not all individuals included in the HRS genetic
dataset have sufficient information to be included in our sample we re-standardize (rescale to zero mean, unit variance)
the HRS genetic data for our sample to ensure the mean and variance are exactly zero and one, respectively.

                                                          24
heterogeneity in equity market participation. 39 First, given evidence that education and cognitive

ability are positively associated with equity market participation, we hypothesize that PGSs

associated with Educational Attainment and General Cognition predict greater stock market

participation and consequently may also predict lower risk aversion, a higher perceived likelihood

of a positive market return, and a lower perceived likelihood of a 20% or greater decline in stock

prices. Although individuals, on average, underestimate the likelihood that the market will increase

by more than 20%, they also greatly overestimate the likelihood of a negative market return and a

greater than 20% decline in stock prices. Thus, we expect higher Educational Attainment and

General Cognition PGSs will predict a more realistic view of the standard deviation of expected

returns and, therefore, a lower perceived likelihood of a greater than 20% increase in equity prices.

     Second, given evidence that trust, sociability, optimism, and good health are positively

associated with equity market participation, we hypothesize that PGSs associated with

Neuroticism and Depressive Symptoms, and PGSs associated with poor health--Myocardial

Infarction and Coronary Artery Disease--predict decreased equity market participation, and

similarly predict higher risk aversion, lower perceived probability of a positive market return, and

higher perceived probabilities of a greater than 20% decline or rise in equity prices. Last, given

evidence that lower BMI and greater height are positively related to equity market participation,

we posit that a smaller BMI PGS and larger Height PGS predict greater market participation, lower

risk aversion, higher expectations of a positive market return, and lower perceived probabilities of

an extreme (>±20%) market return.

     Panel A in Table III reports the results of panel regressions of the economic outcome variables

on each of the eight PGSs individually, the 10 HRS genetic principal components, and the control

variables (indicators for HRS waves, age, gender, retired, and married). Standard errors are

clustered at the respondent level (throughout the paper). To conserve space, we only report the

coefficients associated with each of the PGSs variables. Thus, Panel A reports the results from 48

39
  See Section III.D and Panel C of Appendix A for details including a brief description of the proposed channels
and associated references.

                                                        25
different regressions (six outcomes times eight PGSs). Given the PGSs are standardized, the

coefficients in Table III reflect the relation between a one standard deviation change in the PGS

and the outcome variable. For instance, according to the first cell in the table, a one standard

deviation increase in the Educational Attainment PGS is associated with a 7.1% higher likelihood

(statistically significant at the 1% level) that an individual holds any equity. 40

                                          [Insert Table III about here]

     The results in Panel A provide strong support for our hypotheses: genetic endowments

associated with cognition, personality, health, and body shape predict equity market participation,

risk aversion, and investor beliefs regarding the distribution of expected equity returns.

Specifically, 46 of the 48 reported coefficients have the expected sign and, of those 46 coefficients,

31 differ materially from zero at the 10% level or better (two-tail tests). Neither of the two

coefficients with an unexpected sign differ materially from zero at the 10% level.

     Although we have shown that the PGSs are correlated, and multicollinearity is an issue, we

next include all eight PGSs (along with the control variables and 10 genetic principal components)

in a single regression for each of the economic outcome variables. Panel A of Table III shows that

when predicting stock market participation (first column) and including each of the genetic factors

by themselves as an independent variable, all were statistically significant. Panel B shows that

when all eight PGSs are included in the same regression, some of the PGS have stronger effects

than others. The Educational Attainment PGS remains strongly related to most of the economic

outcomes, even when all PGS are included. For example, stock market participation is most

strongly related to the Educational Attainment PGS--a one standard deviation greater Educational

Attainment PGS predicts a 6.0% greater likelihood of holding any equities. Similarly, the

Neuroticism PGS still significantly predicts four of the six economic outcomes with risk aversion

being most strongly related to the Neuroticism PGS--a one standard deviation greater Neuroticism
40
  We focus on linear probability models for ease of interpretation, to facilitate comparison with much of the literature
in this area (e.g., Hong, Kubik, and Stein, 2004; Puri and Robinson, 2007; Giannetti and Wang, 2016; Barth,
Papageorge, and Thom, 2018), and for our later focus on comparing the relative contributions from these eight genetic
endowments and all other sources of variability. In the Internet Appendix, we repeat our tests with limited dependent
variable models (binary logit and fractional logistic) and reach essentially identical conclusions.

                                                          26
PGS predicts a 6.4% standard deviation higher risk aversion (recall the risk aversion measure is

scaled to unit standard deviation).

   Nonetheless, even when accounting for an individual's genetic predisposition for Educational

Attainment and Neuroticism, we still find other PGS to contain predictive powers. For example,

stock market participation is at least marginally predicted by the Depressive Symptoms PGS, the

Myocardial Infarction PGS, and the BMI PGS. Thus, each of the four genetic component groups

we examine--cognition, personality, health, and body shape--appear to impact equity market

participation in the hypothesized directions. The table also shows that when we include all eight

PGSs, heterogeneity in beliefs regarding the distribution of equity returns remain related to a

number of genetic factors and usually in the expected directions. (The one exception is that beliefs

regarding the likelihood of a market increase are positively related to the Coronary Artery Disease

PGS (at the 5% level), inconsistent with our priors. The results suggest, for example, that a one

standard deviation higher Myocardial Infarction PGS predicts an approximately 1.37% lower

value for beliefs regarding the likelihood of the market increasing in the next year. Given the

standard deviation of the dependent variable is 26.72% (see Table I), this represents a 5.1%

standard deviation shift (i.e., 1.374/26.717=0.051).



IV.B. Do the PGSs Predict Equity Market Participation when controlling for Risk Aversion and

Beliefs?

   The results in Table III show that genetic endowments associated with cognition, personality,

health, and body shape predict an individual's stock market participation, risk aversion, and

beliefs. Given stock market participation should be a function of risk aversion and beliefs, we next

examine whether the ability of these genetic endowments to predict risk aversion and beliefs can

fully explain why these endowments predict stock market participation. Our approach is

straightforward--we add risk aversion and beliefs as independent variables to the regression of

stock market participation on each of the PGSs. If genetic variation in self-reported risk aversion


                                                27
and beliefs fully capture the variation in equity participation predicted by the PGS, then the

coefficient associated with the PGS should no longer differ meaningfully from zero.

   We report the results from this analysis in Table IV. The first and third columns in Table IV

report the coefficients associated with each PGS from separate regressions of each equity market

participation measure on each PGS (individually), risk aversion, the three return belief metrics, the

first 10 principal components of the genetics data, and the control variables (indicators for HRS

waves, age, gender, retired, and married). For ease of comparison, the second and fourth columns

report the coefficients associated with each PGS without adding risk aversion and return beliefs as

regressors (i.e., the values from the first two columns of Panel A in Table III). The results provide

strong evidence that the PGSs continue to predict stock market participation even after accounting

for risk aversion and beliefs. Although the coefficients are generally smaller--suggesting that at

least some of the relation between these eight genetic endowments and stock market participation

arises from the genetic endowment's relation with self-reported risk aversion and return beliefs--

the coefficients remain substantial and statistically significant. For example, Column (1) of Table

IV shows that when we account for the variation in market participation explained by

contemporaneously-measured risk aversion and return beliefs, a one standard deviation higher

Neuroticism PGS is associated with a 2.8% lower likelihood of holding equity (statistically

significant at the 1% level). The previous PGS only regression from Table III reported in Column

(2) of Table IV indicates that the same Neuroticism shock predicts a 3.7% lower likelihood of

holding equity before controlling for risk aversion and beliefs.

                                   [Insert Table IV about here]

   Two non-mutually exclusive explanations exist for why these genetic endowments continue to

predict stock market participation once accounting for risk aversion and beliefs. First, as Harlow

and Brown (1990) suggest, adding biological data to traditional measures of risk aversion (or

beliefs) should generate better estimates of risk aversion (or beliefs). That is, any measure of risk

aversion and beliefs is less than perfect--thus these PGSs may continue to predict stock market

participation because they capture dimensions of risk aversion and beliefs not fully reflected in
                                                 28
self-reported values. Second, as discussed earlier, PGSs have the ability to capture factors other

than risk aversion and beliefs, such as variation in circumstances, that influence stock market

participation.



                 V. PGSS, INVESTOR CHARACTERISTICS, AND ECONOMIC OUTCOMES

V.A. Investor Characteristics and Economic Outcomes

   In this section we examine the extent to which the eight genetic endowments can link the

investor characteristics literature with the heritability literature by investigating the channels

through which these endowments predict stock market participation, risk aversion, and return

beliefs. We begin by evaluating the relations between the economic outcome variables and each

of the 11 investor characteristics that have been documented in previous work to explain equity

market participation. Because many of the characteristics are strongly correlated and our goal is

understanding the role of the genetic endowments in explaining previously identified relations

(rather than determining which of the investor characteristics best explains the outcome variables),

we focus on panel regressions of the outcome variables on each of the investor characteristics

individually while controlling for HRS waves and respondent demographics (gender, age, married,

and retired). In addition, for ease of interpretation and comparison, we standardize (i.e., rescale to

zero mean, unit variance) each of the characteristics. The coefficients for each of the individual

investor characteristics from the 66 panel regressions (11 characteristics times six outcomes) are

reported in Panel A of Table V.

                                    [Insert Table V about here]

   Consistent with previous work, equity market participation is positively related to wealth,

income, education, cognition, trust, sociability, optimism, height, and health and negatively related

to early life poverty (poor) and BMI. As shown in the third column, we also find risk aversion to

be related to each of these 11 characteristics that have been used in previous work to explain equity

market participation. Moreover, the relationships are all in the expected direction and statistically

significant. Specifically, greater wealth, income, education, cognition, trust, sociability, optimism,
                                                 29
height, and health are associated with a lower risk aversion. Conversely, higher BMI and growing

up poor are positively associated with risk aversion.

    The last three columns in Table V report the relations between the 11 individual characteristics

and return beliefs. This is largely new territory--few studies examine if these characteristics are

related to variation in investor beliefs regarding the likelihood of a positive return, and, as far as

we are aware, no published study examines whether these characteristics may be associated with

variation in beliefs regarding the shape of the distribution of expected returns, i.e., the likelihood

of a large gain (>20%) or loss (<-20%). The results in the fourth column document that all 11

characteristics are meaningfully related to beliefs regarding the likelihood of a market increase (in

the expected direction) consistent with the hypothesis that these investor characteristics correlate

with equity market participation, at least in part, because they reflect heterogeneity in return beliefs

as well as heterogeneity in risk aversion. The results in the last two columns provide important and

intuitive insights as well. First, as noted above, because individuals, on average, greatly

overestimate the riskiness of the market, we expect lower probabilities of at least a 20% gain

associated with more realistic views of the standard deviation of equity returns. Consistent with

our hypothesis, cognition and height are negatively associated with beliefs regarding the likelihood

of a market boom (>20%). Trust, optimism, and health, however, are positively related to variation

in perceptions regarding the likelihood of a boom. Given respondents, on average, greatly

overestimate the likelihood of a market crash (<-20%), we expect variables associated with a better

understanding of equities, such as cognition or education, to be negatively associated with beliefs

regarding the likelihood of a crash, while the "negative" variables (BMI and early life poverty)

should be positively associated with beliefs regarding the likelihood of a crash. The results in the

last column confirm this pattern. Specifically, 10 of the 11 characteristics have the expected sign

(the lone exception being the insignificant coefficient for height) and nine of the 11 are statistically

significant at the 5% level or better.

    In sum, the results in Panel A show these 11 investor characteristics are related to equity market

participation, at least in part, because they are associated with both heterogeneity in risk aversion
                                                  30
and heterogeneity in beliefs regarding the distribution of equity returns. For instance, individuals

with high trust are more likely to participate in equity markets (first two columns), are less risk

averse (third column), and their beliefs regarding the distribution of expected equity returns are

shifted to the right (final three columns).

   Because the independent variables are standardized in both Tables III and V, we can directly

examine the relative magnitude of the relation between the eight genetic endowments (established

at least 50 years prior to the outcomes) and the economic outcomes versus the relation between

the 11 investor characteristics (that are observed, approximately, at the same time as the outcomes)

and the economic outcomes. For example, the average absolute value of the coefficient in the third

column of Panel A in Table V indicates that a one standard deviation change in the average investor

characteristic is associated with a 12.6% standard deviation change in risk aversion. The average

absolute value in the third column of Table III Panel A is 3.6%. Thus, on average, the relation

between risk aversion and the average genetic endowment in our set (measured more than 50 years

prior) is 28% of the relation between risk aversion and the average contemporaneously-measured

investor characteristic (i.e., 0.036/0.126=0.282). Results are similar across the two equity

participation variables (i.e., the average absolute value in the first two columns of Table III are

28.8% and 29.2%, respectively, of the average absolute value of the first two columns in Panel A

of Table V). The relations for the three measures of beliefs regarding the distribution of expected

equity returns and the average of these eight genetic endowments range from 26% to 95% of the

relation between the beliefs regarding the distribution of expected equity returns and the average

of the 11 investor characteristics.

   For completeness, we also report in Panel B of Table V the results for an analysis in which we

include all 11 investor characteristics in the model simultaneously (along with the controls for

gender, HRS wave, age, retired, and married). Our results are not directly comparable to previous

work because: (1) we include different combinations of explanatory variables (e.g., because it had

yet to be "discovered," Hong, Kubik, and Stein (2004) do not include trust in their tests), and (2)

many of our metrics, although measuring the same construct, differ from the measures used in
                                                31
earlier studies. As noted above, for instance, advances in the HRS survey allow for, arguably,

substantially improved measures of variables such as trust and optimism. Regardless, the results

in Panel B of Table V largely support previous work. For example, the first column shows that

equity market participation is positively related to wealth, income, education, cognition, trust, and

health, and is inversely related to early life poverty. Analogously, risk aversion (third column of

Panel B) is negatively related to income, education, sociability, optimism, height, and health. 41



V.B. Do Genetic Endowments Predict Investor Characteristics?

    Having shown the consistency of our work with previous studies, we now provide novel

insights by examining the extent to which genetic endowments associated with cognition,

personality, health, and body shape predict heterogeneity in the 11 investor characteristics.

Specifically, we estimate panel regressions of each investor characteristic on the control variables

(indicator variables for HRS waves, gender, age, married, and retired), the 10 HRS genetic

principal components, and each of the individual PGSs. For ease of interpretation, we standardize

(rescale to zero mean, unit variance) each of the 11 dependent variables. Table VI Panel A reports

the results. Thus, for example, the first cell implies that a one standard deviation higher Educational

Attainment PGS predicts a 12.9% standard deviation higher log wealth.

                                           [Insert Table VI about here]

    The results in Table VI provide strong evidence that all 11 characteristics identified in previous

work are meaningfully related to genetic endowments associated with cognition, personality,

health, and body shape. Moreover the signs of the relations are intuitive. Wealth, for example, is

positively predicted by the Educational Attainment and Height PGSs and inversely predicted by

the Neuroticism, Depressive Symptoms, Myocardial Infarction, Coronary Artery Disease, and

41
   Inconsistent with the tests in Panel A, however, risk aversion is positively related to trust when including the other
10 investor characteristics in the model. Moreover, the investor characteristics are largely associated with the return
beliefs in the expected direction (with a few exceptions such as a positive relation between BMI and beliefs regarding
the likelihood of a market increase) when including all 11 characteristics simultaneously. For example, lower wealth,
lower trust, and lower health are all associated with beliefs that a severe (greater than 20%) market decline in the next
year is more likely.

                                                           32
BMI PGSs. In fact, every investor characteristic is meaningfully related to at least three of the

eight PGSs and the average characteristic variable is meaningfully related to 5.7 of the eight PGSs.

    Panel B of Table VI repeats the analysis but regresses each of the 11 investor characteristics

on all eight PGS (in addition to the control variables and 10 HRS genetic principal components)

simultaneously. The average investor characteristic is meaningfully predicted by 3.3 of the PGSs

in the multiple regression framework. Once again, the signs of the relations are largely intuitive.

Optimism, for instance, is positively related to the Educational Attainment PGS but negatively

related to the PGSs associated with Neuroticism, Depressive Symptoms, Myocardial Infarction,

and BMI. In sum, the results in Table VI provide strong evidence that variation in all 11 of these

investor characteristics is driven, at least in part, by genetic endowments associated with cognition,

personality, health, and body shape.



V.C. Investor Characteristics and PGS Channels

    The tests thus far do not include the eight genetic endowments and 11 investor characteristics

as independent variables in the same regression because investor characteristics represent both

genetic and environmental sources of investor heterogeneity, i.e., the characteristics are

contemporaneous realizations of an investor's state while the PGSs are predictors determined at

conception. That is, the characteristics may, at least in part, serve as the channels linking the PGSs

to the economic outcomes (stock market participation, risk aversion, beliefs). Thus, we next

examine the data to identify characteristics that may serve as channels for each of eight genetic

endowments. Our approach is straightforward--we perform a sensitivity analysis to examine if

adding the investor characteristic to the regression subsumes the predictive relation between the

PGS and the economic outcome. For instance, if the Height PGS predicts stock market

participation because taller individuals are more likely to hold equity, then adding realized height

to the regression will subsume the ability of the Height PGS to predict participation. Of course,

realized height reflects both the genetic predisposition for height, environmental factors that

impact height (e.g., nutrition), as well as potential interactions.
                                                  33
   For ease of comparison, the first column in Panel A of Table VII reports the coefficient

associated with each PGS from regressions of stock market participation on the PGS, the 10 genetic

principal components and the control variables (i.e., this column is identical to the first column of

Panel A in Table III). The remaining columns report the coefficient associated with the PGS when

including the investor characteristic listed in the column heading. For example, as shown in the

second column, once accounting for realized wealth (by adding realized wealth as a regressor), a

one standard deviation higher Educational Attainment PGS predicts a 4.2% increase in the

likelihood of holding any stock. This can be compared to the coefficient in the first column in

which a one standard deviation higher Educational Attainment PGS predicts a 7.1% increase in

the likelihood of holding any equity. Thus, the reduced magnitude of the PGS coefficient suggests

that the Educational Attainment PGS predicts stock market participation, at least in part, because

it predicts wealth and wealth is associated with greater stock market participation. Nonetheless,

wealth fails to fully subsume the Educational Attainment PGS's predictive ability (i.e., the

coefficient remains materially large and statistically significant at the 1% level). In short, wealth

appears to be "a partial channel" linking the Educational Attainment PGS to stock market

participation, but the evidence does not support the hypothesis that wealth is the sole channel

linking Educational Attainment to stock market participation.

                                    [Insert Table VII about here]

   The results in Panel A provide substantial evidence of the channels linking the PGSs to stock

market participation as, for every genetic endowment, there is at least one characteristic that results

in considerable reductions in the absolute coefficient associated with the PGS when the investor

characteristic is added to the regression. For three of the PGSs, the most intuitive directly-related

characteristic appears to be a primary channel. Specifically, the General Cognition PGS no longer

predicts stock market participation when controlling for a measure of realized general cognition,

the Coronary Artery Disease PGS no longer predicts stock market participation when controlling

for realized health, and the Height PGS no longer predicts stock market participation when

controlling for realized height. Thus, for example, an individual's actual height attainment appears
                                                  34
to be the primary channel that allows the Height PGS to predict stock market participation.

Interestingly, for these three PGSs (General Cognition, Coronary Artery Disease, and Height), at

least one other investor characteristic also subsumes the predictability. For example, the Coronary

Artery Disease PGS also no longer meaningfully predicts stock market participation when

controlling for realized wealth (perhaps not surprising given the 0.27 correlation between the

wealth and health characteristics reported in Table II), suggesting that wealth may also be a channel

linking the Coronary Artery Disease PGS to stock market participation. 42

     In other cases, however, none of the 11 investor characteristics (individually) fully account for

the ability of the PGS to predict stock market participation. Specifically, PGSs associated with

Educational Attainment, Neuroticism, Depressive Symptoms, Myocardial Infarction, and BMI

continue to meaningfully predict stock market participation even when adding any of the 11

investor characteristics. For instance, the Educational Attainment PGS maintains some predictive

power even when accounting for the individual's actual educational attainment and the

Neuroticism PGS maintains some of its predictive power even when controlling for optimism. In

short, for these five genetic endowments we find no evidence that the link between the PGS and

stock market participation is subsumed by a single characteristic, suggesting additional, as yet

unidentified, characteristics or combinations of characteristics link these endowments to stock

market participation. 43

     Examination of the remaining panels in Table VII yields similar conclusions albeit the patterns

differ. For instance, realized educational attainment does subsume the ability of the Educational

Attainment PGS to predict risk aversion (Panel C). In contrast, none of the 11 investor

characteristics subsume the ability of the Neuroticism PGS to predict risk aversion. In fact, for all

outcomes examined in Table VII (except the likelihood of a 20% market increase), at least two of


42
   However, despite the many studies relating health to wealth, Cesarini, Lindqvist, Ostling and Wallace (2016) do
not find strong evidence of a causal relation between wealth and mortality or health care utilization.
43
   Because our focus is on identifying specific channels linking the PGSs to the outcome variables (and the fact that
many of the characteristics are strongly correlated leading to a collinearity issue), we examine the relations for each
of the eight PGSs by adding one characteristic at a time.

                                                          35
the PGSs maintain some level of predictability regardless of which of the 11 investor

characteristics is added to the regression.

   Overall, these results indicate that these previously identified investor characteristics are an

important channel through which genetic endowments affect individuals' equity market

participation, risk aversion, and beliefs concerning the distributions of stock returns.



    VI. THE ROLE OF THE PGS IN LINKING EQUITY MARKET PARTICIPATION, RISK AVERSION,

                        RETURN BELIEFS, AND INVESTOR CHARACTERISTICS

   In our final empirical analyses, we estimate the importance of genetic endowments associated

with cognition, personality, health, and body shape in linking both the economic outcomes to each

other (i.e., risk aversion and beliefs to stock market participation) and the economic outcomes to

investor characteristics (e.g., the relation between risk aversion and trust). As noted in the

introduction, unlike molecular genetics, twin studies are well suited and important in generating

estimates of phenotype heritability. Twin studies, however, cannot generate an estimate of an

individual's genetic risk for a phenotype. For example, a twin study can estimate the heritability

of both equity market participation and risk aversion but cannot determine whether there exist any

genetic links connecting these two phenotypes or what specific genetic endowments may link the

phenotypes. In contrast, because molecular genetics focuses on genetic risk scores for each

individual, we can examine how phenotypes appear to be genetically linked and estimate the

magnitude of these specific genetic links.

   Our general research design in this section is to first remove variation in the phenotypes (both

economic outcomes and investor characteristics) related to the genetic principal components and

control variables, and then partition the remaining variation into the portion predicted by the eight

genetic endowments and the portion attributed to everything else (i.e., the residual). For ease of

exposition we denote the former the "PGS" component and the residual as the "non-PGS"




                                                 36
component. 44 Because this approach generates predicted and residual components that are, by

construction, independent, the R2 from the second regression can be directly partitioned into the

portion attributed to the eight genetic endowments and the portion attributed to everything else.



VI.A. The Role of the Eight PGSs in linking Participation to Risk Aversion and Beliefs

    Given phenotypes are a function of both environment and genetics and that, in the traditional

framework, heterogeneity in equity exposure is a function of risk aversion and beliefs, we begin

by estimating the role of the genetic endowments associated with cognition, personality, health,

and body shape in linking an individual's equity market participation to their risk aversion and

beliefs. We regress each of the six economic outcome measures (the two equity market

participation measures, the risk aversion metric, and the three return belief metrics) on the first 10

principal components of the genetics data and the control variables (indicators for HRS waves,

age, gender, retired, and married). The residuals from these separate regressions--denoted

orthogonalized outcomes--reflect variation in each economic outcome that cannot be explained

by the 10 genetic principal components or the control variables.

    We next regress orthogonalized stock market participation on orthogonalized risk aversion and

orthogonalized beliefs. For ease of interpretation, we standardize (rescale to unit variance and zero

mean) the independent variables. Panel A in Table VIII reports the estimated coefficients from the

regressions of the two measures of orthogonalized equity market participation on orthogonalized

risk aversion and beliefs individually (columns 1 to 4 and 6 to 9) and simultaneously (columns 5

and 10). Consistent with theory, equity market participation is negatively related to risk aversion,

positively related to beliefs regarding the likelihood the market will increase in the next year, and

inversely related to beliefs regarding the likelihood of a greater than 20% decline in equity markets

44
   By "everything else" we mean, of course, everything else not explained by the control variables and genetic principal
components. We take this approach so that we can decompose the R2 into PGS and non-PGS components. In the
Internet Appendix we report regressions including the controls, principal components, and PGSs simultaneously and
find nearly identical results (although such an approach does not allow a direct decomposition of the R2 into PGS and
non-PGS components). In addition, because the residual captures both genetic sources not captured by our eight PGSs,
as well as all non-genetic sources, our estimates of the PGS share of predictability are conservative estimates of the
genetic share.

                                                          37
over the next year regardless of whether the regressors are included individually or simultaneously.

When included as the only regressor, the orthogonalized likelihood of a 20% gain is positively

related to equity market participation (columns 3 and 8). However, consistent with the hypothesis

that investors who view the market as less volatile are more likely to participate, when controlling

for risk aversion and other beliefs, investors who believe there is a higher likelihood of a greater

than 20% equity return in the next year are less likely to invest in equity markets (columns five

and ten).

                                          [Insert Table VIII about here]

     We next partition the independent variables (orthogonalized risk aversion and beliefs) into

PGS and non-PGS components and then estimate the following regression,
        1RAPGS +  2RANon - PGS +  ,
     EQ =                                                                                                            (2)

where EQ is orthogonalized stock market participation. RAPGS is the portion of orthogonalized risk

aversion predicted by the eight PGSs. That is, it consists of the fitted values from a regression of

orthogonalized risk aversion on the eight PGSs. (We report regression estimates in the Internet

Appendix). RANon-PGS is the portion of orthogonalized risk aversion independent of the eight

PGSs. 45 Because the two independent variables are mechanically uncorrelated, the R2 from

equation (2) can be directly decomposed into PGS and non-PGS components: 46
               )  2( 
          2 ( EQ         ^ RA )  2 (   ^ RA
                                            Non - PGS )
=  R2 =                    1  PGS
                                  +     2
                                                        .                                                            (3)
          ( EQ )
           2
                        ( EQ )
                         2
                                       ( EQ )
                                          2



We then repeat this process for each of the belief metrics. We report coefficients in Panel B of

Table VIII.47 The bottom row reports the fraction of the R2 accounted for by the portion of risk


45
   We exclude the individual i and year t subscripts for notational brevity.
46
   For simplicity, we write Equations (2) and (3) when using only the PGS and non-PGS components of risk aversion.
However, Equation (3) holds even when Equation (2) contains eight regressors, i.e., the four measures (risk aversion
and the three return belief metrics) predicted by the PGSs and the four residuals. That is, given the same set of
predictors (i.e., the eight PGSs), each PGS component is orthogonal to its own residual and each of the other residuals.
For instance, the PGS (i.e., predicted) portion of risk aversion is orthogonal to the non-PGS (i.e., residual) portion of
beliefs regarding the likelihood the market will fall by 20%.
47
   A reader may be concerned that the portion of each variable attributed to the PGS is estimated in sample and
therefore PGSs captures some variation in the variable simply by chance. As a robustness test (see Internet Appendix),
we repeat the analysis using out-of-sample estimates and find essentially identical results.

                                                           38
aversion or beliefs predicted by the genetic endowments, i.e., the first term on the right-hand side

of Equation (3) divided by the R2.

   The results in Panel B suggest that a substantial portion of the relation between individuals'

equity market participation choices and their risk aversion or beliefs arises from the genetic

endowments associated with cognition, personality, health, and body shape. For example, focusing

first on the regressions that include only the PGS and non-PGS components of a single risk

aversion or return belief variable (i.e., columns 1-4 and 6-9), all coefficients (both the portion

predicted by the eight PGSs and the portion attributed to everything else) are statistically

significant at the 1% level and economically meaningful. For instance, the first column reveals

that a one standard deviation increase in PGS-predicted risk aversion is associated with a 5.4%

smaller chance of holding equity while a one standard deviation increase in non-PGS risk aversion

is associated with a 5.0% lower chance of holding equity. For three of the four variables (risk

aversion, perceived likelihood that the market will increase over the next year, and the perceived

likelihood that the market will fall by at least 20% over the next year), the signs of the PGS and

non-PGS portions match across the eight regressions, and the portion predicted by the eight PGSs,

on average, accounts for 42% of the regression R2 (i.e., the average value in the bottom row across

columns 1, 2, 4, 6, 7, and 9 is 42%).

   Similar to Panel A, columns 3 and 8 show the uniqueness of the regression of orthogonalized

market participation on the perceived likelihood that the market will increase by more than 20%--

as the coefficients associated with the PGS and non-PGS portions have opposite signs.

Specifically, the PGS component is negative suggesting it may capture the genetic share of investor

views of the riskiness of stock returns, while the non-PGS component is positive suggesting it may

better capture investor views of very favorable returns (when excluding risk aversion and the other

beliefs from the analysis).

   Columns (5) and (10) report the coefficients from regressions in which we include the PGS

and non-PGS components of all four measures (risk aversion and the three return belief metrics)

simultaneously as regressors. Recognize, however, that because the PGS components are fitted
                                                39
values from the same eight explanatory variables (i.e., the PGSs), variation in the PGS components

are highly correlated. Specifically, the absolute value of the correlation between the four predicted

(i.e., PGS) components averages 65% versus 15% for the four residual (non-PGS) components. 48

As a result, the PGS components exhibit high levels of collinearity reducing the power of the tests.

Importantly, however, the collinearity does not bias the R2 (or how the R2 is apportioned between

the PGS and non-PGS components).

     Results in column (5) of Panel B suggest that the eight genetic endowments account for 32%

of the relation between individuals' equity market participation and their risk aversion and beliefs

regarding the distribution of equity returns. Similarly, results in column (10) suggest that the eight

genetic endowments can explain 20% of the relation between the fraction of assets individuals

hold in equity and their risk aversion and beliefs. In sum, genetic endowments associated with

cognition, personality, health, and body shape play a substantial role in linking stock market

participation to risk aversion and beliefs. 49



VI.B. The Role of the Eight PGSs in linking Economic Outcomes and Investor Characteristics

     Given the 11 investor characteristics are a function of the eight genetic endowments (see Table

VI), environment, and other (unknown) genetic endowments, we next estimate how much of the

relation between these characteristics and outcomes can be attributed to variation in the

characteristic predicted by the eight genetic endowments. Following our previous analysis, we

48
   For example, Panel B in Table III shows that the genetic endowment associated with Neuroticism is positively
associated with risk aversion, beliefs regarding the likelihood of at least 20% gain in equity prices, and beliefs
regarding the likelihood of at least a 20% decline in equity prices. As a result, a higher Neuroticism PGS will be
associated with a simultaneous increase in the PGS components of risk aversion, beliefs regarding the likelihood of at
least 20% increase in equity markets, and beliefs regarding the likelihood of at least a 20% decline in equity markets.
Note that Table III values are based on regressions of risk aversion or return beliefs, whereas the genetic components
used in Table VIII are based on estimates of risk aversion or return beliefs after accounting for variation attributed to
the control variables and the 10 genetic principal components. As shown in the Internet Appendix, however, the
relations between outcomes and the PGSs (Table III) are nearly identical to the relation between orthogonalized
outcomes and the PGSs that are used in Table VIII.
49
   Although the estimates are similar to heritability estimates (e.g., 30% of the variation in risk aversion is heritable),
it is important to recognize that our molecular genetics work is addressing a different question (e.g., "how much of
the relation between risk aversion and stock market participation can be explained by these eight endowments?" versus
"how much of the of the variation in risk aversion is due to genetics?"). As a result, the magnitudes of the coefficients
in our molecular genetics study and twin studies cannot be directly compared.

                                                            40
begin by regressing each of the outcome variables (as in Table VIII) and each of the characteristics

on the first 10 principal components of the genetics data and the control variables (indicators for

HRS waves, age, gender, retired, and married). The residuals from these regressions--denoted

orthogonalized outcomes or orthogonalized investor characteristics--reflect variation in each

outcome or characteristic that cannot be explained by the control variables or the 10 genetic

principal components.

     We then regress each of the orthogonalized investor characteristics on the eight PGSs and

denote the portion of the orthogonalized characteristic predicted by the eight PGSs (i.e., the fitted

value) as the PGS component of the characteristic and the portion explained by everything else

(i.e., the residual) as the non-PGS component (the Internet Appendix reports the coefficient

estimates from these regressions). As before, for ease of interpretation, we standardize (rescale to

unit variance and zero mean) both the PGS and non-PGS components and then regress each of the

orthogonalized outcome variables on PGS and non-PGS components of each of the orthogonalized

investor characteristic variables. Because the PGS and non-PGS components are mechanically

independent, analogous to Equations (2) and (3), the R2 from these regressions can be directly

partitioned into the portion attributed to the eight PGSs (the PGS component) and the portion

attributed to everything else (the non-PGS component).

     Panel A in Table IX reports pairs of coefficients from the 66 regressions (six outcomes times

11 characteristics). 50 Panel B reports the R2 from the regression of the orthogonalized outcome

variable on the PGS and non-PGS components of each orthogonalized investor characteristic.

Panel C reports the portion of the regression R2 attributed to the PGS-predicted portion of each

characteristic. The results demonstrate that a meaningful portion of the relation between each of

the 11 investor characteristics and the economic outcomes arises from the portion of the

characteristic predicted by the genetic endowments associated with cognition, personality, health,

and body shape. For example, as shown in the fifth row of the first two columns in Panel A, a one
50
   Because the PGS component for each of these 11 characteristics are estimated from the same eight PGSs, we cannot
include all 11 PGS components simultaneously as regressors (analogous to the fifth and tenth columns in Table VIII),
i.e., the matrix is mechanically singular once including more than eight of the 11 PGS components.

                                                        41
standard deviation higher PGS component of trust is associated with 7.2% greater likelihood of

stock market participation, while a one standard deviation higher non-PGS trust is associated with

an 8.3% greater likelihood of stock market participation. Therefore, as shown in the fifth row of

Panel C, 43% of the relation (0.0722/(0.0722+0.0832)) between orthogonalized stock market

participation and the two components of orthogonalized trust arises from the portion of

orthogonalized trust predicted by the eight genetic endowments and 57% of the relation (i.e., 57%

of the R2) arises from the portion of orthogonalized trust explained by everything else. 51

                                         [Insert Table IX about here]

     As shown in the first column of the bottom row in Table IX, averaged across the 11

characteristics, 38% of the ability of the two components of the characteristic (the PGS and non-

PGS components) to explain orthogonalized stock market participation arises from the portion of

the characteristic predicted by genetic endowments associated with cognition, personality, health,

and body shape. The bottom row of Panel C reports averages ranging from 20% to 52% across the

six outcome variables. In addition, for eight of the 11 characteristics--income, education,

cognition, trust, sociability, early life poverty, BMI, and health--the portion associated with the

eight genetic endowments explains, on average, at least 30% of the regression R2 across the six

outcome variables (i.e., the average value in the Panel C row associated with that characteristic is

at least 30%). In short, the results suggest that a substantial portion of the heritability in stock

market participation, risk aversion, and beliefs arise, at least in part, because genetic endowments

associated with cognition, personality, health, and body shape influence each of the 11 investor

characteristics.



                                               VII. CONCLUSIONS

     Using Health and Retirement Study data, we provide evidence that genetic endowments

associated with cognition, personality, health, and body shape predict equity market participation.
51
   Similar to Table VIII, the signs of the coefficients in "PGS" column of Panel A are identical to the signs of the
"Non-PGS" column in all cases except orthogonalized beliefs regarding the likelihood of a greater than 20% market
return (and for the insignificant coefficient of Height related to the likelihood of a less than 20% market decline).

                                                         42
Moreover, these endowments, established at least 50 years prior, also predict the two factors that

traditional economic theory suggests play the central role in determining heterogeneity in equity

exposure: risk aversion and beliefs regarding the distribution of equity returns. The relationships

we uncover are both intuitive and consistent with our hypotheses. For example, stock market

participation is positively related to genetic endowments associated with Educational Attainment,

General Cognition, and Height and inversely related to genetic endowments associated with

Neuroticism, Depressive Symptoms, Myocardial Infarction, Coronary Disease, and BMI.

   We further show that the genetic endowments associated with cognition, personality, health,

and body shape continue to predict stock market participation even when controlling for self-

reported risk aversion and beliefs. These results suggest that either the endowments capture

dimensions of risk aversion and beliefs not captured by self-reported values or the endowments

capture individual differences other than risk aversion and beliefs that influence stock market

participation decisions such as variation in circumstances.

   To better understand the channels linking individuals' genetic endowments to their stock

market participation, we also examine 11 investor characteristics shown in previous research to

explain stock market participation. We establish, for the first time, that many of these

characteristics appear to influence stock market participation because they are associated with both

risk aversion and return beliefs. Moreover, the genetic endowments associated with cognition,

personality, health, and body shape predict variation in all 11 of these investor characteristics. In

some cases, these characteristics appear to be the primary channel linking a genetic endowment to

the economic outcomes. For example, the genetic endowment for Height is no longer meaningfully

associated with equity market participation once we control for an individual's realized height. In

other cases, however, we fail to identify a specific channel linking the genetic endowment to the

economic outcome. The genetic endowment for Neuroticism, for instance, continues to predict

variation in risk aversion even when controlling for any of the 11 investor characteristics.

   Last, we estimate the relative importance of genetic endowments associated with cognition,

personality, health, and body shape in linking stock market participation to risk aversion/beliefs
                                                 43
and the 11 investor characteristics. We estimate that these genetic endowments can explain 32%

of the relation between stock market participation and risk aversion/beliefs. Across the 11 investor

characteristics, the eight genetic endowments explain, on average, 38% of the relation between the

characteristic and whether an investor participates in equity markets, 20% of the relation between

the characteristic and risk aversion, and more than one-third of the relation between the

characteristic and beliefs regarding the distribution of equity returns.

   In short, the nitrogenous bases in our DNA--for example, whether we have an A or a G at a

specific locus--predict our stock market participation, our risk aversion, and our beliefs regarding

the distribution of equity returns. Stock market participation heritability arises, at least in part,

because molecular genetic markers associated with cognition, personality, health, and body shape

predict (1) variation in risk aversion and beliefs, and (2) variation in investor characteristics. Our

evidence provides important links between the latent-variable investor heritability literature and

the investor characteristics literature and reveals strong evidence of how and why stock market

participation, risk aversion, and beliefs regarding the distribution of equity returns are heritable.

   We caution that, analogous to evidence linking genetic scores to educational attainment (e.g.,

Okbay et al., 2016), we do not suggest that there exists an "equity market participation gene" any

more than there exists a gene that causes individuals to graduate from college. Rather, we propose

that individual genetic endowments predict equity market participation, at least in part, through

genetic influences on risk tolerance, perceptions of the distribution of equity returns, and investor

characteristics. These influences may be direct or indirect--genetic endowments may directly

impact risk aversion or they may interact with environment to impact risk aversion. For instance,

a genetic endowment for high Neuroticism may result in lower sociability and, as Hong, Kubik,

and Stein (2004) point out, lower sociability may result in individuals being less likely to "learn"




                                                  44
about the historically high returns offered by equity markets (i.e., gene by environment

interactions). 52

     Given our results, one might naturally ask what are the benefits of understanding how genetic

endowments impact choices? First and foremost, there exists a need for basic research to better

understand the mechanisms and linkages that underlie individual choices. For example, previous

research has found that forecasts by professionals are biased (e.g., Gennaioli, Ma, and Shleifer,

2016; Bordalo, Gennaioli, Ma, and Shleifer, 2020). Our results suggest that genetics play a role in

these biased forecasts. Future research could explore this issue further.

     Beyond this academic enrichment, the potential policy implications are many. As one example,

consider the traditional economic model that treats utility parameters for risk aversion as given

and assumes rational distributional beliefs. If tastes and beliefs are, at least partially, impacted by

inherent genetic endowments--and we have some understanding of how, and which, endowments

influence financial decisions--then there may be straightforward pareto improving social

architecture choices that are possible. For example, many individuals may greatly prefer a defined

benefit approach, or defined contribution plan with target date funds or a robo-adviser, rather than

a large slate of choices within a defined contribution plan. Similarly, the benefits of a robust and

stable social security program may be understated when one recognizes the benefits available for

individuals with predispositions to make poor financial choices (for example, due to errors in

return beliefs that are at least in part driven by genetic endowments related to personality).

Moreover, a better understanding of the mechanisms that drive what appears to be suboptimal

choices is a fruitful avenue of pursuit when developing best approaches to improve social well-

being. For instance, if a genetic tendency towards Neuroticism drives ambiguity aversion that leads

to suboptimal choices, there may be opportunities to create securities that hedge ambiguities

through innovative contract design. Consider, as an analogy, that handedness has a genetic



52
  As shown in Table VII, however, Neuroticism continues to predict stock market participation even when controlling
for sociability.

                                                        45
component (e.g., Medland et al., 2009). Knowing this, perhaps a better solution than forcing all

left-handed individuals to use their right hand is to develop left-handed tools.




                                                 46
                                             REFERENCES
Abraham, Gad, Aki S. Havulinna, Oneil G. Bhalala, Sean G. Byars, Alysha M. De Livera, Laxman
    Yetukuri, ..., and Michael Inouye, "Genomic Prediction of Coronary Heart Disease," European Heart
    Journal, 37 (2016), 3267­3278.
Abraham, Gad, Adam Kowalczyk, Justin Zobel, and Michael Inouye, "Performance and Robustness of
    Penalized and Unpenalized Methods for Genetic Prediction of Complex Human Disease," Genetic
    Epidemiology, 37 (2013), 184­195.
Abraham, Gad, and Michael Inouye, "Fast Principal Component Analysis of Large-Scale Genome-Wide
    Data," PLoS ONE, 9 (2014), e93766.
Addoum, Jawad M., George Korniotis, and Alok Kumar, "Stature, Obesity, and Portfolio Choice,"
    Management Science, 63 (2017), 3393­3413.
Anagol, Santosh, Vimal Balasubramaniam, and Tarun Ramadorai, "Noise Trading and Experience Effects,"
    Working Paper, University of Pennsylvania, University of Warwick, and Imperial College London,
    2018.
Balloch, Adnan, Anamaria Nicolae, and Dennis Philip, "Stock Market Literacy, Trust, and Participation,"
    Review of Finance, 19 (2015), 1925­1963.
Barnea, Amir, Henrik Cronqvist, and Stephan Siegel, "Nature or Nurture: What Determines Investor
    Behavior?" Journal of Financial Economics, 98 (2010), 583­604.
Barth, Daniel, Nicholas W. Papageorge, and Kevin Thom, "Genetic Endowments and Wealth Inequality,"
    forthcoming, Journal of Political Economy, 128 (2018), 1774­1522.
Beauchamp, Jonathan P., David Cesarini, Magnus Johannesson, Matthijs J. H. M. van der Loos, Phillipp
    D. Koellinger, Patrick J. F. Groenen, ... and Nicholas A. Christakis, "Molecular Genetics and
    Economics," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25 (2011), 57­82.
Benartzi, Shlomo, "Excessive Extrapolation and the Allocation of 401(k) Accounts to Company Stock,"
    Journal of Finance, 56 (2001), 1747­1764.
Benjamin, Daniel J., Sebastian A. Brown, and Jesse M. Shapiro, "Who is "Behavioral"? Cognitive Ability
    and Anomalous Preferences," Journal of the European Economic Association, 11 (2013), 1231­1255.
Benjamin, Daniel J., David Cesarini, Christopher F. Chabris, Edward L. Glaeser, David I. Laibson,
    Vilmundur Gudnason, ... and Paul Lichtenstein, "The Promises and Pitfalls of Genoeconomics,"
    Annual Review of Economics, 4 (2012), 627­662.
Berkman, Lisa F., Ichiro Kawachi, and M. Maria Glymour, Social Epidemiology (New York, NY: Oxford
    University Press, 2014).
Bernile, Gennaro, Vineet Bhagwat, and P. Raghavendra Rau, "What Doesn't Kill You Will Only Make
    You More Risk-Loving: Early-Life Disasters and CEO Behavior," Journal of Finance, 70 (2017), 167­
    206.
Bharath, Sreedhar T., and DuckKi Cho, "Ephemeral Experiences, Long Lived Impact: Disasters and
    Portfolio Choice," Working Paper, Arizona State University, 2016.
Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes, "From the Cradle to the Labor Market? The
    Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes," Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (2007), 409­439.
Bonaparte, Yosef, and Alok Kumar, "Political Activism, Information Costs, and Stock Market
    Participation," Journal of Financial Economics, 107 (2017), 760­786.
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, Yueran Ma, and Andrei Shleifer, "Overreaction in Macroeconomics
    Expectations," American Economic Review, forthcoming (2020).
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer, "Memory, Attention, and Choice," Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 135 (2020), 1399­1442.
Brennan, Thomas J., and Andrew W. Lo, "The Origins of Behavior," Quarterly Journal of Finance, 1
    (2011), 55­108.
----, "An Evolutionary Model of Bounded Rationality and Intelligence," PLoS ONE, 7 (2012), e50310, 1-
    8.
Brennan, Thomas J., Andrew W. Lo, and Ruixun Zhang, "Variety is the Spice of Life: Irrational Behavior
    as Adaptation to Stochastic Environments," Quarterly Journal of Finance, 8 (2018), 1­39.
Bricker, Jesse, and Geng Li, "Credit Scores, Social Capital, and Stock Market Participation," Finance and
    Economics Discussion Series Working Paper No. 2017­008, 2017.
Brown, Jeffrey R., Zoran Ivkovi, Paul A. Smith, and Scott Weisbenner, "Neighbors Matter: Casual
    Community Effects and Stock Market Participation," Journal of Finance, 63 (2008), 1509­1531.
Brown, Sue, and Richard Sias, "The Fault in Our Stars: Molecular Genetics and Technology Adoption,"
    Working paper, University of Arizona, 2019.
Bush, William S. and Jason H. Moore, "Genome-Wide Association Studies," PLoS Computational Biology,
    8 (2012), e1002822.
Calvet, Laurent E. and Paolo Sodini, "Twin Picks: Disentangling the Determinants of Risk-Taking in
    Household Portfolios," Journal of Finance, 69 (2014), 867­906.
Cameron, Lisa, and Manisha Shah, "Risk-Taking Behavior in the Wake of Natural Disasters," Journal of
    Human Resources, 50 (2015), 484­515.
Campbell, John Y., "Household Finance," Journal of Finance, 61 (2006), 1533­1604.
Caplin, Andrew, and John Leahy, "Psychological Expected Utility Theory and Anticipatory Feelings,"
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116 (2001), 55­79.
CARDIoGRAMplusC4D Consortium, "A Comprehensive 1000 Genomes-Based Genome-Wide
    Association Meta-Analysis of Coronary Artery Disease," Nature Genetics, 47 (2015), 1121­1130.
Cesarini, David, Christopher T. Dawes, Magnus Johannesson, Paul Lichtenstein, and Björn Wallace,
    "Genetic Variation in Preferences for Giving and Risk Taking," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124
    (2009), 809­842.
Cesarini, David, Magnus Johannesson, Patrik K. E. Magnusson, and Björn Wallace, "The Behavioral
    Genetics of Behavioral Anomalies," Management Science, 58 (2012), 21­31.
Cesarini, David, Magnus Johannesson, Paul Lichtenstein, and Björn Wallace, "Heritability of
    Overconfidence," Journal of the European Economic Association, 7 (2009), 617­627.
Cesarini, David, Magnus Johannesson, Paul Lichtenstein, Örjan Sandewall, and Björn Wallace, "Genetic
    Variation in Financial Decision Making," Journal of Finance, 65 (2010), 1725­1754.
Cesarini, David, Erik Lindqvist, Robert Östling, and Björn Wallace, "Wealth, Health, and Child
    Development: Evidence from Administrative Data on Swedish Lottery Players," Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 131 (2016), 687­738.
Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, "Reinforcement Learning and
    Savings Behavior," Journal of Finance, 64 (2009), 2515­2534.
Christelis, Dimitris, Tullio Jappelli, and Mario Padula, "Cognitive Abilities and Portfolio Choice,"
    European Economic Review, 54 (2010), 18­38.
Cole, Shawn A., Anna Paulson, and Gauri Kartini Shastry, "Smart Money? The Effect of Education on
    Financial Outcomes," Review of Financial Studies, 27 (2014), 2022­2051.
Cronqvist, Henrik, and Stephan Siegel, "The Genetics of Investment Biases," Journal of Financial
    Economics, 113 (2014), 215­234.
----, "The Origins of Savings Behavior," Journal of Political Economy, 123 (2015), 123­169.
Davies, G., N. Armstrong, J. C. Bis, J. Bressler, V. Chouraki, S. Giddaluru, ... and I. J. Deary, "Genetic
    Contributions to Variation in General Cognitive Function: A Meta-Analysis of Genome-Wide
    Association Studies in the CHARGE Consortium (N=53,949)," Molecular Psychiatry, 20 (2015), 183­
    192.
de Moor, M. H., S. M. van den Berg, K. J. Verweij, R. F. Krueger, M. Luciano, A. A. Vasquez, ... and D.
    I. Boomsma, "Meta-Analysis of Genome-Wide Association Studies for Neuroticism, and the Polygenic
    Association with Major Depressive Disorder," JAMA Psychiatry, 72 (2015), 642­650.
Deaton, Angus and Raksha Arora, "Life at the Top: The Benefits of Height," Economics and Human
    Biology, 7 (2009), 133­136.
Decker, Simon and Hendrik Schmitz, "Health Shocks and Risk Aversion," Journal of Health Economics,
    50 (2016), 156­170.
Dick, Danielle M., "Gene-Environment Interaction in Psychological Traits and Disorders," Annual Review
    of Clinical Psychology, 7 (2011), 383­409.
Dimmock, Stephen G., Roy Kouwenberg, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Kim Peijnenburg, "Ambiguity Aversion
    and Household Portfolio Choice Puzzles: Empirical Evidence," Journal of Financial Economics, 119
    (2016), 559­577.
Dohman, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde, "Are Risk Aversion and Impatience
    Related to Cognitive Ability?" American Economic Review, 100 (2010), 1238­1260.
Dominitz, Jeff, and Charles F. Manski, "Expected Equity Returns and Portfolio Choice: Evidence from the
    Health and Retirement Study," Journal of the European Economic Association, 5 (2007), 369­379.
----, "Measuring and Interpreting Expectations of Equity Returns," Journal of Applied Econometrics, 26
    (2011), 352­370.
Domingue, Benjamin, Daniel Belsky, Dalton Conley, Kathleen Mullan Harris, and Jason D. Boardman,
    "Polygenic Influence on Educational Attainment: New Evidence from the National Longitudinal Study
    of Adolescent to Adult Health," AERA Open, 1 (2015), 1­13.
Dow, James, and Sérgio Ribeiro da Costa Werlang, "Uncertainty Aversion, Risk Aversion, and the Optimal
    Choice of Portfolio," Econometrica, 60 (1992), 197­204.
Engelberg, Joseph, and Christopher A. Parsons, "Worrying About the Stock Market: Evidence from
    Hospital Admissions," Journal of Finance, 71 (2016), 1227­1250.
Evangelou, Evangelos, and John P.A. Ioannidis, "Meta-Analysis Methods for Genome-Wide Association
    Studies and Beyond," Nature Reviews Genetics, 14 (2013), 379­389.
Evans, Anthony M., and William Revelle, "Survey and Behavioral Measurements of Interpersonal Trust,"
    Journal of Research in Personality, 42 (2008), 1585­1593.
Falk, Armin, Anke Becker, Thomas Dohmen, Benjamin Enke, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde, "Global
    Evidence on Economic Preferences, Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (2018), 1645­1692.
Fischhoff, Baruch, and Wändi Bruine De Bruin, "Fifty­Fifty=50%?" Journal of Behavioral Decision
    Making, 12 (1999), 149­163.
Fisher, Gwenith G., Halimah Hassan, Jessica D. Faul, Willard L. Rodgers, and David R. Weir, "Health and
    Retirement Study Imputation of Cognitive Functioning Measures: 1992­2014," (Final Release Version,
    2017) available at http://hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/modules/meta/xyear/cogimp/desc/COGIMPdd.pdf.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Yueran Ma, and Andrei Shleifer, "Expectations and Investment. NBER Macroeconomics
    Annual, 30 (2016), 379­442.
Georgarakos, Dimitris, and Giacomo Pasini, "Trust, Sociability, and Stock Market Participation," Review
    of Finance, 15 (2011), 693­725.
Giannetti, Mariassunta, and Tracy Yue Wang, "Corporate Scandals and Household Stock Market
    Participation," Journal of Finance, 71 (2016), 2591­2636.
Girirajan, Santhosh, "Missing Heritability and Where to Find It," Genome Biology, 18 (2017), 89.
Goetzmann, William N., Dasol Kim, and Robert J. Shiller, "Crash Beliefs from Investor Surveys," NBER
    Working Paper no. 22143, 2017.
Goldstein, Benjamin A., Lingyao Yang, Elias Salfati, Themistoclies L. Assimes, "Contemporary
    Considerations for Constructing a Genetic Risk Score: An Empirical Approach," Genetic
    Epidemiology, 39 (2015), 439­445.
Grinblatt, Mark, Matti Keloharju, and Juhani Linnainmaa, "IQ and Stock Market Participation," Journal of
    Finance, 66 (2011), 2121­2164.
Guillemette, Michael A., Michael Finke, and John Gilliam, "Risk Tolerance Questions to Best Determine
    Client Portfolio Allocation Preferences," Journal of Financial Planning, 5 (2012), 36­44.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, "Trusting the Stock Market," Journal of Finance, 63
    (2008), 2557­2600.
Guo, Guang, "Twin Studies: What Can They Tell Us about Nature and Nurture?" Contexts, 4 (2005), 43­
    47.
Harlow, W. V. and Keith C. Brown, "Understanding and Assessing Financial Risk Tolerance: A Biological
    Perspective," Financial Analysts Journal, 46 (1990), 50­80.
Health and Retirement Study. Produced and distributed by the University of Michigan with funding from
    the National Institute on Aging (grant number U01AG009740), Ann Arbor, MI.
Heaton, John and Deborah Lucas, "Market Frictions, Savings Behavior, and Portfolio Choice,"
    Macroeconomic Dynamics, 1 (1997), 76­101.
Heimer, Rawley Z., "Friends Do Let Friends Buy Stocks Actively," Journal of Economic Behavior and
    Organization, 107 (2014), 527­540.
Hong, Harrison, Jeffrey D. Kubik, and Jeremy C. Stein, "Social Interaction and Stock-Market
    Participation," Journal of Finance, 59 (2004), 137­163.
Hurd, Michael D., and Susann Rohwedder, "Stock Price Expectations and Stock Trading," NBER Working
    Paper no. 17973, 2012.
Hurd, Michael, Maarten Van Rooij, and Joachim Winter, "Stock Market Expectations of Dutch
    Households," Journal of Applied Econometrics, 26 (2011), 416­436.
Joseph, Jay, "The Use of the Classical Twin Method in the Social and Behavioral Sciences: The Fallacy
    Continues," Journal of Mind and Behavior, 34 (2013), 1­39.
Kamin, Leon J., and Arthur S. Goldberger, "Twin Studies in Behavioral Research: A Skeptical View,"
    Theoretical Population Biology, 61 (2002), 83­95.
Kamstra, Mark J., Lisa A. Kramer, and Maurice D. Levi, "A Careful Re-Examination of Seasonality in
    International Stock Markets: Comment on Sentiment and Stock Returns," Journal of Banking and
    Finance, 36 (2012), 934­956.
Kapteyn, Arie, and Federica Teppa, "Subjective Measures of Risk Aversion, Fixed Costs, and Portfolio
    Choice," Journal of Economic Psychology, 32 (2011), 564­580.
Katti, Gunnar, Lars Olov Bygren, and Soren Edvinsson, "Cardiovascular and Diabetes Mortality
    Determined by Nutrition During Parents' and Grandparents' Slow Growth Period," European Journal
    of Human Genetics, 10 (2002), 682­688.
Kaustia, Markku, and Samuli Knupfer, "Do Investors Overweight Personal Experience? Evidence from
    IPO Subscriptions," Journal of Finance, 63 (2008), 2679­2702.
Kaustia, Markku, and Sami Torstila, "Stock Market Aversion? Political Preferences and Stock Market
    Participation," Journal of Financial Economics, 100 (2011), 98­112.
Keller, Evelyn Fox, and David Harel, "Beyond the Gene," PLoS ONE, 2 (2007), e1231.
Kézdi, Gábor, and Robert J. Willis, "Who Becomes a Stockholder? Expectations, Subjective Uncertainty,
    and Asset Allocation," Working Paper, Central European University and University of Michigan, 2003.
Klein, Robert J., Caroline Zeiss, Emily Y. Chew, Jen-Yue Tsai, Richard S. Sackler, Chad Haynes, ..., and
    Josephine Hoh, "Complement Factor H Polymorphism in Age-Related Macular Degeneration,"
    Science, 308 (2005), 385­389.
Knupfer, Samuli, Elias Rantapuska, and Matti Sarvimaki, "Formative Experiences and Portfolio Choices:
    Evidence from the Finnish Great Depression," Journal of Finance, 72 (2017), 133­166.
Lee, Boram, Leonard Rosenthal, Chris Veld, and Yulia Veld-Merkoulova, "Stock Market Expectations and
    Risk Aversion of Individual Investors," International Review of Financial Analysis, 40 (2015), 122­
    131.
Lillard, Lee, and Robert Willis, "Cognition and Wealth: The Importance of Probabilistic Thinking,"
    Working Paper, University of Michigan, 2001.
Locke, A. E., B. Kahali, S. I. Berndt, A. E. Justice, T. H. Pers, F. R. Day, ... and D. C. Croteau-chonka,
    "Genetic Studies of Body Mass Index Yield New Insights for Obesity Biology," Nature, 518 (2015),
    197­206.
Luppino, Floriana S., Leonore M. de Wit, Paul F. Bouvy, Theo Stijnen, Pim Cuijpers, Brenda W. J. H.
    Penninx, and Frans G. Zitman, "Overweight, Obesity, and Depression--A Systematic Review and
    Meta-Analysis of Longitudinal Studies," Archives of General Psychiatry, 67 (2010), 220­229.
Malmendier, Ulrike, Geoffrey Tate, and Jon Yan, "Overconfidence and Early Life Experiences: The Effect
    of Managerial Traits on Corporate Financial Policies," Journal of Finance, 66 (2011), 1687­1733.
Malmendier, Ulrike, and Stefan Nagel, "Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic Experiences Affect Risk
    Taking?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126 (2011), 373­416.
----, "Learning from Inflation Experiences," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131 (2016), 53­87.
Martin, Alicia R., Christopher R. Gignoux, Raymond K. Walters, Genevieve L. Wojcik, Benjamin M.
    Neale, Simon Gravel, ..., and Eimear E. Kenny, "Human Demographic History Impacts Genetic Risk
    Prediction Across Diverse Populations," The American Journal of Human Genetics, 100 (2017), 635­
    649.
Medland, Sarah E., David L, Duffy, Margaret J. Wright, Gina M. Geffen, David A. Hay, Florence Levy,
    ..., and Dorret Boomsma, "Genetic Influences on Handedness: Data from 25,732 Australian and Dutch
    Twin Families," Neuropsychologia, 47 (2009), 330­337.
Meeks, Suzanne and Stanley A. Murrell, "Contribution of Education to Health and Life Satisfaction in
    Older Adults Mediated by Negative Affect," Journal of Aging and Health, 13 (2001), 92­119.
Merton, Robert C., "Lifetime Portfolio Selection Under Uncertainty: The Continuous-Time Case," Review
    of Economics and Statistics, 51 (1969), 247­257.
----, "Optimum Consumption and Portfolio Rules in a Continuous-Time Model," Journal of Economic
    Theory, 3 (1971), 373­413.
Nicholson, Nigel, Emma Soane, Mark Fenton-O'Creevy, and Paul Willman, "Personality and Domain-
    Specific Risk Taking," Journal of Risk Research, 8 (2005), 157­176.
Obeidat, Ma'en, Louise V. Wain, Nick Shrine, Noor Kalsheker, Maria Soler Artigas, Emmanouela Repapi,
    ..., and Veronique Vitart, "A Comprehensive Evaluation of Potential Lung Function Associated Genes
    in the SpiroMeta General Population Sample," PLoS ONE, 6 (2011), e19382.
Okbay, Aysu, Jonathan P. Beauchamp, Mark Alan Fontana, James J. Lee, and Tune H. Pers, "Genome-
    Wide Association Study Identifies 74 Loci Associated with Educational Attainment," Nature, 533
    (2016), 539-542.
Pasco, Julie A, Lana J. Williams, Felice N. Jacka, Sharon L. Brennan, and Michael Berk, "Obesity and the
    Relationship with Positive and Negative Affect," Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry,
    45 (2013), 477-482.
Persico, Nicola, Andrew Postelwaite, and Dan Silverman, "The Effect of Adolescent Experience on Labor
    Market Outcomes: The Case of Height," Journal of Political Economy, 112 (2004), 1019­1053.
Polderman, Tinca J.C., Beben Benyamin, Christiaan A de Leeuw, Patrick F Sullivan, Arjen van Bochoven,
    Peter M Visscher, ..., and Danielle Posthuma, "Meta-Analysis of the Heritability of Human Traits
    Based on Fifty Years of Twin Studies," Nature Genetics, 47 (2015), 702­709.
Puri, Manju, and David T. Robinson, "Optimism and Economic Choice," Journal of Financial Economics,
    86 (2007), 71­99.
Rosen, Harvey S., and Stephen Wu, "Portfolio Choice and Health Status," Journal of Financial Economics,
    72 (2004), 457­484.
Schunkert, H., I. R. Konig, S. Kathiresan, M. P. Reilly, T. L. Assimes, H. Holm, ... and D. Absher, "Large
    Scale Association Analysis Identifies 13 New Susceptibility Loci for Coronary Artery Disease," Nature
    Genetics, 43 (2011), 333­338.
Shin, Su Hyun, Dean R. Lillard, and Jay Bhattacharya, "Understanding the Correlation Between
    Alzheimer's Disease Polygenic Risk, Wealth, and the Composition of Wealth Holdings," Working
    Paper, University of Alabama, Ohio State University, DIW-Berlin, NBER, and Stanford University,
    2018.
Simonson, Matthew A., Amanda G. Wills, Matthew C. Keller, and Matthew B. McQueen, "Recent Methods
    for Polygenic Analysis of Genome-Wide Data Implicate an Important Effect of Common Variants on
    Cardiovascular Disease Risk," BMC Medical Genetics, 12 (2011), 146.
Smith, Jacqui, Lindsay Ryan, Gwenith G. Fisher, Amanda Sonnega, and David Weir, "Psychosocial and
    Lifestyle Questionnaire 2006­2016," Documentation Report, Core Section LB, 2017, available at:
    https://hrs.isr.umich.edu/publications/biblio/9066.
Vineis, Paolo, and Neil E. Pearce, "Genome-Wide Association Studies May be Misinterpreted: Genes
    versus Heritability," Carcinogenesis, 32 (2011), 1295­1298.
Visscher, Peter M., Naomi R. Wray, Qian Zhang, Pamela Sklar, Mark I. McCarthy, Matthew A. Brown, ...,
    and Jian Yang, "10 Years of GWAS Discovery: Biology, Function, and Translation," The American
    Journal of Human Genetics, 101 (2017), 5­22.
Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette, "Towards an Explanation of Household Portfolio Choice Heterogeneity:
    Nonfinanical Income and Participation Cost Structures," NBER Working Paper no. 8884, 2002.
Ware, Erin B., Lauren L. Schmitz, Jessica Faul, Arianna Gard, Colter Mitchell, Jennifer A. Smith, ...
    Sharon L.R. Kardia, "Heterogeneity in Polygenic Scores for Common Human Traits," bioRxiv, 106062,
    2017.
Ware, Erin, Lauren Schmitz, Arianna Gard, and Jessica Faul, "HRS Documentation Report: HRS Polygenic
    Scores ­ Release 2," Survey Research Center, University of Michigan, 2018.
Winerman, Lea, "A Second Look at Twin Studies," Monitor on Psychology, 35 (2004), 46.
Wood, A. R., T. Esko, J. Yang, S. Vedantam, T. H. Pers, S. Gustafsson, ... and N. Amin, "Defining the
    Role of Common Variation in the Genomic and Biological Architecture of Adult Human Height,"
    Nature Genetics, 46 (2014), 1173­1186.
Yogo, Motohiro, "Portfolio Choice in Retirement: Health Risk and the Demand for Annuities, Housing and
    Risky Assets," Journal of Monetary Economics, 80 (2016), 17-34.
Zuk, Or, Eliana Hechter, Shamil R. Sunyaev, and Eric S. Lander, "The Mystery of Missing Heritability:
    Genetic Interactions Create Phantom Heritability," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
    109 (2012), 1193­1198.
                                APPENDIX A ­ VARIABLE DETAIL AND CONSTRUCTION
                                         Panel A: Economic outcome variables
                      (Source: Combination of RAND HRS fat files and RAND HRS Longitudinal File 2016 (V1))
Equity          Equity participation equals one if the respondent reports holding equities (i) in their pension fund(s), (ii) in
participation   IRA/KEOGH accounts, or (iii) directly.
                (i) Pension fund information comes from the employment and pension section of the interview. Specifically,
                respondents are asked how much money is in the pension plan now and what percent of this plan is invested in
                stock? This question is asked of both spouses for households with partners (i.e., the data are at the respondent
                level). If either spouse reports any of their pension wealth (respondents are asked about multiple pensions if
                they have more than one pension) is invested in the stock market we code the household (associated with the
                financial respondent) as participating in equity markets via their pension assets. In 2010, the respondent is
                limited to a maximum of four pension plans (i.e., eight per household for partnered households). In 2012, HRS
                changed the structure of the pension section and no longer limited the number of pension funds to four per
                respondent. We find, however, that very few respondents report more than four pension plans. Respondents
                who answer they are not sure what fraction is invested in equities, are asked a series of "unfolding" brackets to
                approximate the amount, e.g., is it less than 40% and more than 20%? In cases where the respondent answer is
                greater than zero, we code the household as investing in the stock market.
                (ii) The IRA/KEOGH information comes from the financial respondent's interview regarding household assets
                and income. Specifically, the financial respondent is asked, "Do you [or your] [husband/wife/partner] currently
                have any money or assets that are held in an Individual Retirement Account, that is, in an IRA or KEOGH
                account?" For those households that respond positively, the financial respondent is asked if any of that
                IRA/KEOGH is invested in stocks or mutual funds, how much is in each account, and what fraction of the
                IRA/KEOGH is invested in stock. If the household has more than one IRA/KEOGH, the financial respondent
                is asked about them in order of size up to the three largest IRA/KEOGH accounts. If the financial respondent
                reports any of the household IRA/KEOGH accounts are at least partially invested in the stock market we code
                the household as participating in their IRA/KEOGH.
                (iii) The direct holdings information also arises from the assets and income section of the HRS interview.
                Specifically, financial respondents are asked "Aside from anything you have already told me about, do you [or
                your] [husband/wife/partner] have any shares of stock or stock mutual funds?" Respondents who answer yes
                are classified as participating directly (i.e., in non-retirement accounts) in equity markets following previous
                work (e.g., Addoum, Korniotis, and Kumar, 2017; Hong, Kubik, and Stein, 2004). In addition, respondents who
                answer yes to this question are also asked the value of the stock holdings as well as the value other financial
                assets.

                                                   Appendix A | Page 1
%Equity         We compute the fraction of all (including retirement) wealth invested in equities as the sum of the value of
                direct stocks holdings, IRA/KEOGHs held in stock (inferred from IRA/KEOGH account values and percent
                invested in stock), and pension funds held in stock (inferred from the pension fund account values and percent
                invested in stock) divided by the sum of total financial wealth, IRA/KEOGH account values, and pension fund
                account values. We winsorize %Equity at the 99% level.
                We follow RAND (see https://www.rand.org/labor/aging/dataprod.html) and compute non-housing financial
                wealth as the sum of checking/savings/money market funds, CDs/government savings bonds/Treasury bills,
                corporate/municipal/government or foreign bonds/bond funds, other savings or assets, less other (non-housing)
                debt. We compute the fraction of direct financial wealth invested in equities as the value of direct equity
                holdings (see iii above) divided by non-housing financial wealth.
Risk aversion   In the 2014 and 2016 waves, respondents were asked "Are you generally a person who tries to avoid taking
                risks or one who is fully prepared to take risks? Please rate yourself from 0 to 10, where 0 means `not at all
                willing to take risks' and 10 means `very willing to take risks.'" We subtract the respondent's average (over
                years 2014 and 2016) score to this question from 10 and then rescale the value to zero mean and unit variance
                (for ease of interpretation).
P(Rm > 0)       Respondent response in each HRS wave to the question, "We are interested in how well you think the economy
                will do in the future. By next year at this time, what is the percent chance that mutual fund shares invested in
                blue chip stocks like those in the Dow Jones Industrial Average will be worth more than they are today?" Note
                that in 2014, about half of interviewees were instead asked "What do you think is the percent chance that the
                stock market will be higher in twelve months than it is today?" We find no evidence of a meaningful difference
                in the two versions of this question.
P(Rm > 20%)     Respondent response in each HRS wave to the question, "By next year at this time, what is the percent chance
                that mutual fund shares invested in blue-chip stocks like those in the Dow Jones Industrial Average will have
                gained in value by more than 20 percent compared to what they are worth today?" Note that in 2014, about half
                of interviewees were instead asked "What do you think is the percent chance that the stock market will be at
                least 20% higher in twelve months than it is today?"
P(Rm < -20%)    Respondent response in each HRS wave to the question, "By next year at this time, what is the percent chance
                that mutual fund shares invested in blue-chip stocks like those in the Dow Jones Industrial Average will have
                fallen in value by more than 20 percent compared to what they are worth today?" Note that in 2014, about half
                of interviewees were instead asked "What do you think is the percent chance that the stock market will be at
                least 20% lower in twelve months than it is today?"




                                                  Appendix A | Page 2
                                        Panel B: HRS computed polygenic scores
                      (Source: HRS Polygenic Scores ­ Release 2, 2006-2012 Genetic Data, April 2018)
Educational       Weights from the 2016 Social Science Genetic Association Consortium (SSGAC) based on 293,723 individuals
Attainment PGS    in the discovery sample and 111,349 individuals in the replication sample (see Okbay et al. (2016))
General           Weights from the 2015 Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in Genomic Epidemiology (CHARGE) based
Cognition PGS     on 53,949 individuals who took multiple diverse cognition tests (see Davies et al. (2015))
Neuroticism PGS   Weights from the 2016 Social Science Genetic Association Consortium (SSGAC) based on 170,911 individuals
                  (see Okbay et al. (2016) and de Moor et al. (2015))
Depressive        Weights from the 2016 Social Science Genetic Association Consortium (SSGAC) based on 180,866 individuals
Symptoms PGS      (see Schunkert et al. (2011))
Myocardial        Weights from the 2015 Coronary ARtery DIsease Genome wide Replication And Meta-analysis
Infarction PGS    (CARDIoGRAM) consortium based on 184,305 individuals (see CARDIoGRAMplusC4D Consortium (2015))
Coronary          Weights from the 2011 Coronary ARtery DIsease Genome wide Replication And Meta-analysis
Disease PGS       (CARDIoGRAM) consortium based on 86,995 individuals (see Okbay et al. (2016) and de Moor et al. (2015))
BMI PGS           Weights from the 2015 Genetic Investigation of ANthropometric Traits (GIANT) consortium based on samples
                  totaling 322,154 individuals (see Locke et al. (2015))
Height PGS        Weights from the 2014 Genetic Investigation of ANthropometric Traits (GIANT) consortium based on 253,288
                  individuals in the discovery sample and 80,067 individuals in the replication sample (see Wood et al. (2014))
                                Panel C: Investor characteristics used in previous studies
                  (Source: Unless otherwise noted, combination of RAND HRS fat files and RAND HRS
                  Longitudinal File 2016 (V1))
Wealth            We hypothesize a positive relation with equity market participation due to lower direct and indirect participation
                  costs including, for example, "acquiring enough information about risks and returns to determine the
                  household's optimal mix between stocks and riskless assets" (Vissing-Jorgensen, 2002). Given that most
                  individuals greatly underestimate the mean return and overestimate market risk, learning should shift the
                  expected return beliefs right and shrink the market risk estimate (i.e., probabilities associated with extreme
                  returns). Moreover, if relative risk aversion is decreasing, then wealth will be inversely related to risk aversion
                  (see, for instance, Calvet and Sodini, 2014). Thus, wealth may impact participation via direct costs, risk
                  aversion, and beliefs.
                  We measure raw real (CPI-adjusted to 2010 dollars) wealth defined as the total wealth variable (ATOTB) from
                  the RAND HRS Longitudinal File 2016 (V1). These data include RAND imputed wealth observations (see
                  documentation for details). We winsorize raw real wealth at the 1% and 99% level. The minimum raw real
                  winsorized wealth is slightly greater than -$50,000. Therefore we add $50,000 to our real wealth variable (to

                                                     Appendix A | Page 3
                    ensure households with negative wealth are not excluded from our data) and take the natural logarithm to
                    mitigate skewness.
Income              We hypothesize a positive relation with equity market participation due to lower direct and indirect participation
                    costs (e.g., Vissing-Jorgensen, 2002). Directly analogous to wealth, higher incomes may be associated with
                    lower direct costs, lower risk aversion, and more optimistic beliefs regarding the distribution of expected
                    returns.
                    We use the total household income (ITOT) from the RAND HRS Longitudinal File 2016 (V1). These data
                    include RAND imputed income observations (see documentation for details). We convert all values to 2010
                    dollars and winsorize at the 1% and 99% level before taking the natural logarithm.
Education           We hypothesize a positive relation with equity market participation due to better understanding of financial
                    markets and cognitive ability. Education may also impact participation via higher labor income. See Cole,
                    Paulson, and Shastry (2014) for evidence of the positive relation between stock market participation and
                    education. Empirical evidence suggests cognitive ability is inversely related to risk aversion (e.g., Dohmen,
                    Falk, Huffman, and Sunde, 2010).
                    We use years of education as our measure of education.
Cognitive ability   We hypothesize a positive relation with equity market participation due to improved information processing
                    skill, income, wealth, and education. As noted for education (above), evidence suggests cognitive ability is
                    inversely related to risk aversion and greater cognitive ability should shift beliefs regarding the likelihood of
                    the market rising higher and the likelihood of an extreme market return lower. For evidence regarding cognitive
                    ability and market participation see Kezdi and Willis (2003), Benjamin, Brown, Shapiro (2013), Christelis,
                    Jappelli, and Padula (2010), Grinblatt, Keloharju, and Linnainmaa (2011), and Cole, Paulson and Shasty (2014).
                    Following Fisher, Hassan, Faul, Rodgers, and Weir (2017), we use the HRS total cognition measure which
                    ranges from 0-35, and is based on seven different tests. The first two tests are word recall--in the immediate
                    recall tests, respondents are given a list of 10 nouns (based on four possible lists) and asked to immediately
                    recall as many as possible (score 0-10). The second test is delayed recall. After about five minutes of other
                    questions, respondents are asked a second time to recall as many words as possible (score 0-10). The third test
                    is serial 7s--respondents are asked to subtract 7 from 100 and continue to do so for five trials. Score is the
                    number of correct subtractions (score 0-5). The fourth test is backwards counting--respondents are given two
                    chances to count backwards for 10 consecutive numbers starting from both 20 and 86. The recorded score is 2
                    points if the task is performed correctly on the first try, 1 point if completed correctly on the second try, and
                    zero if not correct on either attempt. The fifth test asks respondent to name the date and day of week--one point
                    for correct day, year, month, and day of week (0-4 points). The sixth test asks respondents to name two objects
                    "What do you usually use to cut paper?" and "What do you call the kind of prickly plant that grows in the

                                                       Appendix A | Page 4
              desert?" Scores are 1 point for each correct answer (0-2 points). The seventh test asks respondents to name the
              current President and Vice-President. One point for each correct answer (0-2 points). To ensure a larger sample,
              we use the average cognition score by each respondent over any of the four waves (2010, 2012, 2014, 2016)
              where the respondent completed the cognition tests. The 2010-2014 cognition scores include values imputed
              by HRS (See http://hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/modules/meta/xyear/cogimp/desc/COGIMPdd.pdf). The 2016
              score is based on raw data and does not include imputed values.
              (Source: HRS Cognition dataset for 2010-2014, Rand fat file for 2016)
Trust         We hypothesize a positive relation with equity market participation due to the individual's lower subjective
              probability of being cheated by equity markets (e.g., Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales, 2008; Giannetti and Wang,
              2016). A perceived likelihood of being cheated by markets results in lower expected return and a higher
              probability of an extreme left tail return (see Balloch, Nicolae, and Philip, 2015) for individuals with lower
              trust.
              To measure trust, the Psychosocial and Lifestyle Questionnaire asks respondents to rate their agreement with
              five statements, where score 1=strongly disagree, 2=somewhat disagree, 3=slightly disagree, 4=slightly agree,
              5=somewhat agree, 6=strongly agree. The five statements are: (1) Most people dislike putting themselves out
              to help other people, (2) Most people will use somewhat unfair means to gain profit or an advantage rather than
              lose it, (3) No one cares much what happens to you, (4) I think most people would lie in order to get ahead, and
              (5) I commonly wonder what hidden reasons another person may have for doing something nice for me.
              Following the guidance in Smith, Ryan, Fisher, Sonnega, and Weir (2017), we compute the average score for
              individuals who rate at least three of the five statements. The trust metric is included in the Leave-Behind
              Questionnaires for 2006, 2008, 2010, and 2012. To ensure a larger sample, we use the average trust score by
              each respondent over any of the four waves (2006, 2008, 2010, 2012) where the respondent completed the trust
              questions. Because higher values in the raw data indicate lower trust, we compute trust as 7 less the respondent
              average trust score over all waves in which they participate from 2006-2012. Thus, trust ranges from 1 to 6
              with high values indicating greater trust. Note that the psychosocial and lifestyle questionnaire measures
              "cynical hostility," a term from psychology to describe the "routine lack of trust of other people" (see Berkman,
              Kawachi, and Glymour, 2014). For consistency with the economics literature, we refer to this dimension as
              "trust."
Sociability   We hypothesize a positive relation with equity market participation due to the assumptions that the individual
              is (1) more informed regarding equities via word-of-mouth and observational learning, and (2) derives utility
              from socializing about investing (e.g., Hong, Kubik, and Stein, 2004; Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales, 2008;
              Heimer, 2014). As noted above, because most individuals underestimate the mean return and overestimate
              market risk, learning (via socialization) should shift the expected return beliefs right and shrink the probabilities

                                                  Appendix A | Page 5
           associated with extreme returns. Hong Kubik, and Stein (2004) propose that individuals who are more social
           may be more "bold" (less risk averse), but find no evidence of a meaningful relation between their measures of
           sociability and risk tolerance. Some researchers, however, report a negative relation between risk aversion and
           sociability (e.g., Nicholson, Soane, Fenton-O'Creevy, and Willman, 2005).
           The HRS Psychosocial and Lifestyle Questionnaire (Leave-Behind Questionnaire) asks respondents three
           questions: On average, how often do you do each of the following with any of your friends, not counting any
           who live with you? (1) meet up? (2) speak on the phone? (3) write or email? Respondents answers are (1) three
           or more times a week, (2) once or twice a week, (3) once or twice a month, (4) every few months, (5) once or
           twice a year, or (6) less than once a year or never. Following the guidance in Smith, Ryan, Fisher, Sonnega,
           and Weir (2017), we score sociability as the average score for respondents who respond to at least two of the
           three questions. Because the raw scores range from 1-6 and higher values indicate less sociability, we subtract
           the value from 6 so that sociability ranges from 1 to 6 with higher values implying greater sociability. Because
           Leave-Behind Questionnaires are given to half the respondents in each wave, we use the respondents' average
           sociability score over waves they participate in from 2006-2016.
Optimism   We hypothesize a positive relation with equity market participation due to higher expected outcomes (e.g., Puri
           and Robinson, 2007). Empirically, Puri and Robinson find an inverse relation between risk aversion and
           optimism. Thus, higher optimism may be associated with lower risk aversion, beliefs of a higher likelihood of
           markets rising, and beliefs of a lower likelihood of extreme left tail returns.
           Individual optimism measures come from the Psychosocial and Lifestyle Questionnaire. Specifically,
           respondents are asked to rate their agreement with six statements, where score 1=strongly disagree,
           2=somewhat disagree, 3=slightly disagree, 4=slightly agree, 5=somewhat agree, 6=strongly agree. The six
           statements are: (1) If something can go wrong for me it will, (2) I'm always optimistic about my future, (3) In
           uncertain times, I usually expect the best, (4) Overall, I expect more good things to happen to me than bad, (5)
           I hardly ever expect things to go my way, and (6) I rarely count on good things happening to me. Following
           Smith, Ryan, Fisher, Sonnega, and Weir (2017), we compute the raw optimism score by multiplying items (1),
           (5), and (6) by -1 and then averaging across all six values for respondents who answer at least four of the
           statements. We then compute the respondent average raw optimism score by computing the average over waves
           they participate in between 2006-2016. Because this value can (theoretically) range from -6 to +6, we add seven
           so optimism is on a scale from 1 to 13 where higher values indicate greater optimism.




                                             Appendix A | Page 6
Negative early    We hypothesize a negative relation with equity market participation due to increased risk aversion and/or lower
life experience   expected returns (e.g., Malmendier and Nagel, 2011). The authors also find evidence consistent with the
                  expected returns explanation but point out that such evidence does not preclude the risk aversion channel.
                  We capture whether individuals grew up with negative early life economic experiences by a dummy variable
                  if any of the four following conditions were met: (1) Respondents answer "poor" to the question, "Now think
                  about your family when you were growing up, from birth to age 16. Would you say your family during that
                  time was pretty well off financially, about average, or poor?", (2) Respondent answers "yes" to the question,
                  "While you were growing up, before age 16, did financial difficulties ever cause you or your family to move
                  to a different place?", (3) Respondent answers "yes" to the question, "Before age 16, was there a time when
                  you or your family received help from relatives because of financial difficulties?", and (4) Respondent answers
                  "yes" to the question, "Before age 16, was there a time of several months or more when your father had no
                  job?"
Height            We hypothesize a positive relation with equity market participation due to lower risk aversion. Addoum,
                  Korniotis, and Kumar (2017) propose that the impact of height on risk aversion may also operate via educational
                  attainment, sociability, and positive early life experience. Dohmen, Falk, Huffman, and Sunde (2010) report
                  empirical evidence that height is inversely related to risk aversion. Persico, Postlewaite, and Silverman (2004)
                  find that the positive relation between height and labor income is primarily accounted for by teen (rather than
                  adult) height suggesting that social effects (such as greater self-esteem) drive the height-wage correlation.
                  Previous research (see Deaton and Arora, 2009) also suggests that height is positively associated with greater
                  positive emotions (e.g., enjoyment) and fewer negative emotions (e.g., sadness). As detailed above, such
                  social/optimism effects could manifest in higher expectations for market returns.
                  Following Addoum, Korniotis, and Kumar (2017), we measure relative height (which we denote height) as the
                  respondent's height in meters less the average height of individuals of the same age and gender in the same
                  wave.




                                                    Appendix A | Page 7
BMI                 We hypothesize a negative relation with equity market participation due to the positive relation between BMI
                    and risk aversion. Addoum, Korniotis, and Kumar (2017) propose the relation between BMI, risk aversion, and
                    stock market participation may also operative via educational attainment, sociability, and early life experience.
                    Empirically, there is a positive association between BMI and depression (see meta-analysis by Luppino et al.,
                    2010). Previous research (e.g., Pasco, Williams, Jacka, Brennan, and Berg, 2013) also demonstrates that BMI
                    is positively related to negative affect (e.g., distress, anger, disgust, fear, and shame) which may result in more
                    pessimistic view of future stock returns.
                    Following Addoum, Korniotis, and Kumar (2017), relative BMI (computed in each wave as respondent's
                    weight in kilograms divided by the respondents height in meters squared) is computed as respondent's BMI
                    less the average BMI for individuals of the same age and gender in the same wave.
Health              We hypothesize a positive relation with equity market participation. Rosen and Wu (2004) suggest health may
                    impact portfolio choice due to changes in "the marginal utility of consumption, degree of risk aversion, rate of
                    time preference, and variability of income." Although the authors find a strong relation between health and
                    equity participation, they find little evidence regarding the channel linking portfolio decisions to health. Other
                    work demonstrates, however, that health is strongly inversely related to negative affect (e.g., see Table 2 in
                    Meeks and Murrell, 2001) and that negative health shocks are associated with increased risk aversion (e.g.,
                    Decker and Schmitz, 2016). Therefore, we hypothesize that health will be inversely related to risk aversion,
                    positively related to more optimistic beliefs regarding the distribution of equity returns, and (consistent with
                    Rosen and Wu's evidence), positively related to equity market participation.
                    Health from each respondent's response is determined from the question "Would you say your health is:
                    excellent, very good, good, fair, or poor?" Responses are coded on a five-point scale where excellent=5 and
                    poor=1 (such that higher values reflect better health).
                                                    Panel D: Control variables
                        (Source: Combination of RAND HRS longitudinal file (v2), HRS 2014 tracker file,
                        RAND HRS fat files, HRS raw files))
Age indicators      Indicator variables for respondent's age (31 indicators for age 50-80).
HRS wave            Indicator variables for HRS waves (2010, 2012, 2014, and 2016).
indicators
Gender indicator    Indicator variable equals one if respondent is male.
Retired indicator   Indicator variable equals one if respondent's labor force status is retired.
Married indicator   Indicator variable equals one if respondent is married.



                                                        Appendix A | Page 8
                                                            TABLE I
              DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS AND CORRELATIONS FOR ECONOMIC OUTCOME VARIABLES AND POLYGENIC SCORES (PGS)

                                            Panel A: Descriptive Statistics for Economic Outcome Variables
                                   N                       Mean                  Standard Deviation          Minimum           Maximum
                                  (1)                       (2)                          (3)                    (4)               (5)
Equity participation            13,200                    0.594                        0.491                  0.000             1.000
%Equity                         10,108                    0.372                        0.388                  0.000             1.456
Raw risk aversion               13,200                    4.126                        2.063                  0.000            10.000
Risk aversion                   13,200                    0.000                        1.000                 -2.000             2.847
P(Rm > 0)                       13,200                   46.942                      26.717                   0.000           100.000
P(Rm > 20%)                     13,200                   27.376                      22.718                   0.000           100.000
P(Rm < -20%)                    13,200                   30.166                      23.288                   0.000           100.000
                                             Panel B: Correlations between Economic Outcome Variables
                       Equity participation       %Equity              Risk aversion           P(Rm > 0)        P(Rm > 20%)   P(Rm < -20%)
Equity participation          1.000
%Equity                       0.630                 1.000
Risk aversion                -0.156                -0.139                   1.000
P(Rm > 0)                     0.225                 0.205                  -0.120                 1.000
P(Rm > 20%)                   0.022                 0.026                  -0.006                 0.517            1.000
P(Rm < -20%)                 -0.097                -0.088                   0.035                -0.241           -0.012         1.000
                                                     TABLE I (CONTINUED)
               DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS AND CORRELATIONS FOR ECONOMIC OUTCOME VARIABLES AND POLYGENIC SCORES (PGS)

                                                       Panel C: Descriptive Statistics for PGS Variables
                                              N                     Mean                 Standard Deviation         Minimum                  Maximum
                                             (1)                     (2)                        (3)                    (4)                     (5)
 Educational Attainment PGS                13,200                    0.0                        1.0                  -3.747                   3.463
 General Cognition PGS                     13,200                    0.0                        1.0                  -3.942                   3.975
 Neuroticism PGS                           13,200                    0.0                        1.0                  -3.729                   3.475
 Depressive Symptoms PGS                   13,200                    0.0                        1.0                  -3.363                   3.605
 Myocardial Infarction PGS                 13,200                    0.0                        1.0                  -3.647                   3.265
 Coronary Artery Disease PGS               13,200                    0.0                        1.0                  -3.718                   3.396
 BMI PGS                                   13,200                    0.0                        1.0                  -3.645                   4.096
 Height PGS                                13,200                    0.0                        1.0                  -4.334                   2.669
                                                        Panel D: Correlations between PGS Variables
                               Educational      General       Neuroticism      Depressive        Myocardial        Coronary           BMI            Height
                               Attainment      Cognition                        Symptoms          Infarction         Artery
 Educational Attainment            1.000
 General Cognition                 0.273            1.000
 Neuroticism                      -0.063            0.052             1.000
 Depressive Symptoms              -0.091           -0.007             0.547           1.000
 Myocardial Infarction            -0.143           -0.076             0.014           0.047           1.000
 Coronary Artery                  -0.116           -0.081             0.041           0.046           0.417           1.000
 BMI                              -0.163           -0.060            -0.126          -0.027           0.079           0.027            1.000
 Height                           -0.093           -0.089             0.013          -0.040           0.082          -0.004           -0.175           1.000
    Notes. This table reports summary statistics and correlations for the economic outcome variables and polygenic scores. The sample period includes HRS waves
2010, 2012, 2014, and 2016. Appendix A provides details for all variables.
                                                                TABLE II
                                  DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS AND CORRELATIONS FOR INVESTOR CHARACTERISTICS

                                                Panel A: Descriptive statistics for investor characteristics
                               N                        Mean                     Standard Deviation          Minimum                Maximum
                              (1)                         (2)                            (3)                    (4)                    (5)
 ln(Wealth)                  13,200                      12.522                         1.354                  6.386                 15.478
 ln(Income)                  13,200                      10.821                         0.977                  7.553                 13.177
 Years of education          13,200                      13.847                         2.393                  0.000                 17.000
 Cognition                   11,611                      24.017                         3.690                  5.750                 34.000
 Trust                       12,096                       4.168                         0.988                  1.000                  6.000
 Sociability                 12,272                       3.940                         0.920                  1.000                  6.000
 Optimism                    12,613                       8.062                         0.909                  3.800                  9.622
 Grew up poor                13,196                       0.400                         0.490                  0.000                  1.000
 Height (relative)           13,200                       0.011                         0.066                 -0.362                  0.362
 BMI (relative)              13,104                      -0.341                         5.928                -17.343                 35.879
 Health                      13,196                       3.388                         1.010                  1.000                  5.000
                                                  Panel B: Correlations between investor characteristics
               ln(Wealth)   ln(Income)    Education Cognition          Trust       Sociability    Optimism       Poor     Height       BMI       Health
 ln(Wealth)       1.000
 ln(Income)       0.436        1.000
 Education        0.307        0.406         1.000
 Cognition        0.189        0.336         0.432        1.000
 Trust            0.178        0.120         0.220        0.181         1.000
 Sociability      0.148        0.134         0.228        0.207         0.240       1.000
 Optimism         0.265        0.246         0.252        0.250         0.483       0.229         1.000
 Poor            -0.086       -0.110        -0.158       -0.102        -0.086      -0.044        -0.075         1.000
 Height           0.053        0.096         0.099        0.093         0.016       0.062         0.076        -0.039      1.000
 BMI             -0.157       -0.051        -0.068       -0.030        -0.103      -0.032        -0.114         0.058     -0.051       1.000
 Health           0.266        0.283         0.234        0.262         0.199       0.140         0.356        -0.126      0.045      -0.226       1.000
    Notes. This table reports descriptive statistics and correlation coefficients for the 11 investor characteristics used in previous studies. The sample
period includes HRS waves 2010, 2012, 2014, and 2016. Appendix A provides details for all variables.
                                                             TABLE III
                   REGRESSION OF EQUITY MARKET PARTICIPATION, RISK AVERSION, AND BELIEFS ON GENETIC ENDOWMENTS
                                  ASSOCIATED WITH COGNITION, PERSONALITY, HEALTH, AND BODY SHAPE

                          Equity participation        %Equity           Risk aversion           P(Rm > 0)            P(Rm > 20%)     P(Rm < -20%)
                                    (1)                   (2)                 (3)                   (4)                   (5)             (6)
                               Panel A: Outcomes on each PGS individually (+control variables and 10 principal components)
 Edu. Attainment PGS             0.071***              0.040***            -0.045***              1.906***              -0.413          -0.829***
 Gen. Cognition PGS              0.022***              0.015**             -0.027*                0.627*                -0.546*         -0.724***
 Neuroticism PGS                -0.037***            -0.017**               0.064***             -0.945**                0.658**         1.095***
 Depressive Symp. PGS           -0.030***            -0.018***              0.021                -0.591*                 0.116           0.514*
 Myocardial Infarc. PGS         -0.021***            -0.010*                0.032**              -1.270***              -0.399           0.041
 Coronary Disease PGS           -0.011*              -0.008                 0.042***             -0.023                  0.152          -0.122
 BMI PGS                        -0.034***            -0.019***              0.010                -0.314                  0.236           0.207
 Height PGS                      0.023*                0.002               -0.044*                0.639                 -0.469          -0.554
                        Panel B: Outcomes on all eight PGSs with all PGS included (+control variables and 10 principal components)
 Edu. Attainment PGS             0.060***              0.035***            -0.028*                1.732***              -0.223          -0.579**
 Gen. Cognition PGS              0.005                 0.006               -0.016                 0.227                 -0.450          -0.556**
 Neuroticism PGS                -0.017**             -0.004                 0.064***             -0.527                  0.735**         0.957***
 Depressive Symp. PGS           -0.013*              -0.011*               -0.012                -0.062                 -0.224           0.013
 Myocardial Infarc. PGS         -0.012*              -0.004                 0.014                -1.374***              -0.612**         0.021
 Coronary Disease PGS            0.002               -0.002                 0.031*                0.730**                0.337          -0.238
 BMI PGS                        -0.021***            -0.011**               0.001                 0.128                  0.220           0.073
 Height PGS                      0.008               -0.006                -0.030                 0.176                 -0.387          -0.347
 R2                            10.10%                  6.23%                4.86%                 5.48%                  1.29%           3.39%
 Number of clusters               5,130                4,322                 5,130                5,130                  5,130            5,130
 Number of obs.                  13,200               10,108                13,200               13,200                 13,200           13,200
    Notes. Panel A reports coefficients on the PGS variables from separate regressions of each of the economic outcome variables on each of the
eight PGSs individually, the first 10 principal components of the genetics data, and the control variables (indicator variables for HRS waves, gender,
age, married, and retired). Panel B reports coefficients when including all eight PGSs as regressors simultaneously along with the principal
components and the control variables. All PGSs are standardized (rescaled to zero mean unit variance). Appendix A provides details for all variables.
In all cases, standard errors are clustered at the respondent level. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.
                                            TABLE IV
                    THE ABILITY OF PGS TO PREDICT STOCK MARKET PARTICIPATION
                        WHEN CONTROLLING FOR RISK AVERSION AND BELIEFS

                                    Equity Participation                           %Equity
                              PGS with risk        PGS only            PGS with risk       PGS only
                               aversion &                               aversion &
                                 beliefs                                  beliefs
                                  (1)                 (2)                  (3)               (4)
 Edu. Attainment PGS              0.060***            0.071***             0.032***             0.040***
 Gen. Cognition PGS               0.016**             0.022***             0.011*               0.015**
 Neuroticism PGS                 -0.028***           -0.037***            -0.011*              -0.017**
 Depressive Symp. PGS            -0.026***           -0.030***            -0.016***            -0.018***
 Myocardial Infar. PGS           -0.016**            -0.021***            -0.006               -0.010*
 Coronary Disease PGS            -0.009              -0.011*              -0.007               -0.008
 BMI PGS                         -0.032***           -0.034***            -0.018***            -0.019***
 Height PGS                       0.017               0.023*              -0.003                0.002
    Notes. The first and third columns report coefficients associated with each PGS from regressions of
the measures of stock market participation on the following independent variables: each PGS, the risk
aversion and the three return belief metrics, the first 10 principal components of the genetics data, and
the control variables (indicators for HRS waves, age, gender, retired, and married). Each coefficient
reported is from a separate regression. For comparison, the second and fourth columns report the
coefficients associated with each PGS from the same regressions as in the first and third columns but
without the risk aversion and belief metrics (i.e., the values are identical to the first two columns of Panel
A in Table III). Standard errors are clustered at the respondent level. ***, **, and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                                          TABLE V
                     REGRESSION OF ECONOMIC OUTCOMES ON INVESTOR CHARACTERISTICS USED IN PREVIOUS STUDIES

                     Equity participation        %Equity            Risk aversion             P(Rm > 0)             P(Rm > 20%)   P(Rm < -20%)
                             (1)                   (2)                    (3)                     (4)                   (5)            (6)
                                        Panel A: Outcomes on controls and investor characteristics individually
ln(Wealth)                0.230***              0.116***               -0.131***                4.701***              0.289        -2.407***
ln(Income)                0.195***              0.093***               -0.152***                4.457***             -0.280        -1.854***
Education                 0.144***              0.082***               -0.166***                4.776***             -0.276        -0.970***
Cognition                 0.129***              0.070***               -0.139***                4.239***             -0.762**      -0.786***
Trust                     0.095***              0.053***               -0.105***                3.866***              0.557**      -1.694***
Sociability               0.077***              0.040***               -0.162***                2.174***             -0.140        -0.571**
Optimism                  0.092***              0.049***               -0.216***                3.680***              0.575**      -1.236***
Poor                     -0.047***             -0.021***                 0.030**               -0.965***             -0.255         0.550**
Height                    0.021***              0.010*                 -0.056***                0.528*               -0.474*        0.098
BMI                      -0.045***             -0.017***                 0.054***              -0.521*                0.079         0.384
Health                    0.111***              0.046***               -0.171***                3.464***              0.618**      -1.545***
                                    Panel B: Outcomes on controls and all 11 investor characteristics simultaneously
ln(Wealth)                0.177***              0.087***               -0.016                   2.271***              0.329        -1.817***
ln(Income)                0.060***              0.026***               -0.047***                1.123***             -0.490        -0.268
Education                 0.038***              0.027***               -0.088***                2.196***             -0.005         0.435
Cognition                 0.040***              0.026***               -0.013                   1.326***             -1.330***     -0.193
Trust                     0.033***              0.021***                 0.042**                1.782***              0.602*       -1.363***
Sociability               0.004                 0.006                  -0.075***                0.116                -0.023         0.094
Optimism                 -0.006                 0.006                  -0.148***                0.885**               0.438         0.087
Poor                     -0.014**              -0.001                  -0.018                  -0.020                -0.226         0.336
Height                   -0.002                -0.001                  -0.032**                -0.047                -0.269         0.295
BMI                       0.000                 0.005                    0.016                  0.672**               0.381        -0.362
Health                    0.030***              0.010*                 -0.097***                1.455***              0.884***     -0.582*
R2                      32.87%                 14.50%                  12.25%                 10.56%                  1.24%         3.67%
Number of clusters         4,033                  3,436                 4,033                  4,033                 4,033            4,033
Number of obs.             10,309                 8,039                 10,309                10,309                 10,309          10,309
                                                      TABLE V (CONTINUED)
                       REGRESSION OF ECONOMIC OUTCOMES ON INVESTOR CHARACTERISTICS USED IN PREVIOUS STUDIES

    Notes. Panel A reports coefficients on the investor characteristics from separate regressions of the outcome variables (two measures of equity
market participation, risk aversion, and three measures of beliefs regarding the distribution of expected returns) on each of the 11 investor
characteristics individually and the control variables (indicator variables for HRS waves, gender, age, married, and retired) (i.e., 66 regressions for
11 explanatory variables times six outcomes). Panel B reports coefficients from regressions of the outcome variables on the 11 explanatory variables
simultaneously with the control variables. All independent variables are standardized (i.e., rescaled to zero mean, unit variance). Appendix A
provides details for all variables. In all cases, standard errors are clustered at the respondent level. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                                             TABLE VI
                     REGRESSION OF INVESTOR CHARACTERISTICS USED IN PREVIOUS STUDIES ON POLYGENIC SCORES (PGSS)
                                        FOR COGNITION, PERSONALITY, HEALTH, AND BODY SHAPE

                          ln(Wlth)     ln(Inc.) Education Cognition            Trust      Social     Optimism        Poor     Height      BMI        Health
                             (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)        (6)          (7)          (8)       (9)       (10)        (11)
                             Panel A: Investor characteristics on individual PGS (+control variables and 10 principal components)
Edu. Attainment PGS       0.129*** 0.115*** 0.225*** 0.170*** 0.137*** 0.069*** 0.133*** -0.044*** 0.046***                             -0.062***    0.100***
Gen. Cognition PGS         0.017       0.030**     0.097*** 0.098*** 0.053*** -0.014                   0.014      -0.001     0.003      -0.014       0.036**
Neuroticism PGS          -0.055*** -0.036*** -0.086*** -0.097*** -0.127*** -0.065*** -0.137*** 0.054*** 0.008                           -0.006      -0.068***
Depressive Symp. PGS     -0.049*** -0.034*** -0.049*** -0.055*** -0.088*** -0.061*** -0.109*** 0.034** -0.002                            0.006      -0.062***
Myocardial Infarc. PGS   -0.043*** -0.029*** -0.058*** -0.044*** -0.038** -0.001                     -0.046*** 0.024        -0.043***    0.032**    -0.066***
Coronary Disease PGS     -0.028** -0.023** -0.037*** -0.011                  -0.007     -0.017        -0.013       0.015    -0.010       0.008      -0.044***
BMI PGS                  -0.074*** -0.042*** -0.055*** -0.053*** -0.069*** -0.008                    -0.065*** 0.047*** -0.012           0.276***   -0.090***
Height PGS                 0.048*      0.054*** 0.082*** 0.061**              0.017      0.044         0.065** -0.059**      0.700***   -0.002       0.031
                              Panel B: Investor characteristics on all eight PGS (+control variables and 10 principal components)
Edu. Attainment PGS       0.113*** 0.105*** 0.203*** 0.143*** 0.108*** 0.064*** 0.106*** -0.027                              0.016      -0.018       0.070***
Gen. Cognition PGS       -0.015        0.003       0.048*** 0.061*** 0.023              -0.031*       -0.017       0.013    -0.029*      0.012       0.011
Neuroticism PGS          -0.021       -0.007      -0.043** -0.063*** -0.086*** -0.030                -0.083*** 0.042**       0.023      -0.002      -0.035**
Depressive Symp. PGS     -0.021       -0.014       0.002        -0.004       -0.035*    -0.040** -0.056*** 0.009             0.009      -0.008      -0.031**
Myocardial Infarc. PGS   -0.023       -0.013      -0.034** -0.032** -0.026               0.016        -0.031*      0.013    -0.026*      0.007      -0.043***
Coronary Disease PGS     -0.005       -0.006       0.001         0.019        0.018     -0.018         0.014       0.003     0.019      -0.009      -0.014
BMI PGS                  -0.051*** -0.020*        -0.011        -0.020       -0.044*** 0.002         -0.042*** 0.041** -0.002            0.273***   -0.070***
Height PGS                 0.022       0.031       0.034         0.025       -0.013      0.032         0.035      -0.049*    0.701***    0.008       0.005
R2                       14.07%      32.30%       13.33%        15.46%        6.65%      4.30%         7.27%       1.98%    17.61%       8.33%       8.28%
Number of clusters        5,130       5,130       5,130       4,530       4,693       4,761        4,896       5,128       5,130         5,110       5,130
Number of obs.           13,200      13,200      13,200      11,611      12,096      12,272       12,613      13,196      13,200        13,104      13,196
    Notes. Panel A reports coefficients on the PGS variables from separate regressions of each of the 11 investor characteristics on each of the eight
PGSs individually, the first 10 principal components of the genetics data, and the control variables (indicator variables for HRS waves, gender, age,
married, and retired). Panel B reports coefficients when including all eight PGSs as regressors simultaneously along with the principal components
and the control variables. Both dependent and independent variables are standardized (rescaled to zero mean, unit variance). Appendix A provides
details for all variables. In all cases, standard errors are clustered at the respondent level. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                                           TABLE VII
                 IDENTIFYING INVESTOR CHARACTERISTIC CHANNELS LINKING POLYGENIC SCORE (PGS) TO ECONOMIC OUTCOMES

Variable:        None        ln(Wlth.) ln(Inc.)         Educ.       Cog.        Trust      Social      Optim.       Poor         Height      BMI                    Health
                   (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)          (10)       (11)                    (12)
            Panel A: Equity participation on control variables (+10 principal components), individual investor characteristics, and individual PGSs
Edu. PGS           0.071***     0.042***     0.049***     0.040***     0.047***     0.060***      0.064***     0.058***     0.069***     0.070***     0.069***      0.060***
Cog. PGS           0.022***     0.018***     0.016**      0.008        0.006        0.015**       0.021***     0.020***     0.022***     0.022***     0.021***      0.018***
Neuro. PGS        -0.037***    -0.024***    -0.030***    -0.025***    -0.024***    -0.027***     -0.034***    -0.025***    -0.034***    -0.037***    -0.037***     -0.029***
Depres. PGS       -0.030***    -0.019***    -0.024***    -0.023***    -0.022***    -0.021***     -0.026***    -0.018***    -0.029***    -0.030***    -0.030***     -0.023***
M. Infarc. PGS    -0.021***    -0.012**     -0.016***    -0.013**     -0.014**     -0.014**      -0.018***    -0.016**     -0.020***    -0.020***    -0.021***     -0.014**
Coronary PGS      -0.011*      -0.005       -0.007       -0.006       -0.007       -0.009        -0.010       -0.010       -0.011*      -0.011*      -0.011*       -0.006
BMI PGS           -0.034***    -0.017***    -0.026***    -0.026***    -0.029***    -0.027***     -0.034***    -0.029***    -0.032***    -0.034***    -0.024***     -0.024***
Height PGS         0.023*       0.012        0.013        0.011        0.009        0.015         0.009        0.012        0.020*       0.008        0.023**       0.019*
                  Panel B: %Equity on control variables (+10 principal components), individual investor characteristics, and individual PGSs
Edu. PGS           0.040***     0.027***    0.031***      0.023***     0.031***     0.033***     0.035***      0.033***      0.039***      0.040***     0.040***    0.037***
Cog. PGS           0.015**      0.014**     0.013**       0.008        0.007        0.014**      0.016***      0.016***      0.015**       0.015**      0.015**     0.013**
Neuro. PGS        -0.017**     -0.011*     -0.014**      -0.011*      -0.010       -0.012*      -0.016**      -0.012*       -0.016**      -0.017*** -0.017***      -0.014**
Depres. PGS       -0.018*** -0.013**       -0.015*** -0.015*** -0.017*** -0.012**               -0.016*** -0.012**          -0.017*** -0.018*** -0.017***          -0.016***
M. Infarc. PGS    -0.010*      -0.006      -0.008        -0.005       -0.007       -0.005       -0.007        -0.006        -0.009*       -0.009*      -0.010*     -0.007
Coronary PGS      -0.008       -0.005      -0.006        -0.005       -0.010*      -0.007       -0.009        -0.007        -0.008        -0.008       -0.007      -0.006
BMI PGS           -0.019*** -0.011**       -0.015*** -0.014*** -0.017*** -0.015*** -0.018*** -0.015*** -0.018*** -0.019*** -0.015***                               -0.015***
Height PGS         0.002       -0.001      -0.001        -0.004        0.005       -0.002       -0.007        -0.006         0.001        -0.007        0.002       0.001
                      Panel C: Risk Aversion on control variables (+10 principal components), individual investor characteristics, and individual PGSs
Edu. PGS          -0.045*** -0.028*        -0.028*       -0.008       -0.025       -0.032**     -0.031**      -0.014        -0.043*** -0.042*** -0.041***          -0.028*
Cog. PGS          -0.027*      -0.025      -0.022        -0.011       -0.020       -0.020       -0.023        -0.020        -0.027*       -0.027*      -0.029*     -0.021
Neuro. PGS         0.064***     0.057***    0.059***      0.050***     0.072***     0.054***     0.050***      0.033*        0.063***      0.065***     0.066***    0.053***
Depres. PGS        0.021        0.014       0.016         0.013        0.020        0.015        0.010        -0.005         0.020         0.021        0.022       0.011
M. Infarc. PGS     0.032**      0.027*      0.028*        0.023        0.027*       0.036**      0.029*        0.021         0.032**       0.030**      0.031**     0.022
Coronary PGS       0.042***     0.038***    0.038***      0.036**      0.041***     0.043***     0.038**       0.039***      0.041***      0.041***     0.042***    0.034**
BMI PGS            0.010        0.000       0.004         0.001        0.012        0.004        0.011        -0.003         0.008         0.009       -0.006      -0.005
Height PGS        -0.044*      -0.038      -0.036        -0.030       -0.048*      -0.041       -0.030        -0.026        -0.042        -0.007       -0.045*     -0.039
                         Panel D: P(Rm>0) on control variables (+10 principal components), individual investor characteristics, and individual PGSs
Edu. PGS           1.906***     1.331***    1.429***      0.888***     1.129***     1.451***     1.756***      1.379***      1.865***      1.880***     1.868***    1.572***
Cog. PGS           0.627*       0.549*      0.499         0.172        0.175        0.356        0.614*        0.529         0.635*        0.625*       0.621*      0.503
Neuro. PGS        -0.945**     -0.690*     -0.787**      -0.543       -0.614       -0.874**     -0.953**      -0.533        -0.900**      -0.950**     -0.952**    -0.707*
Depres. PGS       -0.591*      -0.363      -0.445        -0.359       -0.372       -0.386       -0.508        -0.195        -0.554*       -0.590*      -0.593*     -0.370
M. Infarc. PGS    -1.270*** -1.072*** -1.143*** -0.997*** -1.118*** -1.073*** -1.254*** -1.092*** -1.250*** -1.244*** -1.227***                                    -1.037***
Coronary PGS      -0.023        0.108       0.079         0.151        0.158        0.076        0.071         0.078        -0.013        -0.017        0.005       0.130
BMI PGS           -0.314        0.029      -0.133        -0.055       -0.068       -0.167       -0.274        -0.057        -0.267        -0.306       -0.193      -0.003
Height PGS         0.639        0.416       0.405         0.249        0.246        0.463        0.434         0.314         0.584         0.211        0.723       0.528
                                                        TABLE VII (CONTINUED)
                  IDENTIFYING INVESTOR CHARACTERISTIC CHANNELS LINKING POLYGENIC SCORE (PGS) TO ECONOMIC OUTCOMES
 Variable:          None       ln(Wlth.) ln(Inc.)        Educ.       Cog.       Trust       Social      Optim.       Poor        Height      BMI             Health
                     (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)          (8)         (9)          (10)      (11)             (12)
                   Panel E: P(Rm>0.2) on control variables (+10 principal components), individual investor characteristics, and individual PGSs
 Edu. PGS          -0.413       -0.452*     -0.378      -0.357       -0.349      -0.465*      -0.375      -0.514*     -0.420       -0.398      -0.436      -0.480*
 Cog. PGS          -0.546*      -0.551*     -0.536*     -0.519*      -0.351      -0.621**     -0.592**    -0.638**    -0.552*      -0.545*     -0.569**    -0.569**
 Neuro. PGS         0.658**      0.673**     0.646**     0.633**      0.403       0.571*       0.579*      0.670**     0.669**      0.661**     0.667**     0.705**
 Depres. PGS        0.116        0.129       0.105       0.101       -0.084       0.081        0.017       0.081       0.120        0.116       0.129       0.161
 M. Infarc. PGS    -0.399       -0.390      -0.410      -0.420       -0.551**    -0.383       -0.395      -0.394      -0.392       -0.414      -0.412      -0.352
 Coronary PGS       0.152        0.159       0.144       0.140        0.208       0.144        0.125       0.159       0.155        0.149       0.159       0.179
 BMI PGS            0.236        0.255       0.221       0.219        0.281       0.224        0.334       0.367       0.245        0.232       0.231       0.296
 Height PGS        -0.469       -0.481      -0.450      -0.443       -0.259      -0.395       -0.542      -0.531      -0.477       -0.276      -0.434      -0.485
                  Panel F: P(Rm<-0.2) on control variables (+10 principal components), individual investor characteristics, and individual PGSs
 Edu. PGS          -0.829***    -0.536**    -0.635**    -0.655**     -0.708**    -0.569**     -0.818**    -0.616**    -0.809***    -0.829***   -0.792***   -0.686***
 Cog. PGS          -0.724***    -0.684**    -0.672**    -0.640**     -0.597**    -0.682**     -0.797**    -0.730***   -0.724***    -0.723***   -0.734***   -0.669**
 Neuro. PGS         1.095***     0.968***    1.032***    1.022***     1.070***    1.079***     1.165***    1.070***    1.077***     1.095***    1.095***    0.997***
 Depres. PGS        0.514*       0.399       0.455*      0.470*       0.510*      0.434        0.540**     0.425       0.497*       0.514*      0.518*      0.427
 M. Infarc. PGS     0.041       -0.060      -0.011      -0.012        0.103      -0.090        0.013      -0.024       0.029        0.040       0.004      -0.055
 Coronary PGS      -0.122       -0.188      -0.163      -0.156       -0.056      -0.254       -0.213      -0.211      -0.124       -0.122      -0.136      -0.192
 BMI PGS            0.207        0.034       0.134       0.157        0.188       0.063        0.282       0.169       0.183        0.207       0.094       0.072
 Height PGS        -0.554       -0.442      -0.460      -0.479       -0.370      -0.329       -0.288      -0.232      -0.534       -0.621      -0.628      -0.501
     Notes. The first column in Panel A reports coefficients on the PGS variables from separate regressions of stock market participation on each of the eight PGSs
individually, the first 10 principal components of the genetics data, and the control variables (indicator variables for HRS waves, gender, age, married, and retired).
The remaining columns report the coefficient associated with the PGS (in that row) when adding each of the 11 investor characteristic variables individually to the
regression. The remaining panels report analogous coefficients for the fraction of financial wealth held in equity, risk aversion, and the three measures of return
beliefs. Independent variables are standardized (rescaled to zero mean, unit variance). Appendix A provides details for all variables. In all cases, standard errors
are clustered at the respondent level. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                                            TABLE VIII
                   THE ROLE OF THE PGSS ASSOCIATED WITH COGNITION, PERSONALITY, HEALTH, AND BODY SHAPE IN LINKING
                                      STOCK MARKET PARTICIPATION TO RISK AVERSION AND BELIEFS

                                        Orthogonalized Equity participation                                          Orthogonalized %Equity
                             Panel A: Equity market participation on risk aversion and beliefs regarding expected return distribution
                               (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)         (7)           (8)       (9)          (10)
 Orthogonalized:
 Risk aversion               -0.054***                                            -0.045***    -0.040***                                           -0.035***
 P(Rm > 0)                                 0.090***                                0.103***                   0.065***                              0.071***
 P(Rm > 20%)                                            0.017***                  -0.040***                                0.014***                -0.022***
 P(Rm < -20%)                                                        -0.044***    -0.019***                                            -0.031***   -0.014***
 R2                           1.29%        3.62%         0.12%         0.86%         5.32%         1.13%        2.99%        0.14%        0.69%    4.29%
                   Panel B: Equity market participation on portion of risk aversion and beliefs related to PGSs and portion orthogonal to PGSs
 Orthogonalized:
 Risk aversion PGS           -0.054***                                             0.010       -0.030***                                            0.004
 P(Rm > 0) PGS                             0.063***                                0.087***                   0.029***                              0.035***
 P(Rm > 20%) PGS                                        -0.035***                 -0.051***                               -0.028***                -0.034***
 P(Rm < -20%) PGS                                                    -0.059***     0.034*                                              -0.024***    0.018**
 Risk aversion non-PGS       -0.050***                                            -0.042***    -0.038***                                           -0.033***
 P(Rm > 0) non-PGS                         0.085***                                0.096***                   0.063***                              0.067***
 P(Rm > 20%) non-PGS                                    0.018***                  -0.035***                                0.016***                -0.019***
 P(Rm < -20%) non-PGS                                                -0.041***    -0.018***                                            -0.030***   -0.014***

 R2                           2.42%        5.03%        0.68%        2.29%         6.79%        1.64%        3.38%         0.71%        1.03%       4.94%
 %R2 due to PGS              53.98%       35.90%       78.54%       67.12%        31.54%       37.76%       17.73%        76.27%       38.08%      20.28%
     Notes. Panel A reports coefficients from regressions of orthogonalized equity market participation on orthogonalized risk-aversion and
orthogonalized beliefs where the orthogonalized outcome variables are defined as the residuals from regressions of each of the outcome variables
(risk aversion, beliefs regarding the distribution of equity returns, and equity participation measures) on the first 10 principal components of the
genetics data and the control variables (indicator variables for HRS waves, gender, age, married, and retired). Panel B reports coefficients from
regressions of orthogonalized equity market participation on the portion of orthogonalized risk aversion and orthogonalized beliefs predicted by the
eight PGSs and the portion of orthogonalized risk aversion and beliefs independent of the eight PGSs. The bottom row in Panel B reports the portion
of the R2 attributed to variation in the independent variables predicted by the eight PGSs. Standard errors are clustered at the respondent level. ***,
**, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                                                 TABLE IX
                          THE ROLE OF THE EIGHT PGSS IN LINKING INVESTOR CHARACTERISTICS TO ECONOMIC OUTCOMES

              Equity participation       %Equity                Risk aversion               P(Rm > 0)             P(Rm > 20%)            P(Rm < -20%)
                  Panel A: Outcomes on portion of investor characteristic variable predicted by the PGSs and portion orthogonal to PGSs
               PGS          Non-     PGS         Non-         PGS          Non-         PGS          Non-       PGS         Non-        PGS        Non-
                            PGS                   PGS                       PGS                      PGS                    PGS                    PGS
ln(Wealth)     0.072***     0.207***    0.038***    0.089***   -0.050***   -0.116***    1.819***    4.123***   -0.363       0.283      -0.802***   -2.102***
ln(Income)     0.072***     0.153***    0.039***    0.070***   -0.051***   -0.120***    1.885***    3.401***   -0.411      -0.243      -0.854***   -1.374***
Education      0.070***     0.125***    0.038***    0.070***   -0.055***   -0.150***    1.959***    4.196***   -0.472*     -0.211      -0.953***   -0.682***
Cognition      0.067***     0.110***    0.038***    0.055***   -0.065***   -0.118***    1.893***    3.662***   -0.491*     -0.651**    -1.039***   -0.546**
Trust          0.072***     0.083***    0.038***    0.046***   -0.058***   -0.093***    1.991***    3.513***   -0.414       0.626**    -1.060***   -1.508***
Sociability    0.060***     0.069***    0.027***    0.036***   -0.045***   -0.156***    1.387***    1.960***   -0.299      -0.178      -0.717***   -0.442*
Optimism       0.068***     0.081***    0.034***    0.042***   -0.049***   -0.205***    1.799***    3.394***   -0.334       0.669***   -0.943***   -1.097***
Poor          -0.065***    -0.041***   -0.031***   -0.018***    0.053***    0.026*     -1.541***   -0.822***    0.388      -0.260       0.810***    0.468*
Height         0.022***     0.018***    0.007       0.009*     -0.025*     -0.049***    0.944***    0.443      -0.065      -0.319      -0.331       0.043
BMI           -0.035***    -0.037***   -0.020***   -0.011**     0.011       0.050***   -0.403      -0.378       0.235       0.041       0.229       0.319
Health         0.068***     0.098***    0.035***    0.038***   -0.054***   -0.159***    1.667***    3.117***   -0.346       0.641***   -0.781***   -1.387***
          Panel B: R2 from regression of outcome on portion of investor characteristic variable predicted by the PGSs and portion orthogonal to PGSs
ln(Wealth)           21.52%                    6.54%                   1.67%                     2.99%                     0.04%                 0.96%
ln(Income)           12.80%                    4.46%                   1.77%                     2.22%                     0.04%                 0.50%
Education             9.23%                    4.47%                   2.66%                     3.16%                     0.05%                 0.26%
Cognition             7.42%                    3.20%                   1.90%                     2.46%                     0.13%                 0.26%
Trust                 5.45%                    2.46%                   1.25%                     2.41%                     0.11%                 0.65%
Sociability           3.77%                    1.42%                   2.76%                     0.85%                     0.02%                 0.14%
Optimism              5.02%                    2.05%                   4.64%                     2.18%                     0.11%                 0.40%
Poor                  2.65%                    0.92%                   0.36%                     0.45%                     0.04%                 0.17%
Height                0.36%                    0.09%                   0.32%                     0.16%                     0.02%                 0.02%
BMI                   1.16%                    0.36%                   0.28%                     0.04%                     0.01%                 0.03%
Health                6.42%                    1.89%                   2.93%                     1.84%                     0.10%                 0.48%
                       Panel C: Fraction of regression R2 explained by portion of investor characteristics variable predicted by the PGSs
ln(Wealth)           10.95%                   15.60%                  15.68%                    16.29%                   62.26%                 12.71%
ln(Income)           18.18%                   23.94%                  15.65%                    23.50%                   74.08%                 27.87%
Education            23.93%                   22.81%                  11.81%                    17.90%                   83.40%                 66.12%
Cognition            27.39%                   32.34%                  23.26%                    21.08%                   36.26%                 78.37%
Trust                42.82%                   40.29%                  27.71%                    24.32%                   30.48%                 33.08%
Sociability          42.84%                   35.85%                   7.71%                    33.39%                   73.81%                 72.43%
Optimism             41.87%                   39.20%                   5.51%                    21.94%                   20.02%                 42.48%
Poor                 71.08%                   74.39%                  80.30%                    77.86%                   69.01%                 74.94%
Height               60.40%                   39.43%                  21.54%                    81.93%                     3.95%                98.33%
BMI                  47.99%                   74.68%                   4.88%                    53.22%                   97.05%                 34.01%
Health               32.10%                   45.24%                  10.37%                    22.23%                   22.59%                 24.08%
Average              38.14%                   40.34%                  20.40%                    35.79%                   52.08%                 51.31%
                                                       TABLE IX (CONTINUED)
                          THE ROLE OF THE EIGHT PGSS IN LINKING INVESTOR CHARACTERISTICS TO ECONOMIC OUTCOMES

     Notes. Panel A reports coefficients on investor characteristics variables from separate regressions of each orthogonalized outcome variable on
the portion of orthogonalized investor characteristic variable predicted by the eight PGSs and the portion of the orthogonalized investor characteristic
variable independent of the eight PGSs, where the orthogonalized outcome variables and orthogonalized investor characteristic variables are defined
as the residuals from regressions of each of the outcome variables (equity participation measures, risk aversion, and beliefs regarding the distribution
of equity returns) and each of the 11 investor characteristics (e.g., wealth, income, and education) on the first 10 principal components of the genetics
data and the control variables (indicator variables for HRS waves, gender, age, married, and retired). Panel B reports the R2 from each regression
and Panel C reports the portion of the R2 attributed to variation in the investor characteristic variable that can be predicted by the eight PGSs.
Appendix A provides details for all variables. Standard errors are clustered at the respondent level. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
