                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        THE DRUG CRISIS AND THE LIVING ARRANGEMENTS OF CHILDREN

                                        Kasey Buckles
                                       William N. Evans
                                       Ethan M.J. Lieber

                                      Working Paper 27633
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27633


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2020




The authors wish to thank Matthew Brown and Vivian Crumlish for excellent research assistance.
We are grateful to Dan Anderberg, John Cawley, Joe Doyle, Hilary Hoynes, Melissa Kearney,
Jason Lindo, Heidi Williams, colleagues at the University of Notre Dame, and participants in the
NBER Summer Institute Children's Program for a number of helpful comments on earlier
versions of this work. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Wilson Sheehan
Lab for Economic Opportunities. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Kasey Buckles, William N. Evans, and Ethan M.J. Lieber. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Drug Crisis and the Living Arrangements of Children
Kasey Buckles, William N. Evans, and Ethan M.J. Lieber
NBER Working Paper No. 27633
July 2020
JEL No. I1,J12

                                          ABSTRACT

We examine the impact of the drug crisis that has unfolded over the last three decades in the
United States on children's living arrangements and environments. Because the current living
arrangement could be a result of events that occurred at any point in a child's life, we measure
children's exposure to the crisis with the cumulative drug-related mortality of likely parents. A
potential omitted variables bias complicates the analysis, as the factors that may have led parents
to abuse drugs could also have altered the living arrangements of their children. Within a 2SLS
framework, we instrument for the cumulative mortality of likely parents with a child's years of
exposure to a non-triplicate prescription pad environment. Previous work by Alpert et al. (2019)
demonstrates that pharmaceutical advertising was much more extensive in non-triplicate states
and fostered the development of the drug crisis. Our results indicate that OLS and 2SLS estimates
are nearly identical and the crisis increased both the fraction of children living away from a
parent and in a household headed by a grandparent. We estimate that if drug abuse had remained
at 1996 levels, 1.5 million fewer children aged 0-16 would have lived away from a parent in
2015.

Kasey Buckles                                    Ethan M.J. Lieber
University of Notre Dame                         Department of Economics
Department of Economics                          University of Notre Dame
3052 Jenkins-Nanovic Halls                       3049 Jenkins Nanovic Halls
Notre Dame, IN 46556                             Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER                                         and NBER
kbuckles@nd.edu                                  elieber@nd.edu

William N. Evans
Keough-Hesburgh Professor of Economics
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
3111 Jenkins Nanovic Halls
Notre Dame, IN 46556-7000
and NBER
wevans1@nd.edu
I.       Introduction

         Over the last three decades, the United States has been experiencing a devastating drug

abuse crisis. Drug deaths increased every year from 1987 through 2017 with more than 70,000

people dying from drug poisonings in 2017 alone. At its peak, this crisis was more severe than other

recent public health crises such as the HIV epidemic (41,669 deaths in 1996) or the violence brought

on by the crack epidemic (24,530 homicides in 1992). 1 Between 1999 and 2017, over 702,000

people died of drug poisonings--more than the number of US soldiers that died in all armed

conflicts from the Spanish-American War in 1898 through the present day (about 627,000). 2

Fortunately, drug deaths declined in 2018, but there were still nearly 70,000 deaths in this year. As

the drug crisis has developed, a growing line of work has documented the impact of the epidemic on

employment (Aliprantis and Schweitzer, 2018; Harris et al., forthcoming; Currie et al., 2019), crime

(Doleac and Mukherjee, 2018; Szalavitz and Rigg, 2017; Dave et al., 2020), infant health (Ziedan and

Kaestner, 2020), enrollment in disability insurance programs (Cutler et al., 2017), and intimate

partner violence (Stone and Rothman, 2019). 3

         An important feature of the crisis is that it has primarily impacted people in early adulthood

through mid-life; as Figure 1 shows, the drug death rate between 1999 and 2017 was highest for

those between the ages of 25 and 54. This level of death and drug use among people in this age

range is likely to affect a large number of children, as many will be parents with children in the

home. In this paper, we examine how this drug crisis among adults has affected the living

arrangements of children. Drug use could separate a child from one or both parents through several


1 Author's calculations from the Multiple Cause of Death data files.
2 https://fas.org/sgp/crs/natsec/RL32492.pdf
3 A separate literature has examined the causes of the epidemic. Several papers focus on demand-based explanations

such as the decline in economic opportunities and institutions (Case and Deaton, 2015 and 2017), dislocation generated
by trade (Pierce and Schott, 2020), or the expansion of health insurance (Wettstein, 2019; Averett et al., 2019). Another
set of papers argues the epidemic has been generated by a series of supply shocks such as the advertising practices of
pharmaceutical firms (Alpert et al., 2019), physician's prescribing behavior (Currie and Schwandt, 2020), or the
reformulation of prescription opioids (Alpert at al., 2018; Evans et al., 2019).

                                                            2
pathways. First, a parent who is using drugs could have left the household voluntarily, or been

asked to leave by a family member. The parent could be absent due to enrollment in a substance

abuse treatment program, or due to incarceration because of a crime related to the abuse. If drug

use results in abuse or neglect of the child, the child welfare system could become involved,

increasing the chance of a court-ordered placement with another relative or a foster family. The

child could also move into the home of a family friend or relative to protect him or her from the

consequences of the parent's use. In addition, the parent of the child could have been one of the

hundreds of thousands of people who have died because of the crisis.

        There is abundant anecdotal evidence in the popular press that suggests that many children

are indeed experiencing these kinds of events. A 2016 article in the Wall Street Journal reports that

"Social workers say the scale of the trouble exceeds anything they saw during the crack-cocaine or

methamphetamine crises of previous decades," and quotes a child welfare worker who warns that

`Honestly, if something doesn't happen with this addiction crisis, we can lose a generation of kids'"

(Whalen, 2016). Outlets including Vox, NBC, PBS, CNN, and the Associated Press have noted that

grandparents are increasingly assuming parenting responsibilities because of the opioid crisis--

especially in states that have been hard-hit, including Florida, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and West

Virginia. 4 National statistics support the observations in these stories--there is a long-term, secular

upward trend in children either living away from a parent or living in a household headed by a

grandparent. Between 1980 and 2018, the fraction of children living without a mother or a father in

the household increased from 4.9 to 8.3 percent, and 19.9 to 25.5 percent, respectively. The fraction

of children living in a household headed by a grandparent more than doubled from 3.7 to 8.3

percent. 5


4We list some citations for the popular press articles in Appendix C.
5Data are from the 1-percent Census Public Use Micro Samples from the 1980-2000 Census and the 2010 and 2018
American Community Surveys. We use the IPUMS version of these data (Ruggles et al., 2020).

                                                       3
        In the last few years, researchers in the social sciences have worked to document whether

the drug crisis has increased the movement of children into foster care. Meinhofer and Anglero-

Diaz (2019) note that between 2012 and 2017, the number of children living in and entering foster

care in the U.S. increased by 12 and 8 percent, respectively. Between 2000 and 2015, the fraction of

removals that were drug-related more than doubled, from 14.5 percent to 35.3 percent. Radel et al.

(2018) correlates foster care entries at the county level in a cross section with opioid poisoning death

rates and finds a strong correlation. Quast (2018) examines whether per capita drug prescriptions at

the county level are correlated with child removals for drug use by the state, over time. He found

the correlation was positive and statistically significant in 23 states, negative and statistically

significant in 15 states, and statistically insignificant in 12 states. Quast et al. (2018) and Quast et al.

(2019) perform a similar analysis for Florida and California, respectively.

         Our paper contributes to this nascent literature in two key ways. First, as we describe in

detail below, previous estimates of the relationship between the severity of the crisis and child living

arrangements potentially suffer from both omitted variables bias and reverse causality. Changes in

the economy or in the strength of institutions (for example) could affect both drug abuse rates and

child living arrangements, while a separation from one's children could increase either the

motivation for using drugs or the number of opportunities to do so. To overcome these challenges,

we use an instrumental variables strategy that exploits variation across states and over time in

children's exposure to triplicate prescription laws; Alpert et al. (2019) show that because the

producers of the most frequently abused prescription opioid marketed the drug less aggressively in

states with these laws, the drug crisis was less severe. Second, while the previous literature has

focused on the effects of the crisis on foster care admissions, we consider its effects on parental

absence and on the probability that a child lives in a household headed by a grandparent. This is an

important margin, as many of the channels we describe above would not necessarily result in a foster


                                                      4
care placement. In fact, child welfare services have increasingly sought to place at-risk children with

family members, due in part to the Fostering Connections to Success and Increasing Adoptions Act

of 2008, which established policies to encourage the practice (Child Welfare Information Gateway,

2019).

         To conduct this analysis, we use data from the March Current Population Survey Annual

Social and Economic Supplement from 1990 through 2015. We construct age-state-year cell

averages of different living arrangements for children age 0-16, and pair these with estimates of

children's exposure to the crisis that are constructed from Multiple Cause of Death Data from 1973

to 2017. Our measure of exposure to the crisis is the cumulative drug-related death rate for likely

parents over the child's life. This measure accounts for the fact that a transition to the child's

current living arrangement could have occurred at any point in the child's life, and older children

have had more exposure to the crisis than younger children.

         In OLS models with state, age, and year fixed-effects, we document a strong correlation

between this measure of exposure to the crisis and family living arrangements. Our 2SLS estimates

suggest that the relationship is causal--in all cases, OLS and 2SLS results are very similar in

magnitude and we fail to reject the null hypothesis that the 2SLS estimates are equal to their OLS

counterparts. We show that greater exposure to the crisis increases the chance that a child's mother

or father is absent from the household and it increases the likelihood that he or she lives in a

household headed by grandparent. These results hold when subjected to a wide battery of

robustness tests related to our measure of exposure to the crisis, recent policies related to the

opioids market, welfare reforms in the 1990s, differences in population and urban versus rural

residency of respondents, local economic conditions, trade shocks, the choice of sample, and state-

specific time trends.




                                                    5
         Given the size of the rise in the cumulative death rate of likely parents between 1996 and

2015, the implied effect on children is staggering. We estimate that by 2015, more than 1.5 million

more children aged 0-16 were living away from a mother or a father and a half a million children

were living in a household headed by a grandparent as a result of the drug crisis. While these

estimates are very large, they are consistent with survey data. The 2018 National Survey on Drug

Use and Health (NSDUH) estimates that among adults aged 18 and older, 4.2 million adults had a

substance abuse disorder for illegal drugs other than marijuana, and about half that amount was for

opioid abusers.6 This abuse translates into millions of children living in households with a drug

abuser. Using data from the 2009 NSDUH, Lipari and Van Horn (2017) estimate that 2.1 million

children lived in a household with a least one parent with a past-year illegal use disorder. The

number of children affected by drug-related deaths within their household is also large. Using data

from the 1986 through 2004 mortality follow-back of the National Health Interview Survey (Blewett

et al., 2019), we calculate that households that had an adult death related to drug poisoning in the

four quarters after the household entered the survey included an average of 0.71 children. Assuming

that this number is representative of more recent years, we estimate that the 763,000 deaths of adults

aged 18 and up from 1999 through 2018 occurred in households that housed 542,000 children. 7

This is an underestimate of the number of children exposed to the death of a family member due to

drugs, as it does not count those not living in the household (such as a father estranged from the

child's mother). It is worth emphasizing that because we cannot reject the null hypothesis that OLS




6 https://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/cbhsq-
reports/NSDUHDetailedTabs2018R2/NSDUHDetTabsSect5pe2018.htm
7 The NHIS uses a 113-category cause of death classification system. Drug deaths would appear in three different

categories: accidental poisoning, suicides not from firearms, and other unspecified accidental events, which primarily
include deaths of undetermined intents. Using data from 1999 through 2018 from the National Vital Statistics System's
Multiple Cause of Death data, we estimate that drug deaths represent 70 percent of deaths in these three categories.


                                                          6
and 2SLS results are the same, our analysis suggests that drug deaths were affecting family structure,

rather than declining family institutions leading to drug use.

         Because the drug crisis is recent and currently ongoing, it is too soon to know how these

changes in family structure will affect children's long-term outcome. A large body of work shows

that children who have experienced trauma8 have worse adult outcomes such as higher rates of

mortality (Feletti et al., 1998), substance abuse and mental health incidence (Anda et al., 2006; Dube

at al., 2003), suicide (Dube et al., 2001), involvement in criminal activity (Baglivio et al., 2014), and

unemployment (Hardcastle et al., 2018; Liu et al. 2013). To make steps towards considering some of

these outcomes, in Section V, we apply our same estimation strategy to investigate the impact of the

crisis on the resources available in children's households. Our results suggest that exposure to the

drug crisis increases the probability that a child is living in an impoverished household or is

participating in SNAP.

         In the last sections of the paper, we draw on both theoretical and empirical research from

across the social sciences to discuss how these changes in resources, and changes in children's living

arrangements more generally, are likely to affect outcomes. It is important to note that the variation

we exploit corresponds to a particular counterfactual: a world without the drug crisis. This is

particularly relevant when thinking through the likely welfare impacts of children being pushed to

live in households headed by grandparents. While having a child move in with a grandparent when a

parent is abusing drugs could be a constrained optimal decision conditional on being affected by the

drug crisis, this does not imply that the child is better off than she would have been in the absence of




8 Trauma is frequently measured through the ACE (adverse childhood experiences) survey which asks adults 10
questions about whether as a child their parents divorced, whether someone in their household went to prison, engaged
in substance abuse or was mentally ill, whether they experienced neglect or felt unloved, or experienced various forms of
verbal, physical, or sexual abuse.

                                                            7
the crisis. Overall, the evidence we discuss leads us to conclude that the changes in family structure

that we document will have harmful long-term consequences for a great many of these children.



II.      Measuring a Child's Exposure to the Drug Crisis

         The outcome that we are interested in is a child's living arrangement at a given point in time,

which we observe using the Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC) of the March Current

Population Survey (CPS). Importantly, the current arrangement is a product of all of a child's

experiences to that point in his or her life--it measures the stock of a child's experience rather than

the flow. Accordingly, a 15-year old in a given state and year has substantially more exposure to the

drug crisis than a one-year old, and the 15-year old could have separated from her parent because of

the parent's drug use at any point in her life. Thus, while it is tempting to correlate a child's current

living arrangement with a contemporaneous measure of the crisis in a given state and year, we

believe this would miss much of the relevant exposure to the crisis.

         To that end, we construct a variable that represents a child's cumulative exposure to the drug

crisis. We call this variable CEXPOSUREast , and the subscripts indicate that the measure will vary

with a child's age (a), state (s), and year (t). Our measure of the intensity of the crisis in a given state

and year comes from deaths related to drug poisonings, which are available from the National Vital

Statistics System's Multiple Cause of Death (MCOD). Although drug deaths are more easily

measured than drug use or abuse, they are an imperfect measure because (fortunately) not all use

results in death. In 2017 there were about 72,000 drug deaths, but data from the NSDUH indicates

that in that year, 4.2 million adults had a substance abuse disorder involving illegal drugs (excluding

marijuana) and about half that amount included opioids. Nevertheless, because deaths are highly

correlated with use, we expect that deaths will capture much of the important variation in exposure

to the crisis.

                                                     8
         To construct CEXPOSUREast , we sum the number of drug deaths of likely parents of

children of age a in year t from state s, and divide by the number of likely parents at their birth.9 We

define likely parents as those aged 17 to 40 in the child's year and state of birth.10 A newborn's

exposure is then the drug death rate of those 17-40 years old in the child's year of birth. As a child

ages, so do her likely parents; to account for this, we age the risk set. For example, for a one year old

child, we add the number of deaths among 18-41 year olds in the current year to the number of

deaths among 17-40 year olds in the previous year. More precisely, we define cumulative exposure

as:
                                                                      40+
                                                                 =0 =17+  
                         (1)       =                                                              .
                                                             ( 17-40- / 100,000)


Because they are rare events for people in the age range of likely parents, we express deaths as the

number per 100,000 in the relevant population. Both the numerator and denominator are likely

measured with error because of in- and out-migration, but for most children it should be a

reasonable proxy for their cumulative exposure to the crisis. In our discussion below, we will refer

to this measure as either cumulative exposure or cumulative mortality.

         Given that we have ASEC data from 1990 through 2015 for children aged 0-16, we use the

MCOD data from 1973 through 2015. The former year is required to calculate the cumulative

exposure for children aged 16 in 1990. We obtained access to the restricted-use version of the

MCOD files from 1983 to 2015, which contains state identifiers. We then supplement this with the


9 We use the child's current state of residence from the ASEC files to assign state; unfortunately, state of birth is not

contained in this dataset. Migration in response to the drug crisis would cause measurement error that could lead us to
either underestimate or overestimate the effect of the crisis on living arrangements, depending on the nature of the
migration response. As a check, we have used the American Community Survey (ACS) to estimate our results. These
data do contain information on state of birth but the samples do not start until four years after OxyContin was
introduced and the samples are much smaller in the early years of the ACS. The results in the ACS are similar to the
results from the ASEC and there is little difference in estimates when we use state of birth or state of residence, leading
us to conclude that selective migration is not meaningfully affecting our results.
10 Data from the 1996 Natality Detail data notes that 96 percent of mothers and 93 percent of fathers are in this age

range.


                                                             9
publicly available versions of the MCOD files with state identifiers from 1973 through 1982. 11 In

years 1973-1980, 1983-2015, the MCOD data contains a census of deaths in the US. In 1981 and

1982, there is a 50 percent sample from 19 states. Over this extended period, the MCOD data uses

cause of death codes from three different versions of the International Classifications of Diseases:

ICD-8 (through 1977), ICD-9 (1978-1998), and ICD-10 (1999-2015). In Appendix A we outline the

codes used to identify drug and opioid deaths. As we note in the appendix, it is easier to define drug

deaths across ICD systems than opioid deaths so we focus on this as the key covariate of interest.

            In Figures 2 through 4, we demonstrate how children's exposure to the crisis varies with

their age, state, and year. In Figure 2, we report the national time series of the cumulative mortality

for likely parents of children aged 0, 4, 8, 12 and 16. To calculate these numbers, we merge the

exposure measure to the ASEC samples at the age, state, and year level and weight by population

across states. The rate for children aged 0 captures the contemporaneous death rate for adults aged

17-40. We note two things about this figure. First, cumulative exposure by a given age increases

dramatically over time--by 290 percent for children aged 0, and by 255 percent for children aged 18.

Second, the trends "fan out" over time, reflecting the fact that as the crisis has grown, the difference in

cumulative exposure between older and younger child has grown as well.

            There is also tremendous variation across birth cohorts in their exposure to the drug crisis

by a given age (where we approximate year of birth as survey year minus age). In Figure 3, we

report the measure for three birth cohorts (1978, 1988, 1998) as they age. 12 More recent cohorts

have much greater exposure to the crisis at every age. By age 16, those born in 1998 have

experienced about 334 deaths per 100,000 likely parents--about 3 times more than that experienced

by the 1978 birth cohort.



11   These are available on the NBER website.
12   The slope of a particular line represents the vertical distance between graphs at particular points in Figure 2.

                                                                10
        Finally, there is variation across states in children's cumulative exposure. In Figure 4, we

report the cumulative exposure over time for ten-year olds from six states: California (CA), Illinois

(IL), Nebraska (NE), Ohio (OH), Virginia (VA), and West Virginia (WV). These states represent

two states each with low, medium and high growth in this measure of exposure. These also include

two triplicate (CA and IL) and four non-triplicate states. The two largest states (California and

Illinois) had substantially larger drug poisoning rates in the early part of the sample. In Illinois, a

child's exposure increases by 191 percent over time, while in California it actually returns to its 1990

level by 2015. The other four states all start out with similar rates in 1990, but grow at very different

rates. Nebraska and Virginia see a tripling in our measure of cumulative exposure for ten-year olds,

which is typical of the nation as a whole. Meanwhile, Ohio and West Virginia are epicenters of the

drug crisis, and the exposure rate for 10-year olds increases in these two states by 691 and 1,436

percent, respectively.



III.    Data Sources and Econometric Specification

        As the data will imply the structure of the econometric model, we present information about

both the data sources and the model specification in this section.



A.      Data on Outcomes

        Our primary data on the living arrangements of children comes from the March CPS's

ASEC. The CPS is a monthly survey of the non-institutionalized population that is the primary

source for monthly labor market data in the U.S. The CPS surveys about 60,000 households and

160,000 people each month, and asks a basic set of questions each month and fields special

supplements most months. The ASEC is fielded in March and asks detailed questions about health

insurance status, the previous year's income from a variety of sources, receipt of non-cash benefits,


                                                    11
and a household's participation in certain federal social insurance programs. The income and family

size variables are then used to construct the annual estimates of poverty.

         We use the IPUMS processing of the ASEC (Flood et al., 2020) which has harmonized the

data over time, allowing researchers to pool data across years. The IPUMS versions of the data also

have a number of constructed variables that we use for this analysis. All respondents are a unique

line number within the household and the CPS data has a detailed household roster that identifies

each member's relationship to the head of the household. From these variables, IPUMS generates

variables that match a child to a mother and father in the household, and the coding allows us to

determine whether a mother or father is in the household. The codes do not distinguish between

biological, adoptive, or step-parents. We note that there is some noise in linking children when

there are multiple subfamilies in households, and the IPUMS has explicit rules to match mothers to

children in these situations.13

         We use these codes to generate three key variables at the individual level that measure the

living arrangements of children: 1) whether the child is living away from a mother, 2) whether the

child is living away from a father, and 3) whether the child is living in a household headed by a

grandparent. We can also construct other outcomes from these variables, such as indicators for

whether the child is missing at least one parent, is missing both parents, is in a household headed by

someone other than a parent, and whether the child is in foster care. On the latter, it is important to

note that comparisons to administrative records from the Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and

Reporting Systems (AFCARS) show that CPS estimates of the size of the foster care population are

too small by about half (O'Hare, 2008). Part of the reason for this is that when indicating the child's



13 For example, consider a mother and father that have two adult sons living with them and one of these sons has a child
living in the household. This child will report their relationship to the householder (grandchild) but it is not clear which
adult male (child of householder) to attach as the child's father. In this case, IPUMS uses the oldest male as the parent,
which could be an error.

                                                            12
relationship to the household head in the CPS, relatives who are serving as foster parents are likely

to indicate their familial relationship to the child rather than their foster parent status--for example,

the grandmother who is also a foster parent will often indicate that the child is her grandchild

(Schweizer, 2019). 14

         We construct these living arrangement indicator variables for all children aged 0 through 16

from 1990 through 2015. We then aggregate the data into age, state, and year cells using sample

weights, and express these outcomes as the number of children in a given living arrangement per

100,000. The key outcome in our analysis is therefore a variable yast that measures the number of

children per 100,000 of age a from state s in year t living in a particular household type.



B.       The Econometric Model

         Figures 2-4 indicate there is tremendous variation in the exposure to the crisis across ages,

states, and time. Our econometric model attempts to exploit this variation. Given the variables

defined above, we begin with the model

                        (2)        = X ast  + CEXPOSUREast +  a + µ s + t +  ast
                                  yast

where yast and CEXPOSUREast are defined as above. For regressions in which the dependent

variable measures the absence of a mother or father, we use a measure of CEXPOSUREast that is

restricted to deaths among women and men respectively; for all other regressions, the measure

includes both men and women. Xast is a vector of control variables,  a , µ s , and t are age, state, and

time fixed effects respectively, and  ast is a random error. The data contain 17 age groups, 26 years



14We explored using data from AFCARS; these data provide case-level information on children who enter the foster
care system, where each observation is a removal event. As a result, it captures the "flow" in children's living
arrangements, rather than the "stock." Unfortunately, this structure is not well-suited to our identification strategy,
which exploits variation in children's cumulative exposure to the crisis. Consistent with this, our 2SLS estimates of the
effect of cumulative exposure on foster care admission rates are very imprecise and do not allow us to rule out large
positive or negative effects of the crisis.

                                                            13
of data, and information for 51 states so there are 22,542 observations. The control variables

include the fraction of a cell that is female, Black (non-Hispanic), other race (non-Hispanic), or

Hispanic (with non-Hispanic whites serving as the omitted category). Because both our outcomes

and measure of exposure are expressed as the number of occurrences per 100,000 people, this

allows us to interpret the coefficient on CEXPOSUREast as the number of additional children living

in a particular household structure for each additional cumulative drug death. We obtain consistent

estimates of the standard errors by clustering at the state level.

        We are concerned about two potential sources of bias in our OLS estimates. First, there is

the potential for reverse causation. There has been a general increase in the non-marital birth rate

over much of this time period, and with divorce being prevalent, many fathers are living away from

their children. Case and Deaton (2015 and 2017) argue that the decline in institutions such as

marriage has led to a "culture of despair" where people turn to drugs as a release from their troubles.

In this case, OLS estimates of  will be overstated if the rise in parents living away from their

children results in more drug deaths. Second, there is the potential for omitted variables bias. In the

Case and Deaton framework, the decline in economic opportunities, especially for low-skilled

workers has caused a shift towards drug use as a response. If the same factors encouraging drug

use, such as high unemployment, low wages, or low wage gains, are also damaging families, then the

OLS estimate of  would also be overstated as the estimate would be capturing these same factors

that are driving both high drug use and higher movements away from parents living with their

children. Existing evidence suggests this could be a serious concern. For example, high state

unemployment rates have been shown to lead to both higher drug deaths (Hollingsworth et al.,




                                                    14
2017) and lower marriage rates (Schaller, 2013). 15 Thus, to obtain consistent estimates of , we use

an instrumental variables (IV) procedure as described in the next two sections.



C.       Exposure to Non-Triplicate States in the OxyContin Era

         The rise in drug deaths has been driven primarily by opioids, and the drug at the center of

the rise is OxyContin, a branded opioid pain killer marketed by Purdue Pharma. 16 Its active

ingredient is oxycodone, an opioid that has been in clinical use since 1917 (Kalso, 2005). OxyContin

provides oxycodone through an extended-release formulation that allows for up to 12 hours of pain

relief, and as a result there is typically a high milligram (mg) content of oxycodone in the pills. Since

its release in 1996, OxyContin has been one of the most successful pharmaceuticals of all time with

worldwide sales totaling $35 billion. 17

         OxyContin was introduced in January of 1996. Historically, opioids were reserved for those

with acute pain such as post-surgical or cancer patients. Given the limited use of opioids, pain from

chronic conditions often went untreated. This was viewed by many as a failure of the medical

profession (e.g. Campbell, 1995; American Academy of Pain Medicine and American Pain Society,

1997). With the heightened concern about patient pain, pharmaceutical manufacturers started to

market opioids directly to physicians. A key message in many presentations was that the risks of

addiction were small when opioids were used appropriately. Purdue Pharma was particularly

aggressive at promoting this line of argument for OxyContin (Van Zee, 2009; Quinones, 2015).

         Internal documents from Purdue Pharma related to the introduction and promotion of

OxyContin are now accessible as a result of various lawsuits. These documents indicate that Purdue



15  However, both Schaller (2014) and Hellerstein and Morrill (2011) show that divorce is pro-cyclical, which would
cause a negative bias in our estimates of .
16 We refer to OxyContin ER simply as OxyContin throughout the paper.
17 http://www.latimes.com/projects/la-me-oxycontin-part3/


                                                           15
Pharma's marketing approach was multi-faceted and included advertising in medical journals,

promoting OxyContin at practitioner conventions, incentivizing pharmacies to stock the drug,

advertising in drug wholesaler booklets, and much more. But Purdue Pharma believed that their

most valuable tool was pharmaceutical sales representatives--employees who visit prescribers and

tout the benefits of their employer's drugs. 18 As seen in Figure 5, Purdue Pharma's marketing

expenditures increased from $40 million in 1996 to $260 million by 2001. The number of

OxyContin prescriptions follows a similar pattern, increasing gradually from 300,000 in 1996 to 7.2

million in 2001.

         Although OxyContin became available in all states in January of 1996, Purdue did not

market it equally in every state. During its extensive pre-launch market research, a consistent theme

emerged: Marketing was unlikely to be effective in "triplicate" states. Triplicate programs require

prescribers to use a special, serialized pad to prescribe a Schedule II opioid such as OxyContin.19

The prescriber, pharmacist, and the state each retain a copy. When Purdue Pharma launched

OxyContin in 1996, California, Idaho, Illinois, New York, and Texas had active triplicate programs.

These programs were an early form of prescription drug monitoring and were implemented between

1939 and 1982, well before opioid deaths began rising rapidly.

         Purdue Pharma focus group research indicated that doctors found triplicate pads a hassle

and did not want their prescribing practices observed by the state. In response, physicians could

avoid prescribing Schedule II drugs by prescribing Schedule III opioids instead. Purdue Pharma's

research concludes: "There seems to be a definite opportunity for OxyContin as a medication for

treatment of severe non-cancer pain among doctors in the non-triplicate states. More work might


18 "The deployment of our most valuable resource, the sales force, will be critical to the success of OxyContin" (p. 33 in
1996 Budget Plan).
19 In 1970, the Controlled Substances Act created five "schedules" for drugs related to their potential for abuse and their

medical uses. Schedule I drugs have the highest potential for abuse and no medical use (e.g. heroin). Lower scheduled
drugs have either a lower potential for abuse or a larger role in medicine. Oxycodone, the main ingredient in OxyContin,
is a Schedule II drug.

                                                            16
have to be done to determine if the product is viable in the triplicate states; however, the preliminary

evidence is not encouraging." The ability for a physician to avoid using a triplicate pad meant, "our

research suggests the absolute number of prescriptions they would write each year is very small, and

probably would not be sufficient to justify any separate marketing effort" (p. 8 and p. 59 in

Greenbaum, 1995).

          Figure 6 traces out differences in per capita opioid use across non-triplicate and triplicate

states over time for specific active ingredients.20 Unfortunately, the data for these graphs only

extends back to 1997. To make opioids of varying strengths comparable, we convert each opioid

into morphine equivalent grams and scale per 100,000 population. Triplicate and non-triplicate states

had somewhat similar rates of oxycodone use (the active ingredient in OxyContin) at the start of

1997, but as Purdue's marketing ramped up, so did the differences in oxycodone use across these

groups of states. However, for most of the other opioids included in the ARCOS data, the

difference between non-triplicate and triplicate states is small and remains so up through 2010.

There are two important things to note about the exception, morphine: 1) because all drugs have

been put into comparable units, the growth is negligible relative to the growth seen for oxycodone,

and 2) Purdue Pharma was also actively promoting their continuous release morphine drug, MS

Contin.

          There are at least two reasons to believe that Purdue's marketing is causing these differences

rather than them being directly attributable to the triplicate programs themselves. First, if the

triplicate programs were the driving force, then we would have expected the seven other opioids

shown in Figure 5 to display higher growth in the non-triplicate states than the triplicate states. The


20This data is from the Automation of Reports and Consolidated Orders System (ARCOS), a Drug Enforcement
Administration program that requires all manufacturers and distributors to report their transactions and deliveries of all
Schedules I and II substances as well as a number of Schedule III-V substances. Data from 2000 forward are available
on the DEA's website. We obtained data going back to 1997 via Freedom of Information Act requests.


                                                            17
lack of that differential growth suggests there was something specific to oxycodone, and to a much

lesser extent, morphine. Second, each of the triplicate programs was replaced with an electronic

prescription drug monitoring program within a few years of OxyContin's introduction.21 Evidence

reported in Alpert et al. (2019) suggests that Purdue's marketing directly affected drug overdose

death rates and was not simply picking up other factors including opioid-related policies, changes in

economic conditions, or differences between urban and rural areas.

         The impact of Purdue Pharma's advertising strategy on drug deaths can be seen in Figures 7

and 8. In Figure 7, we report drug death rates for the whole population over time for triplicate and

non-triplicate states. Prior to 1996, the trends for the two groups of states were similar and triplicate

states actually had higher drug death rates than non-triplicate states. After 1996, drug deaths increase

in both types of states, but the increase is more dramatic in non-triplicate states. Figure 8 reports

the corresponding cumulative mortality risk for 10-year olds in these two state groups from 1983

through 2015. 22 The results mirror those in Figure 7. Because we aggregate deaths over an 11-year

period to construct these numbers, the pre-treatment differences in rates across states groups are

large, but the pre-treatment trends are very similar.



D.       The 2SLS model

         To address the potential bias in OLS estimates that we discussed in Section III.B., we

implement an instrumental variables strategy that takes advantage of the fact that Purdue Pharma

marketed OxyContin much less in states with triplicate programs. Specifically, we use a child's




21 The triplicate programs were replaced in 1997 (Idaho), 1999 (Texas), 2000 (Illinois), 2001 (New York), and 2004
(California).
22 Because our MCOD files begin in 1973, 1983 is the first year for which we can construct a cumulative risk number for

10 year olds.

                                                          18
exposure to a non-triplicate state in the post-1995 era as an instrument for our measure of his or her

cumulative exposure to the crisis. We label the instrument YearsExpNTast , and it is constructed as:

                 (3)       YearsExpNTast = Min( Agest , Years after 1995) * NonTriplicatest

where NonTriplicatest is an indicator for whether the child's state did not have a triplicate program

at the time of OxyContin's launch. For example, consider a 10-year-old in 2010 in a non-triplicate

state. That child has had 10 years of exposure to living in a non-triplicate state, and consequently

YearsExpNTast = 10. For a 3-year-old child in the same state and year, she has only been exposed

for three years and so YearsExpNTast = 3. Children in triplicate states of all ages and in all years

have YearsExpNTast = 0.

         The validity of this approach rests on two assumptions. First, it must be the case that

YearsExpNTast is correlated with our measure of cumulative exposure. Figure 8 suggests that this is

the case, and we confirm this with regression estimates of the first-stage equation below. Second,

YearsExpNTast should not be correlated with the error term in equation (2). While we cannot test this

assumption directly, the triplicate programs were in place well before the drug crisis, and we have no

reason to expect that they would have affected family structure for reasons aside from drug

mortality. Moreover, the similar pre-trends for the two types of states in Figures 7 and 8 are

reassuring, and we will compare pre-trends in family structure in the next section.23 We cluster the

standard errors by state in our main analyses, but also provide wild bootstrapped 95 percent

confidence intervals in Appendix Tables B1 and B2.




23 See also Alpert et al. (2019) for more event study results that demonstrate that the two types of states had similar
trends in drug outcomes before the introduction of OxyContin.

                                                             19
IV.     Results

A.      Graphical Analysis

        Before turning to our regression models, we first present a series of graphs in Figure 9 that

foreshadows the results. In Figure 9A, we graph the percent of children aged 0-5 that are living

away from their mothers in triplicate and non-triplicate states. In Figure 9B, we present the same

graph for older children, aged 11-16. In 9C and 9D, we repeat these same graphs for the percent of

children living away from their fathers, and in 9E and 9F, we show graphs for the percent of

children living in a household headed by a grandparent. In each of these graphs, the high and low

values on the vertical axis are the same but the range in all graphs is 10 percentage points to make

comparing magnitudes more straightforward.

        We report the graphs for older and younger children because our econometric model takes

advantage of variation across states, over time, and across different ages of children. In the reduced-

form, for a specific age group, we are comparing outcomes over time in triplicate and non-triplicate

states. However, because younger children were less exposed to the crisis in either state group in

any particular year, we would expect to see larger differences across regimes in outcomes for older

compared to younger children.

        There is a consistent theme running through these graphs. First, for all six graphs, despite

the fact that the triplicate states are a unique set of jurisdictions, their pre-1996 levels and trends in

outcomes are quite similar to those of the non-triplicate states. Second, the results in these figures

suggest the 2SLS models will show some effect of the crisis on these three outcomes. Comparing

9A to 9B, 9C to 9D, and 9E to 9F, there is a noticeably larger negative gap in outcomes between

non-triplicate and triplicate states in the post-1996 period for the older group (B, D, and F)

compared to the younger groups (A, C, and E).




                                                     20
B.       OLS and 2SLS Estimates

         In Table 1, we report the OLS and 2SLS estimates of equation (1). In the first column, we

report the means of the dependent variable for the sample. Six percent of children are living away

from a mother, about 24 percent are living away from a father, 3 percent are living away from both

parents, and about 5 percent are living in a household headed by a grandparent.

         In the next column, we report the OLS estimates of equation (1). In the first two rows, we

use the cumulative death risk for likely mothers and likely fathers, respectively, as the covariate of

interest. In the third row and beyond, we use the aggregate risk for adults in the appropriate age

ranges. The magnitudes of the estimates in the first two rows are remarkably similar--for every

likely parent that dies from a drug poisoning, about 10 children are left without a mother or are left

without a father. Although this estimate might appear large, there are roughly 230 people misusing

opioids or using heroin and about 43 people with a drug use disorder for this class of drugs for

every person who dies from an opioid overdose.24 In the next two rows, we see that for each death,

approximately 15 children are missing at least one parent and about 4 children are missing both

parents. The next two rows suggest that for each additional drug death of a likely parent, 6 children

are living in a household not headed by one of their parents and 2 children are living with a

grandparent as the head of household. Finally, in the last row, our OLS estimate suggests that for

every drug death, 0.2 children are living in foster care. All of these results are statistically significant

at conventional levels, with the exceptions of the results for grandparents and for foster care.

         In the third column of Table 1, we turn to our 2SLS estimates. We report the first-stage F-

test of the hypothesis that the coefficient on the instrument is zero in brackets underneath the


24 The 2017 National Drug Use and Health Survey reports 11.8 million people that used heroin or misused pain relievers
in the past year and we noted above that there are 2.1 million with a substance use disorder for this group of drugs.
(https://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/cbhsq-
reports/NSDUHDetailedTabs2017/NSDUHDetailedTabs2017.htm#tab1-1A) We calculate about 49,000 deaths from
opioids in 2017.

                                                         21
standard errors. Full results from the estimates of the first stage are reported in Table 2; given the

graphs in Figures 7 and 8, it is not surprising that the years of exposure to a non-triplicate

environment is strongly correlated with all death rate measures. The numbers in the first two rows

of Table 2 indicate that a 16-year old with 17 years of exposure to a non-triplicate state was exposed

to a cumulative death rate that was 126 times greater for likely mothers and 189 times greater for

likely fathers than a 16-year old in a triplicate state. The smallest F-test in the table is 80, so there is

little concern about finite sample bias in these models (Staiger and Stock, 1997).

        Returning to the 2SLS estimates in the third column of Table 1, we see that all estimates are

statistically significant at the 5 percent level or lower except for the those related to foster care. In

the first four rows, the 2SLS estimates are close in magnitude to the OLS estimates. In the fourth

column, we report the p-value for the Hausman test of the null hypothesis that the OLS and 2SLS

estimates are the same. In these four cases, the p-value is very high and we cannot reject the null.

In the next two rows where the outcome is the number of children per 100,000 in households

headed by grandparents or headed by a non-parent, the 2SLS coefficients are somewhat larger than

their OLS counterparts, but the p-values on the Hausman test are still slightly larger than 0.05. In

general, the 2SLS estimates present the same story as the OLS models with similar magnitudes.

Case and Deaton (2015 and 2017) suggest the drug crisis is in response to the decline in high-paying

jobs for low skilled worked in sectors like manufacturing, and the resulting decline in institutions like

marriage and the family. In this instance, the similarity of the OLS and 2SLS models are consistent

with the interpretation that the drug crisis is leading to parents living away from their children, and

not the other way around.

        In the final two columns of Table 1, we report the 2SLS model's prediction of the number

of children living in each arrangement due to the drug epidemic. In the fifth column, we give the

change in the rate of likely parents' mortality risk produced by the rise in drug death rates over this


                                                     22
period multiplied by our estimated impact of the risk on the outcome. In the final column, we

report the number of children impacted by this change. 25 We first note that for foster care, the

point estimate is actually negative, so that our calculations suggest that 6,000 fewer children were

living in foster care as a result of the crisis. However, the estimate is imprecise, and we also cannot

rule out that many thousands of children were moved into foster care as a result of the crisis, as

many popular press articles have suggested. We may also be missing children who were in formal

foster care, but who were identified as a relative in the ASEC data.

            What we can conclude is that any movement of children into foster care was dwarfed by the

other changes in living arrangements that we consider. The estimates indicate that had the drug

epidemic stayed at 1996 levels, there would be about 2.3 percentage points fewer children missing at

least one parent in the household and about 0.8 percentage points fewer children living in a home

headed by a grandparent. This translates into 1.5 million children living away from at least one

parent and half of a million children living in a household headed by a grandparent in 2015. Perhaps

the most sobering number is that 300,000 children are living away from both parents as a result of

the drug crisis.



C.          Robustness and Heterogeneity

            In this section, we summarize the findings from a battery of robustness tests; a full

discussion and reporting of results can be found in Appendix B. We assess the robustness of our

results to 1) alternative specification and sample choices; 2) the inclusion of additional controls; 3)




25   Specifically, we calculate the change in cumulative mortality for each age 0-16 over the 20-year period 1996 to 2015
(reported in column 4), multiply this by the 2SLS coefficient on CEXPOSUREast , then multiply this by the number
of children of each age in 2015 as measured by the SEER population data, and scale by 100,000 people to get levels.

                                                              23
omitting individual treatment states; and 4) alternative specifications to address the difference in

population between triplicate and non-triplicate states.

         First, recall that our exposure measure includes all drug deaths, and not only opioid deaths.

While the latter are more likely to be affected by our instrument, the former is more consistently

measured. When we use opioid deaths instead, the point estimates are slightly larger. The same is

true when we account for the shift from prescription to illegal opioids that was induced by the

reformulation of OxyContin in 2010 (documented in Alpert et al. (2018) and Evans et al. (2019)) by

restricting the sample to the years before 2011. In addition, we explore whether the drug crisis

affected the composition of families through changes in fertility by restricting the sample to those

born before the introduction of OxyContin in 1996; doing so yields estimates that are less precise

but consistent with our main findings.26 We find suggestive evidence that children born in non-

triplicate states after the introduction of OxyContin were actually positively selected, in families that

were less likely to have mothers missing, fathers missing, or to be headed by a grandparent. We also

estimate specifications that include state-specific linear time trends to capture differential changes in

population or metropolitan areas (among other things). Our results remain the same.

         Second, we show that our results are not simply masking differences or changes in economic

conditions across triplicate and non-triplicate states. Our results are robust to including controls for

each state's per-capita real GDP or the state's unemployment rate. In addition, we show that the

granting of permanent normalized trade relations to China in 2000, linked to opioid death rates by

Pierce and Schott (2020), is not driving our results. We then show that our results are not merely

picking up other, commonly-studied changes in the opioid market or in public policy--they are not


26 In addition, we explore whether the drug crisis affected the composition of families through changes in fertility using
data on the population of children under age one from SEER. We find suggestive evidence that children born in non-
triplicate states after the introduction of OxyContin were less likely to have an unmarried mother. If these children are
also less likely to live in families with mothers or fathers missing or to be headed by a grandparent later in life, this
selection would cause us to understate the impact of the crisis on child living arrangements.

                                                            24
qualitatively different if we control for subsequent opioid-related policies such as prescription drug

monitoring programs, or if we control for welfare reforms which were previously shown to affect

children's living arrangements (Bitler et al., 2006).

         Third, we remove each triplicate state, one at a time, and re-estimate the regression. We find

that no single triplicate state is driving our results.

         Fourth, we address the large differences in population between triplicate and non-triplicate

states and show that this is not driving our results. We show that including a fourth-order

polynomial in the number of parent-aged adults does not substantively alter the results. Because the

triplicate states are more urban than the non-triplicate states, we also estimate models separately for

children living in metropolitan areas and for children not living in metropolitan areas. Again, our

results are qualitatively similar to our main findings. In the spirit of a matching estimator, our results

are also similar if we restrict our sample to include only the non-triplicate states with populations

similar to triplicate states in 1990.

         In our final appendix table, we explore whether the effects of the crisis vary by race. We run

our analyses separately for white and Black children using race-specific measures of exposure, and

find large impacts on white children similar to what we found for the entire sample.27 Our point

estimates for Black children are larger (though smaller when expressed as the percent change relative

to the mean), but the estimates are imprecise and we cannot reject the null of no effect.



V.       Changes in Family Structure and Longer-Term Effects

         The results in the previous section demonstrate that the drug crisis has had large impacts on

the living arrangements of children. There is a substantial body of work in the social sciences that



27We do not distinguish based on ethnicity in these race-specific models because the ICD-8 version of the mortality data
does not identify ethnicity.

                                                          25
suggests that these changes could have important negative consequences for the affected children.

One of the primary channels for such an effect is diminished household resources. Most theoretical

models of child development include inputs like food, housing, and education, which are often

purchased using household income.28 Rigorous evidence from natural experiments and randomized

trials shows that higher household income does indeed produce improvements in academic

achievement, cognitive ability, and behavioral outcomes, and reductions in criminal activity (Akee et

al., 2010; Duncan et al., 2011; Dahl and Lochner, 2012; Akee et al., 2018). 29 The absence of a parent

as a result of the drug crisis will likely affect the resources available for the child (Lopoo and

DeLeire, 2014; Kalil et al., 2014), though of course the magnitude of the change will depend on how

much the parent would have contributed absent the crisis, and the extent to which these resources

are available in the new living situation.

         As a first step in directly analyzing the impacts of altered living arrangements, we estimate

the same OLS and 2SLS models as before, but with various measures of a household's economic

status as the dependent variable. The results are presented in Table 3 and again we find remarkably

similar point estimates across the OLS and 2SLS methods for most outcomes. Broadly, the results

paint a picture in which children who are more exposed to the drug crisis are more likely to live in

households with fewer economic resources. If interpreted causally, the estimates suggest that

because of the drug crisis, almost 700,000 more children are living in poverty and 785,000 are

participating in the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program ("food stamps").

         While our focus in this section has been on material resources, we would be remiss if we did

not acknowledge that child psychologists have long proposed that parent-child separations may have


28 See for example Becker (1960) and Willis (1973).
29 Child development models also often include time inputs or other measures of engagement from household members
in the production function. Credible causal evidence on the effects of parental engagement is harder to come by, but the
finding of a positive association with desired child outcomes is robust (see Sarkadi et al. (2008) and Kalil and Mayer
(2016) for summaries). While these time and engagement inputs are also likely to be affected by changes in family
structure, we focus on income here because we are able to measure it in our data.

                                                          26
adverse effects on children's mental and emotional health and on the development of their

personalities (Rutter, 1971). It is difficult to establish causal relationships, but unstable attachment

to either one's mother or father throughout childhood is associated with worse biopsychosocial

outcomes (Ranson and Urichuk, 2008; King and Sobolewski, 2006). The separation event itself may

harm children; Fomby and Cherlin (2007) use longitudinal data on both mothers and children to

show that children who experience multiple family structure transitions have worse behavioral

outcomes. Separation events that result from the drug crisis may be especially traumatic; in two-

thirds of foster care cases in 2017 for which drug abuse by the parent is present, the child also

experienced abuse, neglect, or a parent's death.30 These types of childhood traumas are known to

cause Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, which affects "the regulation of the neurobiological stress

systems, alterations in brain maturation, and neuropsychological outcomes in the developing child"

(Watts-English et al., 2006). Given this line of research, it seems clear that the changes in family

structure of the kind that we observe are likely to produce negative outcomes for many children.



VI.        Discussion

           In this paper, we have examined the effect of the drug crisis of recent decades on children's

living arrangements in the United States. Using an instrumental variables strategy that exploits

variation across children in exposure to the crisis as a result of pharmaceutical marketing strategies,

we show that more children are living without one or both parents as a result of the crisis. Our

estimates imply that the increase in the severity of the crisis between 1996 and 2015 meant that 1.5

million children were living away from at least one parent in 2015. Grandparents appear to be filling

the void in part; we see that nearly half of a million children were moved into a household headed by

a grandparent. Between 1996 and 2015, the fraction of children living in a household headed by a


30   Authors' calculations, 2017 Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting Systems data.

                                                           27
grandparent grew from 5.3 to 6.2 percent, and our results indicate that the advancing drug crisis can

explain 83 percent of the increase.

            The opioid crisis is one of a variety of societal changes that have indelibly altered family life

for children. Our work contributes to the literature on the effects of other public health and policy

crises on children's living arrangements. Western and Wildeman (2009), Wildeman (2009),

Wakefield and Wildeman (2014), and Turney (2017) are part of a large body of work that examines

the impact of mass incarceration on families, especially among African Americans. Swann and

Sylvester (2006) argue that the increase in foster caseloads from 1985 through 2000 were due in part

to female incarceration and the growth of crack cocaine, though Fryer et al. (2013) conclude that the

crack epidemic had no impact on foster care admissions but did significantly increase unwed birth

rates.

            It is too soon to know how long-term outcomes for children will be affected by this change

in their living situations. We show that in the intermediate stage, children are more likely to be living

in impoverished households and are more likely to be using SNAP benefits. The existing literature

on the likely effects of reductions in household income and of parental separations suggests that

many children will be negatively impacted by these changes. We can also draw on other work in the

social sciences that has documented the causal effects of changes in family structure on long-term

outcomes.

            While we know of no studies that have identified the causal effect of parental separation as a

result of drug abuse specifically, work on the effects of separations for other reasons may be

informative.31 Gruber (2004) exploits variation in children's exposure to unilateral divorce laws to

show that the marginal divorce leads to worse outcomes for children, including lower educational

attainment and lower incomes. Using a family fixed-effects model to estimate the impact of the


31   See McLanahan et al. (2013) for a review of the literature on the causal effects of father absence.

                                                               28
unexpected death of a parent in Taiwan, Chen et al. (2009) find that maternal death has large

negative impacts on educational attainment. Lyle (2006) studies the impacts of parental absence due

to military deployments and finds negative effects on children's test scores; see Paris et al. (2010) for

a review of the literature on the effects of military deployments on children. Using variation in

judges' sentencing propensities in Sweden, Dobbie et al. (2018) find that parental incarceration leads

to increased risky behaviors and worse labor market outcomes for children. Finally, Doyle (2007;

2008) uses a similar strategy that exploits variation in caseworker propensities to estimate the effects

of different placement outcomes for children in foster care. Doyle's findings are striking, as they

show that even for children whose home environments have drawn the attention of child welfare

services, remaining with the parent is better for the marginal child, as they enjoy better labor market

outcomes and are less likely to enter the criminal justice system.

        Finally, our results also show that nearly half of a million children were moved into a living

situation in which the grandparent is the household head as a result of the crisis. For these children,

whether and how their outcomes are affected will depend on the extent to which grandparents are

able to provide resources and emotional and psychological support. Amorim (2019) finds that

multigenerational households spend more on children's education than similar two-generation

households. As for time inputs, Kalil, Ryan, and Chor (2014) document that children receive more

caregiving time in households with a mother and grandparent than in any other household structure

except for those with two biological parents present. We are not aware of any studies that estimate

the causal impact of living with a grandparent on children's well-being, but among studies

documenting correlations between children's living arrangements and outcomes, it is generally the

case that having a grandparent as a primary caregiver is associated with worse academic outcomes




                                                   29
and behavior problems, while results are more mixed for children who live in multi-generational

households (Dunifon et al., 2018). 32

         This discussion highlights the fact that there will likely be heterogeneity in the effects of

changes in family structure due to the drug crisis, driven by differences across children in the

counterfactual living arrangement and in the resources and support available in the new home

environment. Given that hundreds of thousands of children have been affected, we conclude that

the existing evidence suggests that there will likely be a great number of children whose outcomes

are worsened by this crisis.




32There are also likely to be important consequences for the grandparents as well; as one example, a recent working
paper found that regions where intergenerational co-residence is more common have experienced more COVID-19
deaths (Aparicio and Grossbard, 2020).

                                                          30
References

Akee, Randall, William Copeland, E. Jane Costello, and Emilia Simeonova. 2018. "How Does
Household Income Affect Child Personality Traits and Behaviors?" American Economic Review 108(3):
775-827.

Akee, Randall KQ, William E. Copeland, Gordon Keeler, Adrian Angold, and E. Jane Costello.
2010. "Parents' Incomes and Children's outcomes: A Quasi-Experiment Using Transfer Payments
from Casino Profits." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2(1): 86-115.

Aliprantis, Dionissi, and Mark E. Schweitzer. 2018. "Opioids and the Labor Market." Federal Reserve
Bank of Cleveland Working Paper #18-07.

Alpert, Abbie. E., William N. Evans, Ethan E.M. Lieber, and David Powell. 2019. "Origins of the
Opioid Crisis and Its Enduring Impacts." NBER Working Paper. #26500.

Alpert, Abby, David Powell, and Rosalie Liccardo Pacula. 2018. "Supply-Side Drug Policy in the
Presence of Substitutes: Evidence from the Introduction of Abuse-Deterrent Opioids." American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy 10(4): 1-35.

American Academy of Pain Medicine and the American Pain Society. 1997. "The Use of Opioids for
the Treatment of Chronic Pain." Clinical Journal of Pain 13(1): 6-8.

Amorim, Mariana. 2019. "Are Grandparents a Blessing or a Burden? Multigenerational Coresidence
and Child-Related Spending." Social Science Research 8(May): 132-144.

Anda, Robert F., Vincent J. Felitti, J. Douglas Bremmer, John D. Walker, Charles Whitfield, Bruce
D. Perry, Shanta R. Dube, and Wayne H. Giles. 2006. "The Enduring Effects of Abuse and Related
Adverse Experiences in Childhood: A Convergence of Evidence from Neurobiology and
Epidemiology." European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience 256: 174-186.

Aparicio, Fenoll, and Shoshana Grossbard. "Intergenerational Residence Patterns and COVID-19
Fatalities in the EU and the US." IZA Working Paper No. 13452.

Averett, Susan L., Julie K. Smith, and Yang Wand. 2019. "Medicaid Expansions and Opioid
Deaths." Health Economics 28(12): 1491-1496.

Baglivio, Michael T., Nathan Epps, Kimberly Swartz, Mona Sayedul Huq, Amy Sheer, and Nancy
Hardt. 2014. "The Prevalence of Adverse Chioldhood Experiences (ACE) in the Lives of Juvenile
Offenders." Journal of Juvenile Justice 3(2): 1-17.

Becker, Gary. 1960. "An Economic Analysis of Fertility." Demographic and Economic Change in
Developed Countries. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Bitler, Marianne, Jonah Gelbach, and Hilary Hoynes. 2006. "Welfare Reform and the Living
Arrangements of Children." Journal of Human Resources XLI(1): 1-27.



                                                31
Blewett, Lynn A., Julia A. Rivera Drew, Miriam L. King, and Kari C.W. Williams. 2019. IPUMS
Health Surveys: National Health Interview Survey, Version 6.4 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS.

Buchmueller, Thomas C, and Colleen Carey. 2018. "The effect of prescription drug monitoring
programs on opioid utilization in Medicare." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 10 (1): 77-112.

Campbell, James N. 1995. ``APS Presidential Address,'' Pain Forum 5(1):85­88.

Case, Anne, and Angus Deaton. 2015. "Rising Morbidity and Mortality in Midlife among White
Non-Hispanic Americans in the 21st Century." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112(49):
15078­83.

Case, Anne, and Angus Deaton. 2017. "Mortality and Morbidity in the 21st Century." Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, (Spring): 397­443.

Chen, Stacey Hsiangju, Chen, Yen-Chien, and Jin-Tan Liu. 2009. "The Impact of Unexpected
Maternal Death on Education: First Evidence from Three National Administrative Data Links".
American Economic Review 99(2): 149-53.

Child Welfare Information Gateway. 2019. Major Federal Legislation Concerned with Child Protection, Child
Welfare, and Adoption. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Children's
Bureau.

Currie, Janet, Jonas Y. Jin, and Molly Schnell. 2019. "U.S. Employment and Opioids: Is There a
Connection?" NBER Working Paper #24400.

Currie, Janet and Hannes Schwandt. 2020. "The Opioid Epidemic Was Not Caused by Economic
Distress but by Factors that Could be More Rapidly Addressed." NBER Working Paper. #27544.

Cutler, David, Ellen Meara, and Susan Stewart. 2017. "Has Wider Availability of Prescription Drugs
for Pain Relief: Affected SSDI and SSI Enrollment?" NBER Disability Research Center #NB17-14

Dave, Dhaval, Moniza Deza, and Brady Horn. 2020. "Prescription Drug Monitoring, Opioid Abuse,
and Crime." NBER Working Paper #24975.

Dahl, Gordon B., and Lance Lochner. 2012. "The Impact of Family Income on Child Achievement:
Evidence from the Earned Income Tax Credit." American Economic Review 102(5):1927-56.

Doleac, Jennifer, and Anita Mukherjee. 2018. "The Moral hazard of Lifesaving Innovations:
Naloxone Access, Opioid Abuse, and Crime." IZA Discussion Paper No. 11489.

Doyle Jr, Joseph J. 2007. "Child Protection and Child Outcomes: Measuring the Effects of Foster
Care." American Economic Review 97(5): 1583-1610.

Doyle Jr, Joseph J. 2008."Child Protection and Adult crime: Using Investigator Assignment to
Estimate Causal Effects of Foster Care." Journal of Political Economy 116(4): 746-770.



                                                   32
Dobbie, Will, Hans Grönqvist, Susan Niknami, Mårten Palme, and Mikael Priks. 2018. "The
Intergenerational Effects of Parental Incarceration." NBER Working Paper #24186.

Dube, Shanta R., Roberta F. Anda, Vincent J. Felitti, Daniel P. Chapman, David F. Williamson, and
Wayne H. Giles. 2001. "Childhood Abuse, Household Dysfunction, and the Risk of Attempted
Suicide Throughout the Life Span: Findings from the Adverse Childhood Experiences Study."
Journal of the American Medical Association 286(24): 3089-3096.

Dube, Shanta R., Vincent Felitti, Maxia Dong, Daniel P. Chapman, Wayne H. Giles, and Rober F.
Anda. 2003. "Childhood Abuse, Abuse, and Household Dysfunction and the Risk of Illicit Drug
Use: The Adverse Childhood Experiences Study."Pediatrics 111(3): 564-572.

Duncan, Greg J., Pamela A. Morris, and Chris Rodrigues. 2011. "Does Money Really Matter?
Estimating Impacts of Family Income on Young Children's Achievement with Data from Random-
Assignment Experiments." Developmental Psychology 47(5): 1263-1279.

Dunifon, Rachel E., Christopher E. Near, and Kathleen M. ZiolGuest. 2018."Backup parents,
playmates, friends: Grandparents' time with grandchildren." Journal of Marriage and Family 80(3): 752-
767.

Evans, William N, Ethan M.J. Lieber, and Patrick Power. 2019. "How the Reformulation of
OxyContin Ignited the Heroin Epidemic." Review of Economics and Statistics 101(1):1-15.

Felitti, Vincent J., Robert F. Anda, Dale Norenberg, David F. Williamson, Alison M. Spitz, Valerie
Edwards, Mary P. Koss, and James S. Marks. 1998. "Relationship of Childhood Abuse and
Household Dysfunction to Many of the Leading Causes of Death in Adults: The Adverse
Childhood Experiences (ACE) Study." American Journal of Preventive Medicine 14(4): 245-258.

Flood, Sarah, Miriam King, Renae Rodgers, Steven Ruggles and J. Robert Warren. 2020. Integrated
Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey: Version 7.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN:
IPUMS, https://doi.org/10.18128/D030.V7.0

Fomby, Paula, and Andrew J. Cherlin. 2007. "Family Instability and Child Well-Being." American
Sociological Review 72(2): 181-204.

Fryer, Roland G. Jr, Paul S. Heaton, Steven D. Levitt, and Kevin M. Murphy. 2013. "Measuring
Crack Cocaine and its Impact." Economic Inquiry 51(3): 1651-1681.

Greenbaum, Tom. 1995. OxyContin Non-cancer Pain Focus Groups among Primary Care MDs,
Surgeons, and Rheumatologists.

Gruber, Jonathan. 2004. "Is Making Divorce Easier Bad for Children? The Long-Run Implications
of Unilateral Divorce." Journal of Labor Economics 22(4): 799-833.

Hardcastle, K., M.A. Bellis, K. Ford, K. Hughes, J Garner, and G. Ramos Rodriguez. 2018.
"Measuring the Relationship between Adverse Childhood Experiences and Education and



                                                  33
Employment Success in England and Wales: Findings from a Retrospective Study." Public Health
165: 106-116.

Harris, Matthew C., Lawrence M. Kessler, Matthew N. Murray, and Beth Glenn. Forthcoming.
"Prescription Opioids and Labor Market Pains." Journal of Human Resources.

Hellerstein, Judith K., and Melinda S. Morrill. 2011. "Booms, Busts, and Divorce." The BE Journal of
Economic Analysis & Policy, 11(1).

Hollingsworth, Alex, Christopher J. Ruhm, and Kosali Simon. 2017. "Macroeconomic Conditions
and Opioid Abuse." Journal of Health Economics 56: 222­33.

Horwitz, Jill, Corey S. Davis, Lynn S. McClelland, Rebecca S. Fordon, and Ellen Meara. 2018. "The
Problem of Data Quality in Analyses of Opioid Regulation: The Case of Prescription Drug
Monitoring Programs." NBER Working Paper #24947.

Kalil, Ariel, and Susan E. Mayer. 2016. "Understanding the importance of parental time with
children: Comment on Milkie, Nomaguchi, and Denny (2015)." Journal of Marriage and Family 78(1):
262.

Kalil, Ariel, Rebecca Ryan, and Elise Chor. 2014. "Time Investments in Children Across Family
Structures." The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 654: 150-168.

Kalso, Eija. 2005. "Oxycodone." Journal of Pain and Symptom Management, 29(5): 47-56.

King, Valarie, and Juliana M. Sobolewski. 2006. "Nonresident Fathers' Contributions to Adolescent
WellBeing." Journal of Marriage and Family 68(3): 537-557.

Lipari, Rachel N. and Structher L. Van Horn. 2017. "Children Living with Parents Who Have a
Substance Abuse Disorder." The CBHSQ Report. The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Service
Administration. https://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/report_3223/ShortReport-
3223.pdf

Liu, Yong, Janet B. Croft, Daniel P. Chapman, Geraldine S. Perry, and Kurt J. Greenlund. 2013.
"Relationship netween Adverse Childhood Experiences and Unemployment among Adults in Five
US States." Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology 48: 357-367.

Lopoo, Leonard M., and Thomas DeLeire. 2014. "Family Structure and the Economic Wellbeing of
Children in Youth and Adulthood." Social Science Research 43: 30-44.

Lyle, David S. 2006. "Using Military Deployments and Job Assignments to Estimate the Effect of
Parental Absences and Household Relocations on Children's Academic Achievement." Journal of
Labor Economics 24(2): 319-350.

MacKinnon, James G. and Matthew D. Webb. 2018. "The Wild Bootstrap for Few (Treated)
Clusters." Econometrics Journal 21: 114-135.



                                                 34
McLanahan, Sara, Laura Tach, and Daniel Schneider. 2013. "The Causal-Effects of Father
Absence." Annual Review of Sociology 39: 399-427.

Meinhofer, Angelica, and Yohanis Anglero-Diaz. 2019. "Trends in Foster Care Entry Among
Children Removed from their Homes Because of Parental Drug Use, 2000-2017." JAMA Pediatrics
173(9): 881-883

O'Hare, William P. 2008. "Data on Children in Foster Care from the Census Bureau." Kids Count,
The Annie E. Casey Foundation.

Paris, Ruth, Ellen R. DeVoe, Abigail M. Ross, and Michelle L. Acker. 2010. "When a Parent Goes to
War: Effects of Parental Deployment on Very Young Children and Implications for
Intervention." American Journal of Orthopsychiatry 80(4): 610-618.

Pierce, Justin R, and Peter K. Schott. 2020. "The Trade Liberalization and Morality: Evidence from
US Counties." American Economic Review: Insights, 2(1): 47-64

Purdue Pharma. 1996-2001. Budget Plan

Quast, Troy. 2018. "State-Level Variation in the Relationship Between Child Removals and Opioid
prescriptions." Child Abuse & Neglect 86 (December): 306-313.

Quast, Troy, Eric A Storch, and Svetlana Yampolskaya. 2018. "Opioid Prescription Rates and Child
Removals: Evidence from Florida." Health Affairs 37(1). https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2017.1023

Quast, Troy, Melissa A. Bright, and Chris Delcher. 2019. "The Relationship between Foster Care
Entries and High Dose Opioid Prescribing in Florida." Addictive Behaviors 93(June): 52-58.

Quinones, Sam. 2015. Dreamland: The True Tale of America's Opiate Epidemic. New York: Bloomsbury
Press.

Radel, Laura, Melinda Baldwin, Gilbert Crouse, Robin Ghertner, and Annette Waters. 2018.
"Substance Use, the Opioid Epidemic, and the Child Welfare System: Key Findings from a Mixed
Methods Study." ASPE Research Brief, US. Department of Health and Human Services: Washington,
DC. https://bettercarenetwork.org/sites/default/files/SubstanceUseChildWelfareOverview.pdf

Ranson, Kenna E., and Liana J. Urichuk. 2008. "The Effect of Parent­Child Attachment
Relationships on Child Biopsychosocial Outcomes: A Review." Early Child Development and
Care 178(2): 129-152.

Ruggles, Steven, Sarah Flood, Ronald Goesken, Josiah Grover, Erin Mayer, Jose Pacas, and
Matthew Sobek. IPUMS USA: Version 10.0 dataset]. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V10.0.

Rutter, Michael. 1971. "Parent-Child Separation: Psychological Effects On The Children." Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry 12(4): 233­60. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7610.1971.tb01086.x.



                                                 35
Sarkadi, Anna, Robert Kristiansson, Frank Oberklaid, and Sven Bremberg. 2008."Fathers'
Involvement and Children's Developmental Outcomes: A Systematic Review of Longitudinal
Studies." Acta paediatrica 97(2): 153-158.

Schaller, Jessamyn. 2013. "For Richer, if Not for Poorer? Marriage and Divorce Over the Business
Cycle." Journal of Population Economics 26(3):1007-1033.

Schweizer, Valerie J. 2019. "Characteristics of foster children in the U.S., 2016-2018." Family
Profiles, FP-19-09. Bowling Green, OH: National Center for Family & Marriage Research.
https://doi.org/10.25035/ncfmr/fp-19-09.

Staiger, Douglas, and James H. Stock. 1997. "Instrument Variables Regressions with Weak
Instruments." Econometrica 65(3): 557-586.

Stone, Rebecca, and Emily F. Rothman. 2019. "Opioid Use and Intimate Partner Violence: a
Systematic Review." Current Epidemiology Reports 6(2): 215-230.

Swann, Christpher, and Michelle Sheran Sylvester. 2006. "The Foster Care Crisis: What Caused
Caseloads to Grow." Demography 43(2): 309-335.

Szalavitz, Maia, and Khary K. Rigg. 2017. "The Curious (Dis)Connection Between the Opioid
Epidemic and Crime." Substance Use & Misuse 52(14): 1927-1931.

Turney, Kristen. 2017. "The Unequal Consequences of Mass Incarceration for Children."
Demography 54: 361-389.

Van Zee, Art. 2009. "The Promotion and Marketing of OxyContin: Commercial Triumph, Public
Health Tragedy." American Journal of Public Health 99(2): 221-227.

Wakefield, Sarah, and Christopher Wildeman. 2014. Children of the Prison Boom: Mass Incarceration and
the Future of American Inequality. Oxford University Press: New York.

WattsEnglish, Tiffany, Beverly L. Fortson, Nicole Gibler, Stephen R. Hooper, and Michael D. De
Bellis. 2006. "The Psychobiology of Maltreatment in Childhood." Journal of Social Issues 62(4): 717-
736.

Wettstein, Gal. 2019. "Health Insurance and Opioid Deaths: Evidence from the Affordable Care
Act Young Adult Provision." Health Economics 28(5): 666-677.

Western, Bruce, and Christopher Wildeman. 2009. "The Black Family and Mass Incarceration." The
Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science. 621(1): 221-242.

Wildeman, Christopher. 2009. "Parental Imprisonment, the Prison Boom, and the Concentration of
Childhood Disadvantage." Demography 46:265-280.

Willis, R. J. 1973. A new approach to the economic theory of fertility behavior. Journal of Political
Economy, 81(2, Part 2), S14-S64.


                                                    36
Ziedan, Endy, and Robert Kaestner. 2020. "Effects of Prescription Opioids and Prescription Opioid
Control Policies on Infant Health." NBER Working Paper #26749.




                                               37
               Figure 1: Drug Death Rate by Age in the United States, 1999-2015




Data are from the 1999-2015 Multiple Cause of Death Files.




                                                   38
 Figure 2: Cumulative Drug Death Rate of Likely Parents of Children Ages 0-16, 1990-2015,
                            Multiple Cause of Death Data

                     400


                     350
                                                                                                        Age=16

                     300

                                                                                                         Age=12
                     250
    Deaths/100,000




                     200                                                                                     Age=8


                     150

                                                                                                             Age=4
                     100


                     50
                                                                                                             Age=0

                      0
                           1990   1992   1994   1996   1998   2000   2002 2004   2006   2008   2010   2012   2014
                                                                      Year

Data are from the Multiple Cause of Death Files; see the text for details on how this measure is constructed.




                                                                     39
                          Figure 3: Cumulative Drug Poisoning Death Rate of Likely Parents
                            by Age for Various Birth Cohorts, Multiple Cause of Death Data

                    400


                    350
                                                                                                 1998

                    300


                    250
   Deaths/100,000




                                                                                               1988
                    200


                    150
                                                                                                 1978
                    100


                    50


                     0
                          0    1   2   3    4   5   6   7      8  9   10   11   12   13   14    15    16
                                                              Age
Data are from the Multiple Cause of Death Files; see the text for details on how this measure is constructed.




                                                         40
 Figure 4: Cumulative Drug Poisoning Death Rate of Likely Parents for Children Aged 10
             by State of Residence, 1990-2015, Multiple Cause of Death Data

                     600

                                                                                                                    WV

                     500




                     400
    Deaths/100,000




                                                                                                                    OH
                     300




                     200                                                                                            IL
                                                                                                                    VA
                                                                                                                    CA
                     100                                                                                            NE




                      0
                           1990   1992   1994   1996   1998   2000   2002 2004   2006   2008   2010   2012   2014
                                                                      Year
Data are from the Multiple Cause of Death Files; see the text for details on how this measure is constructed.




                                                                     41
                                               Figure 5: OxyContin Marketing and Prescriptions Over Time

                                        $300                                                                 80


                                                                                                             70
                                        $250




                                                                                                                  OxyContin Prescriptions (x 100,000)
                                                                     Marketing
   Marketing Expenditures (x million)




                                                                     (left axis)                             60

                                        $200
                                                                                                             50


                                        $150                                                                 40

                                                                                      Prescriptions
                                                                                      (right axis)           30
                                        $100

                                                                                                             20

                                        $50
                                                                                                             10


                                         $0                                                                  0
                                               1995   1996    1997     1998    1999   2000     2001   2002
                                                                           Year

Data drawn from Purdue's Annual Budget Plan from 1996-2001. Figures for 2002 are Purdue's estimates made
in 2001 for the following year.




                                                                             42
 Figure 6: Differences in Opioid Use, Non-triplicate minus Triplicate States, ARCOS Data




Data are from DEA's ARCOS system. We use morphine equivalent grams per 100,000 people to put all drugs
into comparable units. Codeine and hydrocodone were schedule II drugs during this time frame, but codeine
combinations (e.g. Tylenol #3) and hydrocodone combinations (e.g. Vicodin) were schedule III drugs. We
cannot differentiate combination from non-combination forms in the ARCOS data. All other listed opioids
were schedule II drugs throughout.




                                                   43
                             Figure 7: Drug Death Rates by Triplicate State Status, 1973-2015,
                                             Multiple Cause of Death Data
                     18

                     16

                     14
                                                                                     Non-triplicate
                                                                                     states
                     12
    Deaths/100,000




                     10

                      8
                                                                                          Triplicate
                      6                                                                   states


                      4

                      2

                      0
                          1973   1978     1983     1988     1993     1998     2003     2008      2013
                                                              Year
Series break point is 1996, the year Purdue Pharma released OxyContin.




                                                            44
                     Figure 8: Cumulative Drug Death Rates for Likely Parents of Children Aged 10
                           by Triplicate State Status, 1983-2015, Multiple Cause of Death Data

                     300




                     250
                                                                                Non-Triplicate
                                                                                States
                     200
    Deaths/100,000




                     150


                                                                                         Triplicate
                                                                                         States
                     100




                     50




                      0
                           1983      1989          1995               2001    2007            2013
                                                               Year

Series break point is 1996, the year Purdue Pharma released OxyContin.




                                                          45
            Figure 9: Living Arrangements of Children over Time and by Triplicate State Status

                  A: Percent Mother Absent from Household, Ages 0-5                                            B: Percent Mother Absent from Household, Ages 11-16
          10%                                                                                           14%



          8%                                                                                            12%



          6%                                                                                            10%                                                    Non-triplicate states
                                                                 Non-triplicate states
Percent




                                                                                              Percent
          4%                                                                                            8%

                                                                       Triplicate states

          2%                                                                                            6%                                                         Triplicate states




          0%                                                                                            4%
                1990      1993   1996   1999   2002    2005   2008       2011     2014                        1990      1993   1996   1999   2002    2005   2008     2011     2014
                                                Year                                                                                          Year

                   C: Percent Father Absent from Household, Ages 0-5                                           D: Percent Father Absent from Household, Ages 11-16
          30%                                                                                           28%



          28%                                                                                           26%

                                                                     Non-triplicate states

          26%                                                                                           24%
                                                                                                                                                                Non-triplicate states
Percent




                                                                                              Percent




          24%                                                                                           22%
                                                                       Triplicate states


          22%                                                                                           20%                                                    Triplicate states



          20%                                                                                           18%
                1990      1993   1996   1999   2002    2005   2008       2011     2014                        1990      1993   1996   1999   2002    2005   2008     2011     2014
                                                Year                                                                                          Year

                       E: Percent Living in HH Headed by a Grandparent,                                              F: Percent Living in HH Headed by a Grandparent,
                                            Ages 0-5                                                                                     Ages 11-16
          14%                                                                                           10%



          12%                                                                                           8%



          10%                                                                                           6%                                                  Non-triplicate states
Percent




                                                                                              Percent




                                                                     Triplicate states

          8%                                                                                            4%

                                                                                                                                                                   Triplicate states
                                                                     Non-triplicate states
          6%                                                                                            2%



          4%                                                                                            0%
                1990      1993   1996   1999   2002    2005   2008       2011     2014                        1990      1993   1996   1999   2002    2005   2008     2011     2014
                                                Year                                                                                          Year



Data are from the Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC) of the March Current Population Survey
(CPS). "HH" is an abbreviation for household.




                                                                                             46
         Table 1: OLS and 2SLS Estimates of the Impact of Cumulative Drug Deaths
         of Likely Parents on The Living Arrangements of Children, ASEC 1990-2015

                          Parameter Estimates (Standard Errors) on CEXPOSUREast

                                                                       Children impacted by movement of the
                                                                         CEXPOSUREast rate from 1996 to
                                                                                    2015 values
                                                            p-value
                           Sample                          Hausman       Change in rate
  Dependent variable        mean        OLS      2SLS         test        per 100,000            # impacted
  Mom not in                6,304       10.0     12.88       0.207           1,291                862,000
  household/100K                       (1.99)    (3.36)
                                                 [84.3]

  Dad not in                23,890      9.32      9.68         0.925          1,436                954,000
  household/100K                       (1.89)    (4.34)
                                                 [80.4]

  Missing at least one      27,294     15.52     18.29         0.533          2,279               1,517,000
  parent/100K                          (3.00)    (5.63)
                                                 [92.7]

  Missing both Mom          2,900       4.38      3.64         0.532           454                 302,000
  and Dad/100K                         (0.78)    (1.44)
                                                 [92.7]

  Grandparent head of       5,282       2.09      6.02         0.061           750                 499,000
  HH/100K                              (1.71)    (2.17)
                                                 [92.7]

  Non-parent head of        9,533       6.41     11.45         0.074          1,427                950,000
  HH/100k                              (1.94)    (2.62)
                                                 [92.7]

  Foster child / 100k        309        0.20     -0.07         0.510           -8.6                -6,000
                                       (0.19)    (0.48)
                                                 [92.7]

All models include fixed effects for age, year and state, plus the fraction of observations that were female, Black
(non-Hispanic), other race (non-Hispanic) and Hispanic. The model includes 17 ages x 51 states x 26 years =
22,542 observations. We calculate standard errors allowing for arbitrary correlation in errors at the state level.
For the 2SLS estimates, the F-statistic for the first stage is indicated in brackets. The last column represents
the number of children in the particular household in 2015 based on movement from the 1996 CEXPOSUREast
based on the 2SLS estimates.




                                                          47
   Table 2: First-Stage Estimates of Cumulative Drug Death Equations, ASEC 1990-2015


                                                             Sample       OLS Coefficient          1st stage
     Dependent variable                                       mean       on YearsExpNTast           F-test
     Cumulative drug deaths/100K of likely mothers            75.3              7.36                 84.2
                                                                               (0.80)

     Cumulative drug death/100K of likely fathers            146.1                11.1               80.3
                                                                                 (1.24)

     Cumulative drug deaths/100K of likely parents           110.9                 9.22               92.5
                                                                                  (0.96)
All models include fixed effects for age, year and state, plus the fraction of observations that were female, Black
(non-Hispanic), other race (non-Hispanic) and Hispanic. The model includes 17 ages x 51 states x 26 years =
22,542 observations. We calculate standard errors allowing for arbitrary correlation in errors at the state level
(in parentheses).




         Table 3: OLS and 2SLS Estimates of the Impact of Cumulative Drug Deaths
         of Likely Parents on Socioeconomic Outcomes of Children, ASEC 1990-2015

                          Parameter Estimates (Standard Errors) on CEXPOSUREast

                                                                           Children impacted the by movement
                                                                            of the CEXPOSUREast rate from
                                                                                   1996 to 2015 values
                                                               p-value
                          Sample                              Hausman       Change in rate
 Dependent variable        mean         OLS        2SLS          test        per 100,000          # impacted
 # in poverty/100K        19,478        8.49        8.85        0.266           1,045              695,000
                                       (3.55)      (4.54)

 # on SNAP/100K           16,064        8.67        10.0        0.592            1,181              785,561
                                       (4.23)      (5.07)

 # without health         10,847        4.22        4.37        0.399            516                343,290
 insurance/100K                        (4.66)      (5.07)

All models include fixed effects for age, year and state, plus the fraction of observations that were female, Black
(non-Hispanic), other race (non-Hispanic) and Hispanic. The model includes 17 ages x 51 states x 26 years =
22,542 observations. We calculate standard errors allowing for arbitrary correlation in errors at the state level.




                                                        48
                                        Appendix A
               Identifying Drug and Opioid Deaths in the 1973-2015 MCOD Data

         To construct cohort exposure measures for those aged 0-16 from 1990 to 2015 required data

from the Multiple Cause of Death data files from 1973 through 2015. Over this period, these data

sets used three different version of the International Classifications of Diseases (ICD): ICD 8

(through 1978), ICD 9 (1979 through 1998) and ICD 10 (1999 and on).

         Identifying drug overdoses in all three versions of the ICD system is relatively

straightforward. In each year, there are three sets of codes that identify unintentional poisoning

deaths, intentional poisonings (e.g., suicides), and drug poisoning of unknown intent. These codes

vary by the class of drug. ICD 8 has an additional code 304 that measure death due to drug

dependence, which is a code under the mental health classifications. This code was dropped in

subsequent versions. In the ICD 9 system, code E962 measures death from homicide due to drug

poisonings. That code under the ICD 10 classification is X85. We list these codes in Table A1

below.

                                            Table A1
                    Codes to Identify Drug Poisonings, ICD 8 through ICD 10

                                                               Poisonings of
 ICD          Unintentional           Intentional              Unknown
 Era          Poisonings              Poisonings               Intent                  Other codes
 ICD-8        E850.0 ­ E858.9         E950.0 ­ E950.5          E980.0 ­ E980.3         304
 ICD-9        E850.0 ­ E858.9         E950.0 ­ E950.5          E980.0 ­ E980.3         E962
 ICD-10       X40 ­ X44               X60 ­ X64                Y10 ­ Y14               X85



           Identifying opioid deaths is relatively easy in ICD 10 as there are codes that identify

conditions present at death to indicate specific drugs. These include T40.1 (heroin), T40.2 (other

opioids) T40.3 (methadone), and T40.4 (synthetic opioids). Like Alpert et al. (2019), we also

include T40.6 (other and unspecified narcotics) as well. There are similar codes in the ICD 9


                                                    49
classifications: 965.0 (opiates and related narcotics), 965.1 (heroin), 965.2 (methadone), 965.9 (other

opiates and related narcotics). There is only one condition code that uniquely identifies opioids in

the ICD-8 coding: 965.1 (opiates and synthetic analogues).

          The problem we found is that in many cases during the ICD 8 and 9 era, the "965"

condition codes are frequently not used when there was a drug death. In the ICD 9 era, we can

identify opioids in some of the "E" codes ­ E850.0 (heroin), E850.1 (methadone), and E850.2

(opiates and related narcotics). Unfortunately, categories E950.0 and E980.0 (poisonings by

analgesics, antipyretics, and antirheumatics for intentional and unknown intent, respectively) lump

opiates in with other drugs (mostly non-opioid pain relievers).

          In the ICD 10 era, the T39 condition code identifies non-opioid analgesics, antipyretics

and antirheumatics and in 1999, there were only 759 deaths from these drugs, but 8,645 of the T40.x

opioid/heroin deaths. As a result, to make a more consistent series without a noticeable jump in

opioid deaths as we move from the ICD 10 back to the ICD 9 era, we use a broader opioid death

rate category that includes the T39 cases. In the ICD 9 era, we consider the "965" conditions listed

above, those that include non-opioid analgesics, and any E850.x code which contains opiates and

the non-opioid analgesics, plus deaths with E950.0 and E980.0 codes. For ICD 8 years, we include

in the broader opioid death category E5853.x codes which are opiates and other analgesics, E950.1

(suicides by salicylates and congeners), E980.1 (poisoning by salicylates and congeners of

undetermined intent), and all 965.x condition codes.

        In Figure A1 below, in the gray line, we report trends in the opioid death counts when we

include this slightly broader set of drugs. The black line is the trend in opioid deaths that only uses

the T40.x codes outlined above. The lines track each other well and the broader definition we use is

greater by 501 to 952 deaths/year in the 1999-2015 period.




                                                   50
                                           Figure A1
                  Opioid-Related Deaths, 1973 to 2015, Including and Excluding
               Non-opioid Analgesics, Antipyretics and Antirheumatics (T39) Causes

          40,000


          35,000


          30,000


          25,000
 Deaths




          20,000


          15,000

                                 Including
          10,000                                                              Excluding
                                 T39 deaths
                                                                              T39 deaths
           5,000


              0
                   1973   1979        1985        1991          1997   2003        2009    2015
                                                         Year
Data are from the Multiple Cause of Death Files, 1973-2015.




                                                    51
                                              Appendix B
                                      Sensitivity and Robustness


        In this appendix, we probe the sensitivity of our primary estimates to a multitude of sample

and specification choices. In addition to these robustness results, we also report clustered wild

bootstrap confidence intervals for the first stage of our 2SLS procedure (Appendix Table B1) as well

as all subsequent robustness analyses (Appendix Tables B2-B6). For ease of comparison, the first

column in most tables in this section contains the basic 2SLS results from Table 1.



Appendix Table B2: Robustness to General Sample and Specification Choices

        In our main analyses, our cumulative risk measure is based on all drug deaths. However, our

instrument generates variation most directly in opioid deaths. The drug death measure is more

general and more consistently coded across ICD classification systems, but an exposure measure

based on opioid deaths is more closely tied to the variation generated by the instrument. In the

second column of Appendix Table B2, we show results based on measuring a child's exposure with

opioid deaths rather than drug deaths. The ratio of estimates based on opioids to the estimates

based on all drug deaths ranges from 1.40 to 1.46; our exposure measure based on drug deaths

increased by 124.6 while the measure based on opioids increased by 89.8--a ratio of 1.38. This

suggests that approximately all of the changes in family structure we estimate are generated by

changes in opioid death rates.

        Alpert et al. (2018) and Evans et al. (2019) demonstrate that the reformulation of OxyContin

in August of 2010, which made OxyContin more difficult to abuse, encouraged the shift in drug

abuse away from prescription opioids towards heroin. Although the reformulation reduced

mortality associated with prescription opioids, it increased heroin mortality to the point that the

reformulation had no impact on drug mortality in the short run. The market for drugs was


                                                     52
systematically changed in 2013 by another supply shock when fentanyl appeared in large scale in

illegal drug markets. The rapid increase in mortality experienced in the US from 2013 to 2018 is

primarily driven by increasing use of fentanyl and other synthetic opioids. One can argue that

OxyContin abuse lead to its reformulation, which then expanded use of heroin, and the heroin

market begat the fentanyl market. That said, one could also argue that our instrument can best

explain the movement of drug use across triplicate and non-triplicate states prior to the end of 2010.

In the third column of Appendix Table B2, we estimate our basic specifications with data only

through 2010. The results are actually slightly larger in magnitude than our baseline estimates and

do not suggest that changes in drug deaths in recent years are driving our results.

        Exposure to the drug crisis might not only affect the living arrangements of children, but

also the probability that a child is born at all. This in turn suggests that the composition of families

in which children are living could be affected by the drug crisis. We test this hypothesis by limiting

our sample to children born prior to the introduction of OxyContin, 1996. The benefit of this

approach is that it precludes the possibility that OxyContin affected the birth of anyone in the

sample; the drawback is that it cuts out approximately 50 percent of our sample and our standard

errors increase considerably. The results from this exercise are shown in the fourth column of

Appendix Table B2. In all but one case, missing at least one parent, the point estimates increase in

size. This suggests that children born in non-triplicate states after the introduction of OxyContin

tended to be positively selected, born to families less likely to have mothers or fathers absent. This is

suggestive evidence that the primary mechanism through which the drug crisis affects children's

living arrangements is through impacts on the family after the child is born.

        As an additional check, we have included state-specific linear trends in the regressions.

These trends will pick up any population, demographic, or other factors which are increasing or

decreasing differentially across triplicate and non-triplicate states. Our estimated impacts of drug


                                                   53
deaths are presented in the fifth column and again, we do not find results qualitatively different from

our main estimates.



Appendix Table B3: Robustness to Additional Controls

        It seems likely that economic wellbeing is an important determinant of both family structure

as well as drug death rates. As such, we explore the degree to which various measures of

economic conditions could be affecting our results. In the first column or results in Appendix Table

B3, we report regressions in which each state's per-capita real GDP has been included as a control

variable. The results are extremely similar to our baseline results.

        In the second column, we include the state's unemployment rate. Hollingsworth et al.

(2017) found a correlation between unemployment rates and drug overdose death rates. Again, our

results are largely unaffected by this variable's inclusion. While unemployment rates might capture

some of the variation in drug over dose death rates, it does not appear to be driving the portion

which is related to family structure.

        Using the granting of permanent normalized trade relations with China in 2000, Pierce and

Schott (2020) showed that geographic regions most exposed to trade with China saw increases in

opioid overdose death rates. To ensure that our results are not being driven by this same trade

shock, we interact their measure of exposure with year dummies and include those variables in our

regression. The results are very similar to our baseline results, suggesting that our instrument is not

providing spurious results in which it happens to capture differences in exposure to trade shocks.

        Triplicate programs were early versions of prescription drug monitoring programs (PDMP)

systems designed to oversee and discipline the prescribing of controlled substances like opioids. In

subsequent years nearly all states adopted some form of PDMP. Although evidence on the

effectiveness of these subsequent PDMPs is mixed (e.g. Buchmueller and Carey, 2018), we create


                                                       54
three different measures of PDMPs (based on Horwitz et al. (2019)) for each state and include them

in the regression. Our measures are indicators for years including and after the state's PDMP 1) was

legislated to be active, 2) actually became active (funding, and other, issues delayed many PDMPs),

and 3) whether it was a modern, electronic system. As seen in the fourth column of Appendix Table

B3, these variables have little impact on our point estimates and suggest that triplicate and non-

triplicate states were not differentially enacting opioid-related legislation that was correlated with

both cumulative drug mortality and family structure.

        Welfare reforms took place at roughly the same time as the introduction of OxyContin, they

varied across states, and they have been shown to have affected children's living arrangements

(Bitler et al., 2006). Consequently, there is a possibility that our estimation strategy is partially

capturing the effects of these policy reforms. Following Bitler et al. (2006), we create two variables

which indicate whether the state had obtained a waiver for its Aid to Families with Dependent

Children (AFDC) program and the first year in which Temporary Assistance to Needy Families

(TANF) was implemented. As seen in the final column of Appendix Table B3, adding these

measures has very little impact on our estimated effects.



Appendix Table B4: Robustness to Omitting Treatment States

        In Appendix Table B4, we test whether any single triplicate state is driving our results. We

do so by dropping each triplicate, one at a time, and rerunning the 2SLS regression. Although there

are slight changes in the point estimate from one sample to the next, the evidence suggests that there

was not a single triplicate state solely responsible for the estimated effects.




                                                     55
Appendix Table B5: Sensitivity to Population-Related Issues

         In 1990, the triplicate states tended to have much greater population and some of the largest

cities in the United States. California, New York, and Texas had the largest populations while

Illinois had a larger population than all but two non-triplicate states. Clearly, the triplicate states

differ from the non-triplicate states in terms of their population and tendency to have large

metropolitan areas. If the changes in family structure tended to occur in less populous places (or

those declining in population), our instrument might simply be picking up that difference between

triplicate and non-triplicate states. In Appendix Table B5, the second column of results reports

estimates from regressions in which we have included a fourth order polynomial in the states'

populations of adults of child-bearing age. Three of the five estimates increase slightly in magnitude

while the other two decrease very slightly. Overall, flexibly controlling for a state's population has

little impact on the results.

         Linked to the differences in population between triplicate and non-triplicate states, the

triplicate states contain the largest cities in the United States. Instead of pure population, it might be

that changes in family structure are actually caused by residing in an urban environment rather than

by drug deaths. To explore this possibility, we have rerun our regressions separately for children

living in metro areas and for children who are living in a non-metro area. These results are

presented in columns three and four of Appendix Table B5. Although we lose a considerable

amount of precision when splitting the sample in this way, our point estimates are quite similar to

what we had found previously. 33 Moreover, the point estimates indicate that there are not large

differences in our estimated impacts of the drug crisis across more and less urban areas, strongly



33 It is worth noting that the results for metro and non-metro areas do not average up to the overall results. They do not
have to do so because we are not restricting all of the other coefficients in the regression (e.g. year effects) to be the
same across the two. In addition, there is a small number of individuals--approximately 1 percent--who could not be
classified into either metro or non-metro areas. For these regressions, they were omitted from both groups.

                                                           56
suggesting our main results are not simply picking up differences in urban status across triplicate and

non-triplicate states.

        An alternative way to assess the importance of differences in population or urbanicity

between triplicate and non-triplicate states is to restrict the sample of states used for the analysis to

those with the largest populations. In the fifth column of Appendix Table B5, we present results in

which the set of triplicate states has been restricted to California, Illinois, New York, and Texas and

the set of non-triplicate states has been restricted to Florida, Pennsylvania, Ohio, and Michigan.

These were the eight most populous states in 1990. The benefit of this restriction is that our non-

triplicate states are much more similar to our triplicate states in terms of population and urbanicity;

the cost is a considerable loss of statistical power. Even with this severe restriction, our point

estimates tend to be quite similar to those we obtain when using all non-triplicate states in the

regression.



Appendix Table B6: Heterogeneity by Race

        Because the there are large baseline differences in the probability of living in different family

structures for white and Black children, it is interesting to consider whether the effects of exposure

to the crisis differ by race. To assess this possibility, we regress race-specific measures of family

living arrangements on race-specific measures of exposure to the crisis. We report these results in

Appendix Table B6. The first and third columns present means of the various living arrangement

variables for white children and Black children respectively; these outcomes tend to be much more

common among Black children. They are roughly twice as likely to live without a mother in the

household, three times as likely to live without a father in the household, and 2.5 times as likely to

live with a grandparent as the household head. The 2SLS results are presented in the second column

for white children and the fourth column for Black children. We find that increased exposure to the


                                                    57
drug crisis had substantial impacts on white children. These estimates are quite similar to our overall

estimates and despite splitting the sample, retain reasonable precision. However, our estimates for

Black children are far noisier, making it more difficult to reject a wide range of values. Though

highly speculative, the implied total effect of the drug crisis implied by our point estimates is actually

smaller in percentage terms for Black children than for white children for almost all of the

outcomes. 34




34 For both white and Black children, we calculate the change in exposure between 1996 and 2015, multiply that by the
estimated effect of exposure, and then divide by the sample mean for the outcome, using race-specific measures at each
step. The smaller effect in percentage terms for Black children is due both to the much higher rates of these outcomes
experienced by Black children, but also a much lower change in exposure to the drug crisis. Between 1996 and 2015, our
measure of exposure rose by roughly 17 for Black children, but by 150 for white children. We have also run the analysis
for white children and Black children using the overall measure of exposure to the crisis. In those analyses, we would
expect to see larger percentage impacts of the rise in the drug crisis on white children because of their larger exposure,
and this is indeed what we find.

                                                           58
                                     Appendix Table B1
         First-Stage Estimates of Cumulative Drug Death Equations, ASEC 1990-2015


                                                             Sample       OLS Coefficient          1st stage
    Dependent variable                                        mean       on YearsExpNTast           F-test

    Cumulative drug deaths/100K of likely mothers             75.3                7.36               84.2
                                                                                 (0.80)
                                                                              [5.78, 9.37]


    Cumulative drug death/100K of likely fathers             146.1                11.1               80.3
                                                                                 (1.24)
                                                                             [8.28, 13.63]


    Cumulative drug deaths/100K of likely parents            110.9                9.22               92.5
                                                                                 (0.96)
                                                                             [7.25, 11.44]


All models include fixed effects for age, year and state, plus the fraction of observations that were female, Black
(non-Hispanic), other race (non-Hispanic) and Hispanic. The model includes 17 ages x 51 states x 26 years =
22,542 observations. We calculate standard errors allowing for arbitrary correlation in errors at the state level
(in parentheses); clustered wild bootstrap 95% confidence intervals presented in brackets.




                                                        59
                                   Appendix Table B2
     2SLS Estimates of the Impact of Cumulative Drug Deaths of Likely Parents on the
      Living Arrangements of Children: Alternative Sample and Specification Choices
             Parameter Estimates (Standard Errors) [cluster wild bootstrap 95% CI] on CEXPOSUREast


                              2SLS from       Use Opioid        Restrict to      Restrict to      State-specific
     Dependent variable        Table 1        Death Rate       Year < 2011      Born < 1996       Time Trends
     Mom not in                  12.88            18.87            20.38            16.24             10.30
     household/100K              (3.36)           (4.99)           (4.80)           (9.18)            (2.37)
                             [5.50, 20.33]    [8.29, 29.35]    [10.39, 31.14]   [-3.05, 35.85]    [5.61, 14.94]

     Dad not in                   9.68            13.59            16.50              9.48             7.51
     household/100K              (4.34)           (6.38)           (7.40)           (14.95)           (3.82)
                             [-2.01,19.12]    [-4.29, 27.21]   [-3.20, 32.51]   [-35.96, 48.00]   [0.37, 14.78]

     Missing at least one         18.29           26.11            29.47             12.18            16.82
     parent/100K                 (5.63)           (8.44)           (9.99)           (19.77)           (4.55)
                             [2.38, 30.13]    [2.19, 43.25]    [2.57, 51.75]    [-45.78, 56.36]   [7.77, 26.30]

     Missing both Mom             3.64             5.20             6.53             11.80             0.63
     and Dad/100K                (1.43)           (2.12)           (1.82)            (3.39)           (1.40)
                              [0.28, 6.62]     [0.22, 9.66]    [2.28, 10.33]     [4.27, 20.71]    [-2.00, 3.34]

     Grandparent head             6.02             8.59             6.86             6.38              8.39
     of HH/100K                  (2.17)           (3.19)           (2.91)           (6.34)            (3.37)
                             [1.60, 11.12]    [2.34, 15.74]    [1.28, 13.87]    [-8.38, 26.63]    [0.74, 16.34]

     Non-parent head of          11.45            16.35            17.37            12.35             14.81
     HH/100k                     (2.62)           (3.67)           (4.07)           (7.82)            (4.49)
                             [6.10, 17.53]    [9.09, 24.87]    [8.95, 26.37]    [-5.70, 36.80]    [4.45, 25.89]

     Foster child / 100k          -0.07            -0.10            0.94              1.96             -0.43
                                  (0.48)          (0.69)           (0.83)            (1.47)           (0.54)
                              [-1.10, 0.95]   [-1.61, 1.37]    [-0.69, 2.97]     [-0.88, 6.56]    [-1.53, 0.62]


Data are from the Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC) of the March Current Population Survey
(CPS). All models include fixed effects for age, year, and state, plus the fraction of observations that were
female, Black (non-Hispanic), other race (non-Hispanic) and Hispanic. The model includes 17 ages x 51 states
x 26 years = 22,542 observations. Standard errors clustered by state are reported in parentheses; 95%
confidence intervals estimated via a clustered (at state) wild bootstrap reported in brackets. Baseline results
reproduced in the first column. The second column uses the (potentially noisily measured) opioid death rate to
construct children's exposure. The third column restricts the sample to 2010 or earlier to avoid OxyContin's
reformulation. The fourth column restricts the sample to those born before OxyContin's introduction. The
final column includes state-specific linear time trends.




                                                        60
                                    Appendix Table B3
      2SLS Estimates of the Impact of Cumulative Drug Deaths of Likely Parents on the
                  Living Arrangements of Children: Additional Controls
               Parameter Estimates (Standard Errors) [cluster wild bootstrap 95% CI] on CEXPOSUREast


                                                                                               Rx Drug           Welfare
                          2SLS from      State Per-capita     Unemp.                          Monitoring         Reform
Dependent variable         Table 1          Real GDP           Rate          Trade Shock      Programs           Controls

Mom not in                   12.88            13.23             13.16            12.78            12.07            12.49
household/100K               (3.36)           (3.40)            (3.24)           (3.37)           (3.02)           (3.29)
                         [5.50, 20.33]    [6.03, 20.60]     [6.15, 20.26]    [5.69, 19.95]    [5.55, 18.72]    [5.30, 19.53]

Dad not in                    9.68             9.03              9.64             9.44             8.62             8.88
household/100K               (4.34)           (4.66)            (4.31)           (4.44)           (4.02)           (3.70)
                         [-2.01,19.12]    [-3.39, 19.03]    [-2.76, 18.80]   [-3.15, 18.71]   [-1.57, 17.23]   [-1.47, 17.00]

Missing at least one          18.29           17.74             18.29            17.90            17.19            17.28
parent/100K                  (5.63)           (5.91)            (5.57)           (5.76)           (5.08)           (4.82)
                         [2.38, 30.13]    [2.22, 31.30]     [2.53, 30.45]    [1.44, 30.61]    [3.53, 28.84]    [3.89, 27.64]

Missing both Mom              3.64             3.71              3.82             3.67             2.85             3.36
and Dad/100K                 (1.43)           (1.50)            (1.36)           (1.45)           (1.35)           (1.40)
                          [0.28, 6.62]     [0.47, 6.75]      [0.51, 6.50]     [0.20, 6.57]    [-0.24, 5.72]     [0.12, 6.22]

Grandparent head              6.02             5.34              5.99             6.08             5.72             5.63
of HH/100K                   (2.17)           (2.64)            (2.19)           (2.22)           (1.97)           (2.04)
                         [1.60, 11.12]    [-0.28, 11.59]    [1.87, 11.22]    [1.58, 11.26]    [1.91, 10.01]    [1.64, 10.24]

Non-parent head of           11.45            11.40             11.50            11.61            11.38            11.05
HH/100k                      (2.62)           (3.12)            (2.66)           (2.70)           (2.64)           (2.58)
                         [6.10, 17.53]    [4.92, 17.82]     [6.25, 17.47]    [6.46, 17.76]    [5.77, 16.84]    [5.77, 16.96]

Foster child / 100k           -0.07            -0.06             -0.06            -0.06            0.02             -0.10
                             (0.48)           (0.52)            (0.49)           (0.48)           (0.49)           (0.49)
                         [-1.10, 0.95]    [-1.20, 1.06]     [-1.15, 1.02]    [-1.04, 0.91]    [-0.96, 1.08]    [-1.12, 0.94]


Data are from the Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC) of the March Current Population Survey
(CPS). All models include fixed effects for age, year, and state, plus the fraction of observations that were
female, Black (non-Hispanic), other race (non-Hispanic) and Hispanic. The model includes 17 ages x 51 states
x 26 years = 22,542 observations. Standard errors clustered by state are reported in parentheses; 95%
confidence intervals estimated via a clustered (at state) wild bootstrap reported in brackets. Baseline results
reproduced in the first column. The second column controls for state-level per-capita real GDP. The third
column controls for a state's unemployment rate. The fourth column includes a control for the 2001 trade
shock interacted with year dummies. The fifith column includes controls for prescription drug monitoring
programs. The final column includes controls for the welfare reforms that occurred in the 1990s.




                                                             61
                                      Appendix Table B4
        2SLS Estimates of the Impact of Cumulative Drug Deaths of Likely Parents on the
               Living Arrangements of Children: Omitting Each Treatment State

                Parameter Estimates (Standard Errors) [cluster wild bootstrap 95% CI] on CEXPOSUREast


                          2SLS from          Drop           Drop               Drop            Drop            Drop
Dependent variable         Table 1           Texas         New York           Illinois         Idaho          California

Mom not in                    12.88           12.99           13.65            13.09            12.54             9.76
household/100K                (3.36)          (3.49)          (3.58)           (3.50)           (3.36)           (2.20)
                          [5.50, 20.33]   [4.99, 21.25]   [5.723, 21.72]   [5.81, 20.93]    [5.33, 20.01]    [5.42, 13.93]

Dad not in                     9.68           12.71           10.15             7.28            10.07             7.67
household/100K                (4.34)          (3.47)          (4.82)           (3.85)           (4.41)           (5.19)
                          [-2.01,19.12]   [3.84, 20.61]   [-5.34, 19.85]   [-3.68, 15.65]   [-2.84, 19.24]   [-4.55, 21.16]

Missing at least one          18.29           21.87           19.53            15.98            18.62            14.46
parent/100K                   (5.63)          (4.55)          (6.11)           (5.50)           (5.67)           (5.69)
                          [2.38, 30.13]   [8.85, 31.53]   [0.03, 32.16]    [1.48, 28.46]    [2.47, 31.16]    [1.64, 29.11]

Missing both Mom and          3.64             3.79            3.55             3.15             3.54             2.60
Dad/100K                     (1.43)           (1.47)          (1.58)           (1.45)           (1.45)           (1.37)
                          [0.28, 6.62]     [0.19, 6.68]   [-0.28, 6.87]    [-0.25, 6.19]    [-0.01, 6.52]    [-0.42, 5.28]

Grandparent head               6.02            4.46            5.71             5.87             6.06             7.22
of HH/100K                    (2.17)          (1.54)          (2.34)           (2.21)           (2.18)           (2.18)
                          [1.60, 11.12]    [1.61, 7.76]   [1.24, 11.71]    [1.35, 11.27]    [1.68, 11.26]    [2.65, 11.92]

Non-parent head of            11.45            9.54           12.33            11.15            11.38            11.83
HH/100k                       (2.62)          (1.80)          (2.69)           (2.65)           (2.63)           (2.98)
                          [6.10, 17.53]   [5.81, 13.21]   [6.93, 18.28]    [5.47, 17.77]    [5.91, 17.50]    [5.43, 18.68]

Foster child / 100k           -0.07            -0.26           -0.11            -0.38            0.05             -0.05
                              (0.48)          (0.49)          (0.54)           (0.42)           (0.47)           (0.60)
                          [-1.10, 0.95]   [-1.39, 0.73]   [-1.54, 0.93]    [-1.48, 0.50]    [-0.98, 1.02]    [-1.51, 1.25]


Data are from the Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC) of the March Current Population Survey
(CPS). All models include fixed effects for age, year, and state, plus the fraction of observations that were female,
Black (non-Hispanic), other race (non-Hispanic) and Hispanic. The model includes 17 ages x 51 states x 26 years
= 22,542 observations. Standard errors clustered by state are reported in parentheses; 95% confidence intervals
estimated via a clustered (at state) wild bootstrap reported in brackets. Baseline results reproduced in the first
column. Additional columns drop each triplicate state, one at a time.




                                                          62
                                     Appendix Table B5
       2SLS Estimates of the Impact of Cumulative Drug Deaths of Likely Parents on the
          Living Arrangements of Children: Sensitivity to Population-Related Issues

                Parameter Estimates (Standard Errors) [cluster wild bootstrap 95% CI] on CEXPOSUREast


                                                                                  Restrict to        Largest
                                  2SLS from      Polynomial in   Restrict to      Non-metro         Population
       Dependent variable          Table 1        Population     Metro Areas        Areas             States

       Mom not in                    12.88           11.18           11.48            10.33             10.82
       household/100K                (3.36)          (2.60)          (3.35)           (3.79)            (7.58)
                                 [5.50, 20.33]   [5.52, 16.94]   [3.89, 18.18]    [2.73, 18.48]    [-10.13, 28.43]

       Dad not in                     9.68           11.95            6.50             8.89             3.64
       household/100K                (4.34)          (4.43)          (4.09)           (7.10)           (4.99)
                                 [-2.01,19.12]   [3.18, 22.10]   [-2.91, 15.75]   [-6.82, 23.99]   [-9.76, 16.19]

       Missing at least one           18.29          20.78           14.66            16.12             10.18
       parent/100K                   (5.63)          (5.48)          (5.37)           (9.13)            (8.32)
                                 [2.38, 30.13]   [9.03, 34.37]   [1.73, 25.90]    [-3.90, 36.73]   [-13.74, 30.43]

       Missing both Mom and          3.64             2.53            2.19             2.87              2.14
       Dad/100K                     (1.43)           (1.62)          (1.35)           (1.65)            (1.80)
                                 [0.28, 6.62]    [-1.34, 5.77]   [-1.05, 4.88]    [-0.59, 6.14]     [-3.39, 7.06]

       Grandparent head               6.02            8.71            3.46             6.25             6.09
       of HH/100K                    (2.17)          (2.54)          (2.49)           (3.12)           (2.61)
                                 [1.60, 11.12]   [3.08, 14.39]   [-1.93, 9.39]    [-0.66, 12.77]   [-1.46, 13.66]

       Non-parent head of            11.45           14.78            7.63            11.83             8.91
       HH/100k                       (2.62)          (3.96)          (2.59)           (3.80)           (2.65)
                                 [6.10, 17.53]   [5.76, 24.58]   [2.35, 14.12]    [3.85, 19.39]    [1.47, 15.14]

       Foster child / 100k           -0.07            -0.20           0.11             -0.70            -0.12
                                     (0.48)          (0.57)          (0.53)           (0.78)           (0.70)
                                 [-1.10, 0.95]   [-1.45, 0.97]   [-0.95, 1.47]    [-2.40, 0.83]    [-1.73, 1.79]


Data are from the Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC) of the March Current Population Survey
(CPS). All models include fixed effects for age, year, and state, plus the fraction of observations that were female,
Black (non-Hispanic), other race (non-Hispanic) and Hispanic. The model includes 17 ages x 51 states x 26 years
= 22,542 observations. Standard errors clustered by state are reported in parentheses; 95% confidence intervals
estimated via a clustered (at state) wild bootstrap reported in brackets. Baseline results reproduced in the first
column. The second column includes a fourth order polynomial in the state's parent-aged population. The third
column restricts the sample to children living in urban areas. The fourth column restricts the sample to children
living in non-metro areas. The fifth column restricts the sample to the four triplicate states with large populations
(California, Illinois, New York, and Texas) as well as the four non-triplicate states with the largest populations as
of 1990 (Florida, Pennsylvania, Ohio, and Michigan).




                                                         63
                                     Appendix Table B6
      2SLS Estimates of the Impact of Cumulative Drug Deaths of Likely Parents on the
                          Living Arrangements of Children by Race
              Parameter Estimates (Standard Errors) [cluster wild bootstrap 95% CI] on CEXPOSUREast



                                  Mean for White    Restrict to White   Mean for Black   Restrict to Black
        Dependent variable          Children            Children          Children          Children

        Mom not in                     5,494              10.83            10,363              19.52
        household/100K                                    (3.07)                              (19.92)
                                                      [4.28, 17.58]                       [-14.48, 67.13]

        Dad not in                     18,318              7.24            56,477             52.42
        household/100K                                    (4.71)                             (50.33)
                                                      [-6.21, 18.31]                     [-56.23, 179.70]

        Missing at least one           21,603             15.49            60,379             61.24
        parent/100K                                       (6.55)                             (47.19)
                                                      [-1.83, 31.18]                     [-14.05, 226.30]

        Missing both Mom and           2,208               1.86             6,461              13.62
        Dad/100K                                          (1.15)                              (13.98)
                                                      [-0.87, 4.37]                       [-8.52, 49.79]

        Grandparent head               4,214               5.91            10,470              16.44
        of HH/100K                                        (1.88)                              (22.12)
                                                       [0.84, 9.77]                       [-22.91, 73.85]

        Non-parent head of             7,935              10.30            16,739              45.21
        HH/100k                                           (2.62)                              (31.44)
                                                      [3.73, 16.12]                       [-3.45, 144.40]

        Foster child / 100k             241                -0.50             631               7.53
                                                          (0.32)                              (6.84)
                                                      [-1.15, 0.11]                       [-4.43, 30.36]


Data are from the Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC) of the March Current Population Survey
(CPS). All models include fixed effects for age, year, and state, plus the fraction of observations that were
female and the fraction that were Hispanic. The model for Black children includes 18,013 observations; the
models for white children include 22,529. This difference is due to some age-state-year combinations having
zero children in that cell. Standard errors clustered by state are reported in parentheses; 95% confidence
intervals estimated via a clustered (at state) wild bootstrap reported in brackets. For the estimate of the effect
on "Dad not in household" for Black children, the conventional clustered wild boot strap would not find an
upper limit to the confidence interval, and so we use a subcluster wild boostrap as suggested by MacKinnon
and Webb (2018).




                                                       64
                                        Appendix C
                                  Popular Press References

Beltran, Ana. 2017. "Grandparents Raising the Children of the Opioid Epidemic." American Bar
Association, July 2017.
http://www.americanbar.org/groups/public_interest/child_law/resources/child_law_practiceonlin
e/child_law_practice/vol-36/july-aug-2017/grandparents-raising-the-children-of-the-opioid-
epidemic/

Breslauer, Brenda, and Rappleye, Hannah. 2020. "'Love, over Everything': As West Virginia
Struggles with Foster Care Crisis, Families Step Up." NBCNews.com. NBCUniversal News Group.

Dam, Andrew Van. 2019. "How These Grandparents Became America's Unofficial Social Safety
Net." The Washington Post, WP Company, March 23. http://www.washingtonpost.com/us-
policy/2019/03/23/how-these-grandparents-became-americas-unofficial-social-safety-
net/?utm_term=.cdcd0730976e

Galvin, Gaby. 2019. "The U.S. Opioid Crisis has Shifted Family Dynamics, Pushing Many
Grandparents back into Parental Roles for their Addicted Children's Kids." US News and World
Report. January 28. https://www.usnews.com/news/health-news/articles/2019-01-28/opioid-
crisis-forcing-grandparents-to-care-for-kids-of-addicts

Guza, Megan. 2018. "Amid Opioid Crisis, Grandparents Take on Parenthood Again." AP NEWS.
Associated Press, https://apnews.com/12f69fe7438b4b0c8392dff857ebdfef.

Levin, Dan.2019. "'Become My Mom Again': What It's Like to Grow Up Amid the Opioid Crisis."
The New York Times, May 31. http://www.nytimes.com/2019/05/31/us/opioid-children-
addiction.html

Lopez, German. 2017. "Another Shocking Statistics about the Opioid Epidemic." Vox.
https://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2017/3/31/15136326/opioid-epidemic-grandparents-
children

Morona, Amy. 2019. "America's Opioid Crisis Means Many Grandparents Are Now Raising Their
Grandchildren." PBS. Public Broadcasting Service https://www.pbs.org/weta/washingtonweek/blog-
post/americas-opioid-crisis-means-many-grandparents-are-now-raising-their-grandchildren.

Nigam, Minali. 2019. "Dramatic Rise in Kids Entering Foster Care Due to Parents' Drug Use, Study
Says." CNN. Cable News Network, https://www.cnn.com/2019/07/15/health/foster-care-drug-use-
study/index.html.

Schneider, Mac. 2017. "The Opioid Crisis Is Making Grandparents Parents Again." Vox.
https://www.vox.com/videos/2017/10/30/16562000/opioid-crisis-grandparents-raising-children

Simon, Scott. 2017. "The Foster Care System Is Flooded With Children Of The Opioid Epidemic."
NPR, December. 2017. http://www.npr.org/2017/12/23/573021632/the-foster-care-system-is-
flooded-with-children-of-the-opioid-epidemic


                                               65
Stein,Perry, and Lindesyt Bever. 2017. "The Opioid Crisis Straniing the Nation's Foster Care
Systems." Washington Post. July 1. https://www.washingtonpost.com/national/the-opioid-crisis-
is-straining-the-nations-foster-care-systems/2017/06/30/97759fb2-52a1-11e7-91eb-
9611861a988f_story.html?utm_term=.89476f66ce7a

Whalen, Jeanne. 2016. "The Children of the Opioid Crisis." The Wall Street Journal. Dow Jones &
Company, https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-children-of-the-opioid-crisis-1481816178

Wiltz, Teresa. 2019. "As Need Grows, States Try to Entice New Foster Parents." Pew Charitable
Trusts. https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/blogs/stateline/2019/03/01/as-need-
grows-states-try-to-entice-new-foster-parents

Wong, Tai. .2020. "How Grandparents are Raising Grandchildren in Wake of Opioid Epidemic."
WETM Tampa. February 7. https://www.wfla.com/news/how-grandparents-are-raising-
grandchildren-in-wake-of-opioid-epidemic/




                                                66
