                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           BEHAVIORAL CORPORATE FINANCE:
                            THE LIFE CYCLE OF A CEO CAREER

                                        Marius Guenzel
                                       Ulrike Malmendier

                                       Working Paper 27635
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27635


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Marius Guenzel and Ulrike Malmendier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Behavioral Corporate Finance: The Life Cycle of a CEO Career
Marius Guenzel and Ulrike Malmendier
NBER Working Paper No. 27635
August 2020
JEL No. G3,G32,G34,G4

                                           ABSTRACT

One of the fastest-growing areas of finance research is the study of managerial biases and their
implications for firm outcomes. Since the mid-2000s, this strand of behavioral corporate finance
has provided theoretical and empirical evidence on the influence of biases in the corporate realm,
such as overconfidence, experience effects, and the sunk-cost fallacy. The field has been a
leading force in dismantling the argument that traditional economic mechanisms--selection,
learning, and market discipline--would suffice to uphold the rational-manager paradigm. Instead,
the evidence reveals that behavioral forces exert a significant influence at every stage of a chief
executive officer's (CEO's) career. First, at the appointment stage, selection does not impede the
promotion of behavioral managers. Instead, competitive environments oftentimes promote their
advancement, even under value-maximizing selection mechanisms. Second, while at the helm of
the company, learning opportunities are limited, since many managerial decisions occur at low
frequency, and their causal effects are clouded by self-attribution bias and difficult to disentangle
from those of concurrent events. Third, at the dismissal stage, market discipline does not ensure
the firing of biased decision-makers as board members themselves are subject to biases in their
evaluation of CEOs.

By documenting how biases affect even the most educated and influential decision-makers, such
as CEOs, the field has generated important insights into the hard-wiring of biases. Biases do not
simply stem from a lack of education, nor are they restricted to low-ability agents. Instead, biases
are significant elements of human decision-making at the highest levels of organizations.

An important question for future research is how to limit, in each CEO career phase, the adverse
effects of managerial biases. Potential approaches include refining selection mechanisms,
designing and implementing corporate repairs, and reshaping corporate governance to account
not only for incentive misalignments but also for biased decision-making.


Marius Guenzel
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
mguenzel@wharton.upenn.edu

Ulrike Malmendier
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall # 3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
ulrike@econ.berkeley.edu
Chief executive officers (CEOs) and other top-level managers make decisions with far-reaching
consequences for different stakeholders. Production decisions, for example, can have a substan-
tial impact on both shareholder value and employment. Consider the aviation industry and the
announcement by Airbus in 2019 that they would discontinue production of their flagship A380.
The announcement came after years of persistent cost explosions, development failures, and can-
celed orders. The news increased shareholder wealth by $1.9bn on announcement day, but the
decision was also expected to result in up to 3,500 job cuts and reassignments in multiple European
countries.
    Standard neoclassical economics assumes that all managerial decisions are based on rational
payoff maximization. Apparent failures to maximize shareholder value, such as the delay in halting
production of the Airbus A380, are attributed to incentive misalignment or uncertainty. Growing
research in behavioral corporate finance, however, shows that biases and systematic mistakes in
managerial decisions are oftentimes the better explanation.
    Even though behavioral corporate finance has become one of the most active areas of research
in finance, early behavioral research did not include the analysis of managerial decisions, but
focused exclusively on biases in individual investors (e.g., overconfidence and cognitive limitations
in Barber and Odean 2000; Lamont and Thaler 2003). Successful C-level managers were thought
to be immune to these psychological forces. If anything, managers might exploit the biases of
investors by timing the market (Baker et al. 2003; Baker and Wurgler 2000).
    Why did early behavioral work draw such a stark contrast between managers and other agents?
Why would managers not be subject to biases and systematic mistakes when lay people are? Why
did the paradigm of the rational manager remain intact, even as the field's foremost motivation
was to provide better explanations for puzzling investment and financing decisions such as the
introductory Airbus example?
    The rational-manager paradigm is predicated on three pillars: (a) selection, (b) learning, and
(c) market discipline. As for the first, corporate executives are not a random subsample of the



     After being in service for less than 12 years, the Airbus A380 had cost $25 billion and "never turned a profit"
even though "executives long maintained that demand would take off"; cf. the February 14, 2019 Wall Street Journal
and New York Times articles wsj.com/articles/airbus-will-stop-building-its-a380-superjumbo-jet-11550121699 and
nytimes.com/2019/02/14/business/airbus-a380.html.

                                                         1
population. They are smart and highly educated, and therefore presumed not to be susceptible to
the biases of consumers and investors. As for the second, managers may make occasional mistakes,
but are presumed to learn, update rationally, and optimize going forward. And the third pillar,
market discipline, reflects that managers are closely monitored by corporate boards and the market,
keeping any bias-driven errors at bay.
   The new wave of behavioral corporate finance research that began to appear in the mid-to-late
2000s has drastically altered this line of reasoning. A convincing body of evidence documents sys-
tematic and persistent biases in managerial decision-making, including overconfidence, reference-
dependent thinking, and reliance on cognitive shortcuts, and reveals that managers' character traits
and past experiences shape their decisions. Circling back to the Airbus example, empire-building
motives and rational career concerns are factors that might have contributed to the A380 decision
timeline; but so are overconfidence (about product quality), the sunk-cost fallacy (in light of project
overruns in excess of $10 billion), managerial envy (of Boeing's 747 "jumbo jet"), and biased
projections (of airline demand for supersized jets).
   This article reviews and analyzes the growing body of research in behavioral corporate finance.
The review is organized according to three distinct phases of CEO careers: appointment, being at
the helm, and dismissal. Each phase of the CEO's career life cycle is closely linked to one of the
three pillars of the rational-manager paradigm. The first section (`CEO Selection: Who Becomes
a CEO?') discusses the first stage of the CEO career life cycle, the initial appointment, and links
it to the selection argument: Why do selection mechanisms not filter out biased candidates? Why
might they even favor candidates with certain biases? The second section (`CEO Decisions: Do
Biases Affect Corporate Policies?') examines CEO decision-making while in office and links it to
the learning argument: Which systematic biases do CEOs exhibit? What might prevent CEOs from
learning from past mistakes? The third section (`CEO Survival: When Are CEOs Dismissed?')
discusses CEO turnover and links it to the market-discipline argument: Are boards and markets
aware of CEOs' biases? How are biased CEOs incentivized? When are biased CEOs replaced?
The final section is the `Conclusion.' Throughout, the article identifies promising avenues for
future research and discusses policy implications and managerial advice.




                                                  2
CEO Selection: Who Becomes a CEO?
This section discusses and evaluates the selection process, that is, the first stage in the life cycle
of a CEO's career: Who becomes a CEO? Why would one expect CEOs to be rational or biased?
Which biases facilitate or hinder the promotion to the CEO position?

                              Figure 1: The CEO Selection Process
Calculations for first-, mid-, and senior-level management are based on the 2015 EEO-1 report, the most recent report
that presents total employment numbers aggregated across racial or ethnic groups (eeoc.gov/statistics/job-patterns-
minorities-and-women-private-industry-eeo-1). Calculations for CEOs are based on the total US labor force (for
comparability, also using numbers from 2015; bls.gov/webapps/legacy/cpsatab1.htm) and the number of publicly
listed firms, i.e., firms included in the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) database in December 2015 with
a share code of 10 or 11 (ordinary common shares) and an exchange code of 1 (NYSE), 2 (NYSE American / Amex),
or 3 (Nasdaq).



                                                                                    0.002%


                   · Who becomes a CEO?                                     CEOs
                   · Why would we expect CEOs                                                   2%
                     to be biased?
                                                                Senior-Level Managers
                   · Which biases and
                     characteristics
                     facilitate or hinder              First- and Mid-Level Managers                           9%
                     promotion?

                                                                        Employees

                                                   Operatives    Laborers   Service Workers   Craft Workers
                                            Office & Clerical Workers   Sales Workers   Technicians   Professionals




    As highlighted in Figure 1, CEOs are a very select group of people. Of the roughly 52 million
employees of US firms that are required to file an EEO-1 report, only 9% reach entry- or mid-level
management positions. Just 2% advance to senior-level management, defined as those within two
reporting levels of the CEO. A mere 0.002% of the total labor force in the United States rise to the
very top of the pyramid and serve as CEO of a publicly listed firm. Those who make it all the way
to the top are generally highly educated and can draw on decades of professional experience. For

    Private companies with at least 100 employees have to file an annual EEO-1 report with the US Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission.

                                                                    3
example, in a sample of more than 5,000 CEOs of US public firms from 1980 to 2011, Dittmar
and Duchin (2015) find that 1 in 3 CEOs has an MBA degree and the average CEO accumulated
21 years of work experience at 4 different firms prior to attaining that position. For a comparable
CEO sample over the period 1992-2010, Schoar and Zuo (2017) report that 15% of CEOs have
prior experience in banking, 10% in consulting, and 3% in academia.
   Economists have traditionally assumed that CEOs and other top managers are rational, unbiased
decision-makers. This was both because of the self-selection of highly educated and trained
individuals reflected in these statistics, and because firms' selection mechanisms were expected to
filter out biased CEO candidates if their biases were detrimental to firm value. However, research
in behavioral corporate finance has identified various channels that allow for or even favor the
selection of biased CEOs, which reveals that this conclusion is premature.


The Selection Process

It is useful to distinguish between three scenarios: selection when managerial biases are unobserv-
able, selection when managerial biases are observable, and biases and frictions in the selection
process (cf. Figure 2).

Selection When Biases Are Unobservable:         What mechanism might induce value-maximizing
boards to appoint systematically biased CEOs when biases are unobservable (but board members
are aware that managers are, with some probability, biased)? Goel and Thakor (2008) develop a
simple model to illustrate one plausible mechanism. Consider a set of risk averse managers who
are competing for a CEO position. All of them have previously implemented projects. Some
are rational, and some are overconfident and underestimate the riskiness of their projects. While
project risk levels, and mangers' ability and overconfidence "status" are unobservable in the model,
project payoffs are observable.
   In this setup, the optimal selection rule appoints the manager with the highest payoff as CEO
since ability (which is uncorrelated with overconfidence) has to be inferred from payoffs. As a
result, the value-maximizing selection mechanism favors overconfident managers, who tend to
choose higher-risk projects and to generate more extreme payoffs. Hence, biased candidates are
more likely to be appointed as CEO than unbiased candidates in this setup.

                                                 4
    Goel and Thakor's (2008) paper demonstrates a potential link between a specific bias--
overconfidence--and the selection of CEOs. It also has two broader implications. First, as
the main idea applies to lower- and mid-level promotions as well (not only CEO appointments),
corporate selection mechanisms could spur the appointment of biased individuals at all levels of
the managerial pyramid. As a result, the prevalence of biases might be increasing toward the
top rather than the bottom of the pyramid, which in turn implies a prevalence of biases among
CEO candidates. Second, while the model is framed in the context of overconfidence, any bias
or character trait that affects attitudes toward project riskiness yields similar results. For example,
managers might choose different risk levels because they apply a company-wide instead of the
appropriate project-specific discount rate to evaluate project cash flows, or because their beliefs
are influenced by their lifetime experiences. In all of these cases, value-maximizing boards might
appoint candidates who are biased and whose biases and beliefs subsequently shape corporate
outcomes.

Selection When Biases Are Observable:              Implicit in the discussion thus far was the assumption that
firms prefer to hire rational executives since managerial biases are detrimental to value generation.
If, instead, biases have a "bright side," and the benefits outweigh the costs, value-maximizing boards
may deliberately seek managers with observable advantageous biases and character traits. A bias
with an apparent "bright side" is overconfidence; it counteracts risk aversion and thus induces risk
averse CEOs to choose investment levels closer to the first-best. In this spirit, the model of Gervais
et al. (2011) shows that value-maximizing firms might favor overconfident CEOs even when they
can verify ex ante whether a CEO candidate is overconfident. Firms then design incentive contracts
to account for the CEO's level of overconfidence. In Gervais et al.'s (2011) setting, moderate levels
of CEO overconfidence are optimal for shareholders. Moderate levels of overconfidence are also
optimal for the CEOs themselves, who benefit when the CEO's surplus creation is shared between
firms and managers.


      The section `CEO Decisions: Do Biases Affect Corporate Policies?' discusses the evidence on how incorrect
discount-rate choices and lifetime experiences affect CEOs' strategic decisions in more detail. With regard to lifetime
experiences, Schoar and Zuo (2017) show that CEOs who begin their career during recessions start out in, and ultimately
also become CEO at smaller firms, suggesting selection and promotion effects of formative experiences also across
firms.

                                                          5
    Empirical evidence supports the notion that certain biases can be beneficial to shareholder
value. Hirshleifer et al. (2012) find that CEO overconfidence is valuable in innovative industries
in particular, where commitments to risky projects are essential.

Biases and Frictions in the Selection Process:            Yet another reason for the appointment of biased
managers to the helm of a company is the possibility that the selection mechanism may be distorted
or that the board members in charge are themselves subject to biases.
    As for the first aspect, distorted promotion and selection mechanisms have been documented at
least at lower hierarchy levels. For example, in a micro data set comprised of 214 sales firms, Benson
et al. (2019) show that manager selection criteria are heavily tilted toward current job performance,
rather than those worker characteristics that predict managerial skill. Even if such "short-termism"
reflects the attempt to induce high worker effort and establish transparent promotion principles,
instead of misguided selection, it does open another channel for selecting biased managers, namely,
overconfident managers who choose higher-risk projects with more extreme payoffs.
    As for the second aspect, there is ample anecdotal evidence of corporate board members
themselves exhibiting biases and favoring CEOs with similar viewpoints and biases to their own.
For example, Qatar Airways CEO Akbar Al Baker responded to questions about gender equality
and female leadership in the airline industry during a press conference in June 2018 that "Of course
[the firm] has to be led by a man, because it is a very challenging position."                 In other words, if
Al Baker has any influence on the selection of his successor, or if those in charge share similar
viewpoints, the selection process at Qatar Airways is likely biased against high-ability women in
the candidate pool. More generally, biased boards might be prone to appoint CEOs of the same
gender, with a similar cultural background, or other salient similarities (homophily).
    Perhaps surprisingly, these aspects have not been identified convincingly in empirical data


      The flag carrier of Qatar carried over 32 million passengers and employed more than 43,000 people from 168
nationalities in 2017; cf. qatarairways.com/content/dam/documents/annual-reports/2017_Annual_Report_ENGLISH-
WEB.pdf for the 2017 annual report.
      One day later, the airline released a written statement from Al Baker, reading: "Qatar Airways firmly believes
in gender equality in the workplace ... With a female work force of more than 33%, as I mentioned today, it
would be my pleasure if I could help develop a female candidate to be the next CEO of Qatar Airways." Cf.
theguardian.com/business/2018/jun/05/qatar-airways-akbar-al-baker-airline-iata.
      Homophily is the tendency to collaborate and mingle with similar others. For an example of the detrimental
effects of homophily in the context of venture capital syndicates, see Gompers et al. (2016).

                                                         6
on CEO selection. There is some evidence that new executives are chosen in part based on
congruence in (biased) viewpoints with existing decision-makers. In particular, Malmendier et al.
(2018) estimate that overconfident CEOs are seven times more likely to appoint overconfident chief
financial officers (CFOs) than are non-overconfident CEOs. There is also some literature that looks
at CEO dismissal when boards are biased, that is, the flipside of hiring (discussed in the section
`CEO Survival: When Are CEOs Dismissed?'). A comprehensive "behavioral approach" should
allow for possible biases among all parties involved--including board members--in all decisions.
Misattribution of past managerial performance, recency bias, or projection bias come to mind as
natural promising starting points for such an analysis.



                          Figure 2: Biases and CEO Selection

                             CEO Candidates
          Observable
            biases
           and traits
                                                               Promotion to CEO
                                                                                        CEO
         Unobservable
            biases
          and traits                                              Biases and
                                                                Frictions in the
                                                               Selection Process



   What other reasons could prompt firms to select biased CEOs? One avenue for future research
would be a broader consideration of correlations between biases, other personality traits, and
abilities. That is, even if a specific bias is detrimental to shareholder value ceteris paribus, it
might be correlated with beneficial traits or personality characteristics. In this vein, Kaplan and
Sorensen (2019) find that company founders, who are likely particularly (over)confident, score high
on charisma in executive personality assessments. With increasing availability of micro data on
executives' assessments and on selection criteria, researchers can explore the interplay of different
biases, other personality traits, and ability scores, and test whether the selection mechanisms in
place allow boards and selection committees to identify biases in candidates.




                                                 7
Self-Selection and Assortative Matching

Self-selection and manager-firm assortative matching also contribute to the prevalence of behavioral
biases among CEOs as well as their cross-sectional variation (cf. Figure 3).
   One dimension is sorting into growth versus value firms. The model of Gervais et al. (2011),
augmented with a competitive labor market for CEOs, predicts that overconfident managers are
more likely be employed in growth than in value firms. The reason is that growth firms have more
upside potential and can offer highly convex compensation schemes. These contracts appeal to
overconfident CEOs, who overestimate their ability to create value. Graham et al. (2013) take up
these theoretical predictions and show that tall and young CEOs--characteristics that are frequently
associated with overconfidence--are more likely to head firms with high expected growth rates.
   Relatedly, self-selection pertains to the dimension of financial risk-taking. Cronqvist et al.
(2012) provide evidence of a "behavioral consistency" between firms' and CEOs' leverage ratios:
CEOs' personal leverage strongly predicts their firm's leverage. This correlation might be the result
of CEOs "imprinting" their preferences on firms' capital structures; but Cronqvist et al. (2012)
argue that self-selection and matching are (also) at work since a CEO's personal leverage strongly
predicts that of their successor.
   Combining the two aspects of value-versus-growth and financing, Custódio and Metzger (2014)
report that CEOs with a background in finance are more likely to be appointed by mature firms, and
"nonfinance CEOs" by growth firms. Here, the self-selection interpretation is that financial experts
prefer mature firms because of their financial characteristics (e.g., higher retained earnings). Of
course, alternative channels might also be at work. For example, financing and the minimization
of cost of capital might become more important value drivers as firms mature.
   Finally, cultural and educational factors might induce self-selection. Hilary and Hui (2009) find
that firms in religious counties have more prudent corporate policies (e.g., reduced risk exposure).
They also document that when CEOs switch firms, the religious environments of the old and
new employer are similar. They infer that a desire for alignment between corporate culture and
managerial preferences or styles drives manager-firm matching.




                                                 8
             Figure 3: CEO Self-Selection and Assortative Matching

               CEO Candidates




            Manager Characteristics        Self-Selection and
                                                                        Firm Characteristics
                Overconfidence            Assortative Matching
                                                                          Value vs. Growth
             Attitude Toward Debt
                                                                              Leverage
             Background in Finance
                                                                           Risk Exposure
                    Religion




Psychological Assessments of CEO Candidates

Having presented various arguments for why selection and self-selection mechanisms do not
prevent, and sometimes even encourage the rise of biased managers, this subsection takes a step
back and turns to direct psychological evidence on the personalities of CEOs and C-suite candidates.
One piece of evidence on CEOs and CFOs comes from Graham et al. (2013), who use psychological
assessments of managers from survey-based psychometric personality tests. In their data, CEOs
are substantially more optimistic than both the lay population and CFOs. Moreover, top-level
managers are aware of these differences in character traits: 35.7% of CFOs perceive their CEO
peers to be "more optimistic about all aspects of life, above and beyond the CEO's extra optimism
about business prospects" (Graham et al. 2013, p. 112).
   In a similar vein, Kaplan et al. (2012) and Kaplan and Sorensen (2019) utilize proprietary data
on assessments of more than 2,600 C-suite candidates from a consulting firm to identify their traits
and biases. They distinguish between the characteristics of those who make it into the pool, those
who are selected, and those who are successful in their new position.
   The firm scores interviewees on 30 characteristics, such as "Develops People," "Aggressive,"
or "Holds People Accountable." Kaplan and Sorensen (2019) extract four underlying (latent)
factors that capture the variation in these 30 characteristics, via factor analysis. The heat map
in Figure 4a (constructed from their Table 5) visualizes the factor loadings on each of the 30


                                                   9
assessed characteristics. The loadings are color-coded from dark green (most negative loadings)
to dark brown (most positive loadings). The first factor loads positively on all 30 characteristics,
and is interpreted as general talent. The second factor loads most positively on "Respect" and
"Teamwork," and most negatively on "Aggressive." Kaplan and Sorensen (2019) interpret this
factor as distinguishing between interpersonal versus execution skills. The third factor loads
positively on, for example, "Analytical Skills" and negatively on "Enthusiasm" and "Persuasion,"
and identifies candidates as analytical versus charismatic. The fourth factor loads positively on,
for example, "Strategic Vision" and "Brainpower" and negatively on "Holds People Accountable."
It classifies candidates with stronger strategic skills versus detail orientation.
    Figure 4b shows the average factor scores across all CEO candidates (All), as well as average
scores for CEO candidates at venture capital (VC), private equity (PE), and public (P) firms.
Relative to candidates for other C-suite positions, CEO candidates are, on average, more talented,
and score higher on execution, charisma, and strategic skills. CEO candidates at VC and PE firms
are particularly charismatic, while CEO candidates at public firms are much more analytical.
    Turning to candidate selection, Kaplan and Sorensen (2019) find that higher general ability
and interpersonal skills are strong predictors for being hired. The latter finding is particularly
interesting since high execution scores, as opposed to interpersonal skills, predict initial selection
into the CEO candidate pool and a CEO's ultimate success if selected. Why, then, are interpersonal
skills more important than execution skills for the appointment and selection among several suitable
candidates? Are different characteristics valued differently by employers and selection committees?
Is the selection process suboptimal because selection committee members make biased choices?
The assessment of CEO characteristics and their potential misvaluation throughout the selection
process is a promising avenue for future research.




      Kaplan and Sorensen (2019) construct the factors such that sample-wide average score is zero. Thus, cross-group
comparisons implicitly use the other candidates as a control group. If, for example, the sample consisted of CEO and
CFO candidates only, any factor where CEO candidates score above zero, on average, would result in CFO candidates
having a below-zero mean.
      As discussed in the subsection on the CEO selection process, more research is also warranted on how biases
correlate with personality characteristics. For example, some of the personality characteristics from Figure 4a that are
used to identify execution skills (e.g. "Aggressive" or "Fast") are plausibly correlated with overconfidence (see also the
discussion in Bolton et al. 2013).

                                                           10
                Figure 4: Psychological Assessment of CEO Candidates
Both panels visualize results from the factor analysis in Kaplan and Sorensen (2019). Factors are identified as: talent
(+), interpersonal (+) vs. execution skills (-), analytical (+) vs. charisma (-), and strategic skills (+) vs. managerial
details (-). (+) and (-) indicate positive and negative factor loadings, respectively.

(a) This heat map visualizes the factor loadings of the four identified factors from Table 5 in Kaplan and Sorensen
    (2019), and from Table IV in Kaplan et al. (2012) for "Written Communication." Positive (negative) loadings are
    displayed in brown (green). Factor loadings smaller than 0.15 (in absolute value) are displayed in gray.




(b) This panel visualizes Table 6, Panels A and B, in Kaplan and Sorensen (2019), showing average factor scores
    across CEO candidates. "All" refers to average scores across all CEO candidates. "VC" ("PE", "P") calculates
    average scores for CEO candidates at venture capital (private equity, public) firms. Note that factor scores are
    constructed such that the average score across all candidates (CEO and non-CEO) is zero.




Policy Implications and Managerial Advice

What are some potential overall lessons from this discussion that might be taken to the `real world'?
A first step would be an increased awareness of managerial biases. Both the manager aiming to
climb the corporate ladder and the employer seeking to fill a top managerial position will benefit if
they start accounting for their own and the other party's biases. The candidate might better identify


                                                          11
suitable employers who hold the promise of a successful career; cf. our discussion of assortative
matching and overconfident managers' better career prospects in growth firms, all else equal.
   From the perspective of employers seeking a new CEO, one lesson might be the necessity
to directly "test" for managers' biases in the selection process; a process which should, ideally,
be tailored to the CEO job environment. For example, in fast-changing environments such as
the fashion industry or the renewable energy sector, selecting a CEO who systematically under-
or overreacts to new information could be particularly costly. One interesting and robust pattern
relevant for CEO selection is that managers with a financial background appear to exhibit fewer
biases, at least in certain investment and financing contexts. Malmendier and Tate (2005) were
the first to show that investment-financing decisions are less biased (less investment-cash flow
sensitive) among CEOs with a finance education; that is, with an undergraduate or graduate degree
in accounting, finance, business (including an MBA), or economics. Relatedly, Custódio and
Metzger (2014) show that a finance background reduces the prevalence of incorrect discount-
rate choices (dubbed the "weighted cost of capital (WACC) fallacy," see also the section `CEO
Decisions: Do Biases Affect Corporate Policies?') and increases CEOs' responsiveness to tax cuts.
For example, following the "Bush Tax Cuts" in 2003, financial-expert CEOs increased total payout
by 17%, relative to a mean payout ratio of 0.59. At the same time, much of this correlation may
reflect selection rather than a causal effect of education.
   More research is needed that documents existing and studies optimal organizational approaches
to managerial selection in the presence of diverse and biased candidates.



CEO Decisions: Do Biases Affect Corporate Policies?
Having established why biased managers are appointed to the helm of a company, this section
turns to CEO decision-making and firm policies. This evidence will challenge the second pillar of
the rational-manager paradigm: learning, that is, the notion that managers' experience on the job
will improve their decision-making over time and ultimately de-bias them. There are at least four
reasons for why learning and de-biasing is limited in the context of top-level decisions.
   First, many measurable corporate decisions occur at low frequency. For example, acquisitions
are typically rare events during a CEO's tenure, and thus opportunities to learn from previous

                                                  12
mistakes are few and far between.
   Second, learning from past decisions is limited as it is difficult to distinguish between causality
versus correlation of managerial decisions and outcomes. Output is hard to measure, hard to
attribute to specific individual performances, and hard to disentangle from other (firm-specific or
economy-wide) events. In the context of mergers and acquisitions (M&A), for example, researchers
and practitioners have long struggled to measure the long-run value creation in mergers, that is,
to find suitable benchmark performances and counterfactuals (see, e.g., Loughran and Vh 1997,
Malmendier et al. 2018, Rau and Vermaelen 1998, and Savor and Lu 2009).
   Third, evidence on the self-attribution bias indicates that people tend to attribute successes to
their own actions but failures to external circumstances--"Heads I win, tails it's chance." (Langer
and Roth 1975; Miller and Ross 1975). In other words, even if performance evaluations were
accurate, managers might draw wrong inferences, and discount information that could induce
learning.
   Finally, certain biases might even be reinforced, rather than ameliorated, as top managers
overestimate the causal impact of their decisions. For example, psychologists have found that
people exhibit higher levels of overconfidence when they are (or perceive to be) in control, and are
committed to or emotionally invested in the outcome (Weinstein 1980). Each of these factors is
relevant to the CEO position. As the key corporate decision-makers, CEOs likely believe they are
in control, and they are personally invested because firm performance determines their reputation
and pay.

   With these arguments in mind, the remainder of this section provides a selective discussion of
how managerial biases and character traits shape and distort corporate outcomes. The organization
follows the general structure of a firm's balance sheet, distinguishing between investment and
financing activities.
The CEO's main investment-related decisions include

    · the identification of investment projects,

    · the allocation of resources across segments,

    · the determination of optimal cash reserves, and


                                                   13
    · optimal external growth through M&A.

The CEO's main financing-related decisions (in collaboration with the CFO ) include

    · leverage levels and debt maturity, and

    · debt and equity issues and corporate payouts.

The discussion leads with a high-level preview of some overarching themes, and then delves deeper
into each CEO decision area.


Preview

Figure 5 previews the CEO biases that have been found to affect firm outcomes, both for investment
and financing decisions. The intersection in the middle shows the two biases that affect both
decision areas and have garnered the strongest interest in terms of research output and publications
to date: overconfidence and experience effects.
    While the list of biases is by no means short, overconfidence and other belief-based biases
have, to some extent, overshadowed the importance of nonstandard preferences and heuristics.
For example, 50% of the papers on managerial biases published in the top three finance journals
between 2000 and 2016 focus on the role of CEO overconfidence in firm decision-making (cf.
the summary in Malmendier 2018). On the one hand, this is an indication of the relevance and
importance of the overconfidence bias in practice, and also reflects that theory makes clear-cut and
intuitive predictions that overconfidence should affect both CEO selection (see the section `CEO
Selection: Who Becomes a CEO?') and corporate policies. On the other hand, other biases on
(and beyond) this list are also ex ante plausible and relevant for decision-making at the top level
(cf. again the discussion in Malmendier 2018). Progress on these other classes of biases is needed.
    Perhaps the most striking overall insight is how prevalent biases are even among highly educated,
financially sophisticated, successful professionals. Behavioral biases emerge as a formalization of
how agents are "wired," rather than as mistakes they make despite a sort of "baseline rational"
wiring.


       Graham et al. (2015) argue that the average CEO does not fully delegate financial decisions to the CFO and that
there is "an element of CEO dominance ... across all the policies" (Graham et al. 2015, p. 456).

                                                         14
                    Figure 5: CEO Biases and Corporate Policies


                                                CEO




                 Sunk-Cost Fallacy
               Reference Dependence
                    Present Bias
              Preference for Skewness
                Extrapolative Beliefs                                   Prospect Theory
               Underreaction to News       Overconfidence            Attitude Toward Debt
                   WACC Fallacy           Experience Effects         Background in Finance
               Availability Heuristic                                     CFO Biases
                Competition Neglect
                    Gut Feeling
                     Social Ties
               Peer Effects and Envy




      Investment & Merger Decisions                    Financing Decisions
      ­ Identification of Projects and                 ­ Debt-Equity Mix and Debt Maturity
         Investment Levels
      ­ Allocation of Capital and Resources            ­ Debt and Equity Issues
         Across Segments
      ­ Cash Holdings                                  ­ Payout Policy
      ­ Firm Scope and M&A



Investment Decisions

Investment Projects:    Firms should invest in those projects that have the largest expected stream of
cash flows over time, discounted at the appropriate rate. A sizable literature in corporate finance has
documented systematic deviations from this investment rule, and the work in behavioral corporate
finance has shown that many of these deviations stem from CEO biases, including nonrational
expectation formation (overconfidence, experience-based learning, over- or underreaction to news),
and nonstandard preferences (present bias).

   Malmendier and Tate (2005) were the first to empirically identify a behavioral bias in CEOs--

                                                  15
CEO overconfidence--and directly link it to corporate decision-making. In the context of firm
investment, they showed that a significant fraction of CEOs of large (Forbes 500) companies
overestimate the returns to their projects and thus perceive the net present value of those future
cash flows to be higher than potential lenders and other market participants. In other words,
they believe that their firm is systematically undervalued, and as a result that external (stock
or debt) financing is too costly. Consequently, they rely as much as possible on internal funds
to finance new investment projects, and might even cut investments when they need to access
external capital markets. In other words, overconfidence bias is shown to be a significant factor in
explaining the widespread phenomenon of investment-cash flow sensitivity, which had previously
puzzled researchers, especially when it occurred in large firms with direct access to external capital
markets.
   Malmendier and Tate (2015) confirm the same investment patterns in more recent data and with
improved identification. Following Almeida et al. (2012), they focus on firms that were hit by
an adverse credit market shock in 2007, and compare pre-versus-post firm investment behavior of
overconfident CEOs, relative to rational CEOs, in a difference-in-differences setting. Consistent
with the theoretical predictions of the Malmendier and Tate (2005) overconfidence model, they find
that overconfident CEOs curb their investment more in response to the financing shock, reflecting
their greater aversion to external financing.
   Subsequent papers have corroborated that a significant determinant of corporate investment is
the CEO's misperception and overestimation of the value their investment projects will create, and
have explored the implications for specific types of firms or industries. Giat et al. (2009) calibrate
a structural model to data on 118 pharmaceutical research and development (R&D) projects, and
find that R&D managers substantially overestimate the average product output per year compared
to estimates of investors (average expected output values of $77.5 million vs. $12.5 per year,
respectively) and also compared to the true mean ($24.4 million per year). The work of Gervais
et al. (2011) and Graham et al. (2013) emphasizes the bright side of overconfidence and suggests
that it might be an attractive feature for risky growth firms, as it counteracts risk aversion. Building
on this notion, Hirshleifer et al. (2012) show that innovative activity and innovation quality are
higher when firms are run by overconfident CEOs. Their estimates imply that, in firms run by



                                                  16
overconfident CEOs, the R&D/assets ratio is 27% higher, patenting is 9-28% higher, and patents
generate 11-40% more citations. Consistent with Gervais et al.'s (2011) selection model, the
documented innovation-spurring effect of overconfidence is concentrated in innovative industries
with arguably higher growth opportunities.

   A second line of research explores how CEOs' investment decisions are shaped by their prior
experiences. Here, the overarching theme is that negative formative experiences trigger more
cautious behavior later in life. Schoar and Zuo (2017) show that CEOs who started their career
during recessions exhibit more conservatism. They estimate reductions in capital expenditures and
R&D investments of around 0.4 percentage points of (lagged) total assets as a result of the CEO
beginning their career in a recession, controlling for firm fixed effects, birth-decade fixed effects,
and industry-year fixed effects.
   One concern with interpreting their results as evidence of a causal effect of experiences on
corporate outcomes is assortative matching (see the section `CEO Selection: Who Becomes a
CEO?'). What if the results are driven by certain firms seeking out conservative leaders, rather
than by conservative leaders imprinting their styles? Firm fixed effects are insufficient to address
this issue, given their time-invariant nature. Dittmar and Duchin (2015) are able to work around
this issue by exploiting exogenous CEO turnovers following death, illness, or scheduled retirement.
They show that, conditional on the CEO change being exogenous, there are no abnormal policy
changes on average, but CEOs who have experienced corporate distress throughout their career
decrease capital expenditures by 0.4-0.5 percentage points relative to nondistressed CEOs.
   The same identification challenges affect personal life experiences. For example, Benmelech
and Frydman (2015) test whether CEOs who have served in the military differ in their corporate
policies. Here, an additional hurdle is that, from an ex ante perspective, it is not clear whether
military experience should spur more conservative policies (military service might instill a sense
of duty and caution in CEOs) or more aggressive policies (combat experience might trigger more
aggressive and risky behavior). Benmelech and Frydman (2015) estimate an influence toward
more conservative policies, including lower levels of capital expenditure and R&D investment.
These leanings appear, however, to be context-specific, as discussed below in the analysis of
financing decisions, and the discrepancies between more versus less conservatism in investment


                                                 17
versus financing might again reflect differences in assortative matching--who among those serving
in the military become CEOs--across different corporate domains.

   Another behavioral bias that has been linked to investment decisions is hyperbolic discounting;
that is, present-biased preferences. Present bias is one of the most widely studied biases in
behavioral economics. It describes people's inclination to value the present over the future by
more than what exponential discounting would imply, but to discount exponentially between future
periods. As time passes, the hyperbolic agent changes discounting and starts overvaluing payoffs
in the now-present period relative to payoffs further in the future, leading to time inconsistencies
(Laibson 1997; Thaler and Benartzi 2004).
   Grenadier and Wang (2005) show that present-biased preferences distort investment in a standard
real-options framework. First, they consider an entrepreneur with an investment opportunity that
generates a single payoff in the final period. In such a scenario, present-biased entrepreneurs
invest too early as they undervalue the option to wait until uncertainty is resolved. In another
scenario, an investment generates a series of future cash flows instead of a single payment. Here,
present-biased entrepreneurs invest later than time-consistent agents because they discount future
cash flows more, lowering their incentives to invest at any point in time. While Grenadier and Wang
(2005) derive these predictions in the context of commercial real estate developers, the model is
equally relevant for the investment of firms--especially in light of the evidence that CEOs and other
C-suite managers tend to be impatient (Graham et al. 2013).
   An interesting aspect of applying hyperbolic discounting in corporate finance is that it is easier
to draw conclusions about welfare implications than in the typical consumer setting. In general,
welfare statements are difficult when agents are present-biased, since some choices are preferred
by today's self but not by tomorrow's self, or vice versa. In the context of corporate investment
decisions, instead, one can simply evaluate the impact of an investment choice on shareholder value.
The more the investment behavior of a hyperbolic discounter deviates from the optimum, the more
their bias is welfare-reducing for shareholders.

   Finally, an example of mistakes in the expectation formation process comes from Greenwood
and Hanson's (2014) evidence of "competition neglect"; that is, the failure of managers to correctly
take competitors' actions into account. Their estimations on data from the shipping industry reveal


                                                   18
that managers overextrapolate the persistence of exogenous demand shocks. They do not internalize
the endogenous supply response of their competitors, which triggers overinvestment.

Allocation of Capital and Resources Across Segments:                     Capital has to be allocated not only
across projects but also across divisions of a firm. The literature has identified a variety of factors
triggering investment distortions in firms with multiple segments, including CEOs' misjudgment
of segment risk and characteristics, "people-related factors" such as CEOs' social ties to divisional
managers, and even CEOs' gut feeling.

    Krüger et al. (2015) provide evidence of a "WACC fallacy": Managers use a single, company-
wide rate to discount cash flows to value all projects, rather than a project- or segment-specific
rate that appropriately accounts for the risk of the cash flows. Earlier survey evidence by Graham
and Harvey (2001) indicates that almost 60% of the 392 surveyed managers exhibit this "WACC
fallacy." The evidence in Krüger et al. (2015) shows that, as a result, conglomerate firms discount
the projects of risky divisions too little, leading to overinvestment in risky projects, and discount
projects of safe divisions too much, leading to underinvestment in safe projects.
    Another bias in the cross-segment allocation is a tendency to go for "long shots." Schneider
and Spalt (2016) show that CEOs in conglomerate firms allocate substantially more money to
segments with more skewed returns. For example, small segments with project returns at the 75th
percentile of the skewness distribution invest 7.5% more, relative to the mean, than those at the
25th percentile. Schneider and Spalt (2016) also observe that CEO preferences for skewness are
more pronounced when firms are located in counties with a higher gambling propensity.

    There is also strong evidence of "people-related" factors. Graham et al. (2015) report that
approximately 70% of CEOs allocate capital based on the divisional manager's reputation or
confidence in the project. While this finding does not preclude rational decision-making--middle
managers with a higher reputation are likely to be more talented, and confidence in projects
might signal project quality--complementary evidence from other research points to a behavioral
explanation: Duchin et al. (2020) find that CEOs allocate more capital to male divisional managers.
On average, male managers obtain $13-19 million more funds per year than their female peers,

     In a similar vein, Ma et al. (2020) show systematic underreaction to new information in managers' sales forecasts
in managerial survey data from Italy.

                                                         19
controlling for a wide array of variables including education, age, experience, and even social
connections. The authors attribute the majority of the gender gap to family-related, educational,
and environmental determinants during a CEO's formative years, such as being born into a male-
dominated family where the father was the sole earner and had more education than the mother, or
attending an all-male high school.      The effect of a CEO's gender bias is reduced by up to 35% in
more "gender-aware" firms with a female chair of the board.
    Another determinant of managerial decisions is that of social connections. In prior work,
Duchin and Sosyura (2013) document that shared educational or employment experiences between
CEOs and middle managers affect capital allocation. One additional social connection between
CEO and middle manager is associated with 7.2% more capital inflow. Such connection-based
capital allocation is not always inefficient, though. While it reduces investment efficiency in weak-
governance regimes, it turns out to be value-enhancing in environments with high information
asymmetries. That is, both biases and misaligned incentives might be at work.
    The same is true for other findings on CEO-manager social ties. Xuan (2009) shows that newly
appointed CEOs in conglomerates tilt capital flows toward divisions without preexisting ties. He
explains the distortion as an attempt to gain approval and cooperation from divisional managers.
While moral hazard appears to be at work, it is interesting to note that new CEOs are particularly
keen to seek approval if they did not serve in an executive role, such as chief operating officer or
president, prior to their appointment to the CEO position.
    Using data from just one conglomerate, Glaser et al. (2013) find that well-connected managers
obtain inefficiently large amounts of cash after unexpected cash windfalls. The detailed data allow
the authors to measure connections based on mentor-mentee relationships and regular lunch or
business meetings.

    Finally, Graham et al. (2015) present evidence on a much more basic determinant of capital
allocation: Almost 50% of surveyed US CEOs view "gut feeling" as an important or very important
decision criterion for capital allocation. While not tied to a specific psychological bias, these
responses reveal the limitations of the standard rational model of decision-making.


    Duchin et al. (2020) also show that CEOs' attitudes toward gender impact gender-related policies, such as
promotion of women.

                                                     20
Cash Reserves:        As in the case of investment, prior formative experiences are also an important
factor in explaining the amount of cash reserves a firm holds. Dittmar and Duchin (2015) estimate
that prior experiences of distress in previous career positions induce CEOs to increase cash holdings
by, on average, 5-12%.        Dessaint and Matray (2017) find that, after hurricanes, unaffected firms in
the proximity of the disaster increase cash reserves by 1.1 percentage points of assets compared to
distant firms. They attribute the overreaction to salient events to managers' availability bias. Bias
and Schmid (2019) provide complimentary evidence on the salience of recent employee strikes:
CEOs react by increasing cash reserves by about one percentage point. The authors use a clever
approach to identification, comparing CEOs who are directors at other firms which are hit by a strike
to CEOs who are directors at the same firms, but during nonstrike times. The value implications
of holding more cash depend on its alternative use. If an additional dollar of cash is more likely
paid out as a dividend than invested, its value is diminished by taxes. Consequently, higher cash
holdings can be costly for shareholders. The value implications of holding more cash depend on its
alternative use. If an additional dollar of cash is more likely paid out as a dividend than invested, its
value is diminished by taxes. Consequently, higher cash holdings can be costly for shareholders.

Firm Scope and M&A:              Many of the biases that the literature has identified as influencing
investment decisions also play a role in mergers, including overconfidence, the "WACC fallacy,"
and social connections. M&A are, after all, just another type of investment.

    Malmendier and Tate (2008) find that CEOs' overconfidence makes them more prone to under-
take acquisitions, and that those acquisitions tend to be value-destroying.                  Compared to earlier
work, notably Roll's (1986) hubris hypothesis of corporate takeovers, one of Malmendier and
Tate's (2008) main contributions is to embed biased takeover decisions in a market setting. They
clarify that overconfidence, or hubris, does not imply that CEOs overbid "no matter what." Instead,
this depends on the differences in beliefs between the CEO and other market participants. While
overconfident CEOs overestimate the value of a merger, they also overestimate their firm's stand-

      Schoar and Zuo (2017) find the opposite; that is, that recession CEOs hold less cash. The latter finding is less
intuitive, and the authors argue that it needs to be looked at in tandem with tax avoidance practices.
      Faulkender and Wang (2006) estimate a marginal cash value of $0.77 among financially unconstrained firms.
      Similar evidence on the effect of overconfidence on acquisition frequencies and value destruction comes from
Huang and Kisgen (2013), who use a gender-based overconfidence proxy, and Benson and Ziedonis (2010) in the
context of corporate venture capital acquisitions.

                                                         21
alone value. As a result, they may pass on merger opportunities if they have to access the external
capital market; that is, convince other market participants to fund the acquisition, and the financing
conditions seem "too expensive." This logic implies that the effect of overconfidence on merger
propensity will be most pronounced for cash deals, which Malmendier and Tate (2008) confirm in
the data.
    The discussion of the "WACC fallacy" also applies to acquisitions: If managers use their own
firm's cost of capital to value acquisition candidates, they will overbid when the target's cost of
capital is higher than theirs. Consistent with this conjecture, Krüger et al. (2015) find that, in
acquisitions of targets with a higher cost of capital, acquirers lose on average 0.8% of market
capitalization at announcement, which translates into 8% of deal value, or $16 million, evaluated
at an acquisition with average characteristics.
    Finally, the research on managers' social ties and networks also applies to merger outcomes.
Most of the evidence emphasizes the adverse consequences of managerial ties, which might re-
flect moral hazard (managers maximizing private benefits, to the detriment of shareholders) and
behavioral biases and social preferences.

    In the context of M&A, Guenzel (2020) shows that managers systematically take sunk costs--
that is, unrecoverable costs that are irrelevant for decision-making--into account in their investment
decisions. Even though the sunk-cost fallacy is one of the classic mistakes in decision-making
(Thaler 1980) and considered a "common mistake" (Berk and DeMarzo 2017), documenting
it empirically is complicated by selection effects. Applied to firm investment, ruling out that
unobserved CEO beliefs or information drive both an initial investment and subsequent behavior is
difficult. Guenzel (2020) overcomes this identification challenge by isolating plausibly exogenous


      For example, Fracassi and Tate (2012) estimate 100 bp lower announcement returns when CEOs have strong
social connections to independent directors, such as shared directorship positions or charity memberships. Conversely,
Schmidt (2015) associates connectedness with higher announcement returns in contexts where information sharing and
board advice are important. Ishii and Xuan (2014) report a significantly negative effect of social connectedness between
acquirer and target management on the combined announcement returns. The mean three-day announcement return
to the combined firm is 1% in their sample; a one-standard deviation increase in connectedness lowers announcement
returns by 0.6-0.9 percentage points. El-Khatib et al. (2015) show that the acquirer CEO's centrality in the social
network (defined as the universe of directors and executives of US public firms in the BoardEx database) affects merger
outcomes. They associate high network centrality with increased decision power and less opposition in the boardroom,
and argue that these adverse factors outweigh the information advantages of strong links. As in the literature on social
ties and investment decisions, better data and identification are needed to disentangle the competing incentive- and
bias-based explanations.

                                                          22
variation in the purchase price in takeovers unfolding after the acquirer has made the purchase
decision. Such variation in costs sunk into an acquisition arises in stock acquisitions that fix
the number of acquirer shares exchanged in the transaction, and is triggered by aggregate market
movements between merger agreement and completion. Guenzel (2020) shows that as an acquisition
becomes exogenously more expensive and the amount of sunk costs increases, the acquirer elevates
its commitment to the acquired entity, evidenced by lower divestiture rates. While Guenzel (2020)
identifies the sunk-cost fallacy in the M&A setting, a wide array of investment decisions can be
distorted by managers failing to ignore sunk costs.

    Other evidence on biases in M&A decisions reflects that mergers are distinct from other types
of investment due to their size and complexity. Goel and Thakor (2009) build on the fact that
mergers abruptly increase firm size, and propose that managerial envy is a plausible behavioral
motivation for mergers. They design a model of merger waves where CEOs derive utility from
higher consumption relative to their CEO peers. Since CEO compensation is tied to firm size,
a merger in a CEO's peer group will trigger envy, and an increased desire to also undertake an
acquisition.
    The evidence in Shue (2013) is broadly in line with this envy-based model of mergers. She
identifies peer effects on firm decisions, including acquisitions, using an identification technique
first implemented in Lerner and Malmendier (2013): the random assignment of Harvard Business
School MBA cohorts to "sections."               Tracking those MBA graduates who end up as executives
at an S&P 1500 firm, she estimates that section peers are 11% more similar in their acquisition
strategies than class peers from different sections.
    Baker et al. (2012) study merger negotiations and argue that behavioral biases and shortcuts
affect offer prices. They provide evidence that all parties involved--managers, boards, and target
shareholders--use previous target-stock peak prices as reference points in the negotiation and
assessment of offer terms: There is considerable bunching in the distribution of offer prices around
salient peak prices, such as the 52-week high. That is, salient prices appear to serve as a mental

      Lerner and Malmendier (2013) find that exposure to section peers with a background in entrepreneurship decreases
post-MBA venture activity. Their results are most consistent with learning from peer interactions, where entrepreneurial
peers help filter out unpromising business ideas, thereby reducing unsuccessful entrepreneurship.
      Consistent with the "keeping-up-with-the-Joneses" interpretation, Shue (2013) finds that peer effects are more
than twice as strong following alumni reunions, when social ties (and relative thinking) are likely reinforced.

                                                          23
shortcut in complex negotiations such as mergers.


Financing Decisions

Most of the behavioral research on the financing side has focused on firm leverage, which is
persistent and sluggish, with only a few papers providing more "immediate" evidence from new
issues and payouts. This work has established important influences of CEO overconfidence,
gain-loss thinking, and personal backgrounds, and has also led the way toward a comprehensive
behavioral approach that considers CEO-CFO joint decision-making.

Debt-Equity Mix and Debt Maturity:                    As discussed in the context of investment-cash flow
sensitivity, overconfidence implies that CEOs perceive their firms to be undervalued by the market
and, as a result, prefer internal resources to accessing the external capital market. At the root of
this preference is the disagreement between CEO and financiers (banks, investors) about the future
stream of cash flows the firm will generate, and thus the appropriate cost of financing. Consistent
with this, Malmendier et al. (2011) find higher "debt conservatism" among overconfident CEOs,
defined as the amount of additional debt firms can issue before tax benefits diminish (Graham 2000).
In other words, overconfident CEOs display a significant aversion to debt financing and "leave
money on the table" in terms of forgoing the tax benefits of debt. At the same time, they are even
more averse to stock financing than debt financing. Conditional on accessing external financing,
overconfident CEOs lean toward debt, since their disagreement with investors about the cost of
financing is even larger for equity financing. As a result, their leverage ratio is 15% higher relative
to the mean, even though the absolute amount of debt is already low. CEO overconfidence thus
emerges as an explanation for the long-standing puzzle of pecking order preferences in corporate
finance, that is, internal       debt     equity financing.
    A series of papers complements these insights with corroborating evidence in the contexts of
entrepreneurship (Landier and Thesmar 2008) and of the banking sector (Ho et al. 2016; Ma
2018).

      In the context of entrepreneurship, Landier and Thesmar (2008) present a theoretical model of entrepreneurs who
have to secure financing for a venture, but can influence the riskiness of their venture at later stages. The main prediction
is that overoptimistic entrepreneurs will obtain short-term debt financing because this allows investors to gain control
of the firm in case of a bad signal (after which the optimist would still choose too much risk). Using a large data set

                                                            24
    Experience effects also affect CEOs' financial policy choices. The notion of experience effects,
as first coined by Malmendier and Nagel (2011), captures the phenomenon that personal lifetime
experiences tend to have long-lasting effects on individual beliefs and risky choices in the same
domains. Malmendier et al. (2011) provide evidence that CEOs who grew up during the Great
Depression appear more averse to assuming debt throughout their careers. Related research shows
that CEOs hold less debt if they have previously experienced distress (Dittmar and Duchin 2015) or
if they started their career during a recession (Schoar and Zuo 2017). Malmendier et al. (2011) also
associate military experience with more aggressive financial policies and higher leverage. They
show that the latter results are driven by CEOs who were veterans of World War II (but not of
the Vietnam or Korean wars), suggesting that actual combat and war experience (e.g., winning or
losing war), and whether future CEOs were drafted or self-selected into the military play a role. In
fact, the most recent research on experience effects reveals that the direction of experience-based
learning--whether it generates positive or negative attitudes--depends on how an individual has
emotionally lived through those experiences (emotional-tagging hypothesis; see Laudenbach et al.
2019a, 2019b).
    Additionally, personal preferences and career backgrounds appear to influence leverage choices.
As discussed in the section `CEO Selection: Who Becomes a CEO?,' Cronqvist et al. (2012) show
that CEOs' leverage decisions align with those in their personal life (loan-to-value ratio for primary
homes). In addition, Custódio and Metzger (2014) find that CEOs with a background in finance
are more sympathetic to debt. They use exogenous shocks to credit markets and CEO turnovers to
establish a causal effect.

    Related work cautions against focusing solely on the CEO in the context of (biased) financing
decisions, in favor of also considering the CFO. While CEOs' decision-making delegation is



on French entrepreneurs, they provide empirical support for their model: There is a significant positive association
between entrepreneurs overestimating their firm's growth and using short-term debt. In the context of the banking
sector, Ho et al. (2016) provide evidence that precrisis, overconfident bank CEOs increased leverage more than their
peers, leaving their banks more vulnerable to negative shocks, and leading to worse performance during the crisis (e.g.,
more loan defaults and greater likelihood of failure during the crisis). Ma (2018) provides complementary findings that
overconfident CEOs increased their exposure to real estate loans 20 pp more than other CEOs, and performed worse
during the crisis, by 15 pp in stock returns between 2007 and 2009.
      This might explain differences between the estimated increase in aggressiveness as the result of military experience
here and the estimated decrease in Benmelech and Frydman (2015), as discussed in the context of investment decisions.

                                                           25
oftentimes limited, it is still stronger in the realm of financing and capital structure decisions than,
say, M&A decisions. Graham et al. (2015) report survey results for 950 US CEOs and 525 US
CFOs, who were asked to rate their level of involvement on a scale of 1 (high) to 7 (low).                CEOs'
modal rating is 4 for capital-structure decisions, while it is 2 for M&A decisions. In contrast, about
25% of CFOs state that they make capital structure decisions in relative isolation, compared to only
about 10% in M&A decisions.
    Consistent with these decision weights, Malmendier et al. (2018) confirm that indeed, the
biases of the CFO, rather than the CEO, dominate financing outcomes: When regressing leverage
on indicators for both CEO and CFO overconfidence, they consistently find that the latter bias
dominates. They also show that overconfident CEOs are more likely to appoint like-minded CFOs,
intensifying the possibility of misattributing corporate decisions. In light of this recent evidence,
further research on the relative importance of different decision-makers and their biases on corporate
outcomes is warranted, also in the context of investment decisions.

Debt and Equity Issues and Corporate Payouts:               With regard to new issues, Malmendier et al.
(2011) show that, conditional on accessing external financing, overconfident CEOs are 11 percent-
age points less likely to issue equity. Relatedly, overconfident CEOs are more likely to address
their firm's financing deficit with debt rather than equity.          Both findings are consistent with the
predicted impact of overconfidence on financing decisions: As overconfident managers perceive
their company to be undervalued by the market, they prefer to avoid any external financing--debt
and equity--but if they do have use external funds, they prefer debt, as the difference in opinion
affects the cost of financing less than in the case of equity (where differences in all states of the
world matter). Malmendier et al. (2018) extend this evidence to CFOs, and argue that CFO biases
outweigh CEO biases also when it comes to new issue decisions.
    Other research explores the role of prospect theory in explaining the pricing of initial public
offerings (IPOs). A long-standing empirical puzzle in IPOs has been the substantial underpricing.


      The survey was conducted in February 2006 and sent to more than 10,000 CEOs and 9,000 CFOs, for a response
rate of slightly below 10%.
      If one accepts gender as a proxy for overconfidence, Huang and Kisgen (2013) provide consistent results.
Comparing male-female with male-male CEO transitions, they find that female CEOs issue significantly less debt. Of
course, females and males differ in many ways, and women who rise to the top are highly selected.

                                                       26
Typically, the first-day return is positive, implying that investor demand would have justified a higher
offer price and that the issuer (i.e., the firm offering the shares) "left money on the table." Loughran
and Ritter (2002) argue that, with prospect-theory preferences, pre-IPO owners may nonetheless
be satisfied as they do not derive utility from their absolute wealth, but apply a concave function to
gains and a convex function to losses. Loughran and Ritter (2002) document that, empirically, IPOs
with more money left on the table tend to be those in which the IPO price anticipated in the initial
prospectus was substantially lower than the final offer price. If pre-IPO owners use the prospectus
price as their reference point, the wealth gain they experience on the shares that they retain in the
IPO can easily exceed the loss from money left on the table, leading to a perceived net gain under
prospect-theoretical integration of gain and loss components.

    With regard to corporate payouts, Chen and Wang (2012) document that firms frequently engage
in substantial repurchases even when financially constrained, leading to low cash reserves, reduced
investment, and increased distress risk. They hypothesize that overconfidence triggers managers to
buy back stock at prices that are seemingly "too low."
    One open question is how overconfident CEOs trade off "cheap" repurchases with investments
whose net present value (NPV) they overestimate. Given the strong evidence that overconfident
CEOs prefer to use cash for investments, a natural question is why overconfident CEOs would
use internal resources for stock repurchases rather than investments. A promising avenue for
future research is to jointly look at the different possible uses of internal funds when managers are
overconfident or display other biases. A first step in this direction is the analysis of payout and
investment decisions in Banerjee et al. (2015). They find that, after improvements in corporate
governance (Sarbanes-Oxley Act, see also the discussion in the section `CEO Survival: When Are
CEOs Dismissed?'), overconfident CEOs reduce investment and use the freed-up cash flow to raise
dividends.


      Following this logic, Ljungqvist and Wilhelm (2005) estimate the net perceived gain of prospect-theory issuers
from their IPO, and show that firms are less likely to switch underwriters in secondary offerings when the net perceived
gain is positive. Loughran and McDonald (2013) argue that underwriters might even be able to capitalize on prospect-
theory-minded issuers. When an issuer is unsure about firm value as gauged by the level of uncertain language in
their prospectus, the underwriter can propose a low-balled initial offer price in the prospectus--thus manipulating the
issuer's reference point--and later only partially revise the final offer price upward. This increases the likelihood that
investor demand in the IPO will be high and the issuer will be satisfied in the IPO, as measured by pre-IPO owners
experiencing a net gain.

                                                           27
Policy Implications and Managerial Advice

What systematic actions can organizations take to counteract biased decision-making, to the extent
that these decisions reduce shareholder value?                Despite the abundance of evidence on CEO
biases, surprisingly little is known about "corporate repairs." The section `CEO Survival: When
Are CEOs Dismissed?' will discuss the (limited) evidence on what corporate governance can look
like with biased managers. Beyond this, we know little about "best practices" and the pragmatic
procedures firms might implement to curb managerial biases. There are two exceptions: First, Heath
et al. (1998) conceptually discuss potential approaches such as corrective versus preventative, and
domain-specific versus domain-general repairs. And, second, Camerer and Malmendier (2007)
suggest a simple three-step procedure that emphasizes the importance of randomized controlled
trial (RCT) "thinking." They suggest that firms (a) need to devote time to identify a common
mistake that their managers or other employees make in business-relevant decisions, (b) identify
a potential repair, whether via organizational redesign, procedural changes, or different hiring
practices, and (c) test its effectiveness, ideally in a randomized fashion.
    Take overconfidence as an example. Given that overconfidence can be particularly harmful in
firms with abundant cash flows (i.e., those without "correctives" from the market), one potential
procedural repair might be to require managers to "have their project's five most critical assumptions
evaluated for plausibility by two uninvolved managers," at least for projects without interaction
with external financiers. Or, taking social ties as another example, a procedural repair might be to
"implement a two-stage process for project funding requests, and remove any project-identifying
information from spreadsheet in first round."
    Whether these and other corporate repairs work in practice is an empirical question; and while
this discussion thus remains speculative, it underscores the potential of corporate repairs, both in
research and for organizational outcomes.




      As discussed in the context of CEO selection, value destruction is often implicitly assumed but not necessarily
the case, as biases may help to overcome, for example, conservatism and risk aversion.

                                                         28
CEO Survival: When Are CEOs Dismissed?
In light of the far-reaching effects of CEO biases on corporate policies, at least three interrelated
questions arise: First, do boards watch out for CEOs' biases, and if so, (how) do they detect them?
Second, does corporate governance "step in" and adjust monitoring mechanisms, including CEO
compensation and dismissal? And third, what if board members are biased themselves? These
questions are at the core of this section (cf. Figure 6). Research on the interplay of CEOs, biases,
and governance is slightly less developed, and the discussion in this section more tentative.



                                Figure 6: CEO Monitoring

             External                                                      Internal
       Corporate Governance                                          Corporate Governance

                                    Are board members biased?          Board of Directors


                                               Biases

             Monitoring             Are board members aware                   Monitoring
                                   of CEOs' biases? Are moni-                 Compensation
                                   toring mechanisms adjusted?                Dismissal


                                                CEO




Corporate Governance With Biased Managers:            A key tool with which to align the interests of
managers and shareholders is compensation. Executive compensation is known to have a large
manager-specific component (Graham et al. 2012), which could reflect variation in "CEO ability,"
but also variation in CEO biases and other CEO characteristics, with corporate monitors tailoring
incentives correspondingly. For example, compensation seems to be tailored to individual risk
tolerance. Graham et al. (2013) report that 53% of surveyed CEOs with low risk aversion receive

                                                 29
above-mean performance-based compensation, compared to 35% of the highly risk averse CEOs.
Similarly, only 42% of CEOs who exhibit high impatience receive above-mean contingent pay,
relative to 56% among patient CEOs.
    Turning to behavioral components, research has also directly analyzed optimal contract design
when managers are biased, in particular when they are overconfident or loss averse. Gervais et al.
(2011) consider the compensation contract for a risk averse manager who may be overconfident. The
authors show that the optimal compensation in good states of the world is lower when contracting
with moderately overconfident relative to rational managers. Intuitively, overconfidence reduces
the threshold of undertaking risky investment projects after a good signal. If the manager is strongly
overconfident (and not too risk averse), the firm offers instead highly convex pay since the manager
puts excess probability on the good payoff state.
    The empirical evidence is mixed. Humphery-Jenner et al. (2016) report empirical findings
that overconfident CEOs are paid a higher fraction of compensation as contingent pay. On the
surface, this finding might seem to back the second prediction of Gervais et al. (2011), which
they dub the "exploitation hypothesis." However, as pointed out by Malmendier (2018), there
is a disconnect between model and empirics: The model captures overconfidence about signal
precision, whereas the empirical analysis uses the Longholder measure of overconfidence about
mean expected payoffs.         In fact, Otto (2014), who also uses a Longholder-based measure, reports
lower option and lower total compensation if CEOs are overconfident. He provides a model that
delivers these predictions. Here, overconfident (optimistic) managers overestimate the success
probability of the project for which they are hired. Thus, while there is some promising theoretical
and empirical work linking overconfidence to governance and compensation responses, future
research is warranted to sharpen the findings.
    Dittmann et al. (2010) analyze optimal compensation contracts in the presence of prospect-
theory-type preferences and loss aversion. They calibrate their model to the compensation data of
595 US CEOs and find that--as long as managers are assumed to have relatively low reference


      The Longholder measure was introduced in Malmendier and Tate (2005), and refers to CEOs who hold executive
stock options all the way until the year of expiration. HolderXY refers to CEOs with exercisable stock options that are
at least XY % in the money after the vesting period. Also, Humphery-Jenner et al. (2016) find evidence for higher pay
convexity across different levels of overconfidence (e.g., Holder30, Holder67, Holder100), in contrast to the prediction
in Gervais et al. (2011) that pay structure depends on the degree of overconfidence.

                                                          30
wages--the loss-aversion model matches the data moments much better than a model in which
managers are risk averse with constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) utility. Their calibration
not only suggests that managers are loss averse with regard to pay and that firms offer contracts
that match these preferences, but also provides guidance on the long-standing question of what
reference points people have. To the extent that one can draw inferences from the joint hypotheses
tested, the observed compensation patterns suggest a reference point closer to the base pay than the
market value of total compensation.

   Research that explores how governance mechanisms other than compensation can curb adverse
effects of managerial biases is still in its infancy. One exception is Banerjee et al. (2015), in which
the authors analyze the impact of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act on the corporate policies of overconfident
CEOs. The reform, passed in 2002 in response to a series of accounting scandals, aimed to elevate
accounting standards and increase board independence and governance stringency. Post-enactment,
overconfident CEOs reduce investment-cash flow sensitivities and show improved acquisition per-
formance, among other things. The documented effects are not present among firms who voluntarily
complied with the board-independence requirements of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act before its passage,
which corroborates the paper's identification. The authors conclude that corporate governance can
mediate the relationship between overconfidence and corporate performance.

CEO Turnover:       CEO biases do not necessarily imply a higher rate of dismissal. This depends
on several factors. First, it depends on whether a bias is value-destroying or value-enhancing (e.g.,
since it might counteract risk aversion), as discussed in the section `CEO Selection: Who Becomes
a CEO?.' Second, it depends on whether the board appointed a biased CEO deliberately or not,
and whether frictions or biases of the board members themselves are at play. Finally, it depends on
the firm's governance.

   Starting from the assumption of unbiased, value-maximizing boards, research that looks at how
such boards evaluate the performance of biased CEOs and decide on their dismissal is scarce. One
exception is Campbell et al. (2011), in which the authors theoretically and empirically study CEO
overconfidence and forced turnover. Their model predicts an inversely U-shaped relation between
overconfidence and forced CEO turnover as, similar to the settings in Goel and Thakor (2008) and
Gervais et al. (2011), overconfidence counteracts risk aversion. This prediction is supported in

                                                  31
the data. Both in nonparametric survival plots and hazard models, CEOs with moderate levels
of overconfidence have lower dismissal probabilities than those with low and high degrees of
confidence.

    If board members are biased, they might misjudge a CEO's performance and make suboptimal
retention and dismissal decisions, independently of whether the CEO is biased or not. Such research
is limited to, at best, indirect proxies, and this topic remains a promising avenue for future research.
    There is an older literature analyzing how board size affects the effectiveness of board monitoring
(see, e.g., Yermack 1996). This literature has motivated theory work on "conformity" versus
"speaking up," discussed toward the end of this section. Other general board characteristics may
also at least indirectly relate to variation in behavioral biases. For example, Adams and Ferreira
(2009) find that CEO firing probabilities increase by 1.5 times as much for 40%-female boards
relative to all-male boards after stock performance deteriorates by one standard deviation (15.23 vs.
9.87 percentage points). Lee et al. (2014) report a lower likelihood of CEO turnover after bad stock
performance when there is greater alignment in political beliefs between the CEO and monitors.
    Eisfeldt and Kuhnen (2013) and Jenter and Kanaan (2015) provide new empirical evidence that
CEO turnover is related to overall industry shocks; that is, factors beyond the CEO's control. In
particular, Jenter and Kanaan (2015) raise the possibility of biased judgment by boards (relative
thinking), as the observed patterns are consistent with boards misattributing bad performance to
CEOs rather than industry conditions. While a definitive assessment of the relative importance
of attribution bias and other, rational mechanisms--such as bad times being more revealing about
CEO ability--is beyond the scope of their paper, research on the interplay of biases, incentives,
and performance evaluation is a promising avenue to pursue.
    On the theory side, some papers have made progress on biased boards and their effects on
firms and CEOs. Malenko (2013) introduces a model of communication and decision-making
in corporate boards and shows that directors' conformity biases can increase the effectiveness of
communication among directors. In the model, boards operate in two steps. First, directors can


       Note, however, that the point estimate on the main effect of political alignment is negative and similar in magnitude
to the other coefficients of interest (though it is insignificant). In addition, a direct interpretation of interaction terms is
in fact invalid in their setting as they estimate a nonlinear (probit) model (see Ai and Norton (2003), and see Aggarwal
et al. (2011) for an example of a proper treatment in a finance context).

                                                              32
incur a cost and express their opinion on a given issue; second, they vote. When pressure for
conformity at the voting stage is high, directors have higher incentives to discuss their opinions in
the first stage in an attempt to convince others of their opinion.
   Donaldson et al. (2020) directly link board members' biases to CEO retention decisions. They
develop a model in which there can be "deadlock on the board"--directors deciding to retain a
CEO they agree is bad. Directors differ in their preferences over the firm's policies; the authors
refer to this as a director's "bias" and suggest that it should be interpreted as either private benefits
or misspecified beliefs. Deadlock happens when some directors prefer to retain a weak CEO
today because this increases the likelihood that they can appoint a CEO with more similar beliefs
tomorrow. (While the model features a rational CEO, a biased incumbent or candidate CEO would
be a natural extension to study, potentially exacerbating the documented inefficiencies.) Testing
these theoretical predictions in the data (especially in the era of big data), as well as digging deeper
into the relation between CEO biases and governance responses, are natural opportunities for future
research.


Policy Implications and Managerial Advice

Much of this section's discussion on optimal corporate governance with biased CEOs is linked
to policy implications. There are at least two broader takeaways. First, traditional governance
mechanisms to align managerial and shareholders' incentives may be largely ineffective in terms
of curbing certain CEO biases, or may even exacerbate biased decision-making. A key example
is option-based compensation for overconfident CEOs. These managers are already (highly!)
motivated to pursue projects and acquisitions that they perceive to be value-maximizing. The
problem is that their perception is wrong, not that the managers' motivation is low. Other tools,
such as the strategic use of debt overhang or procedural changes, are more promising. Second,
board members should account for their own potential biases and mistakes in their judgment and
evaluation of CEO performance, such as attributional errors and hindsight bias. Corporate repairs
and training need to include those who monitor managers, in addition to managers themselves.




                                                   33
Conclusion
Since the mid-to-late 2000s, the field of behavioral corporate finance has provided overwhelming
evidence that managers are subject to biases that affect corporate outcomes in numerous ways, and do
so in each phase in the life cycle of a CEO career. The theoretical and empirical evidence pinpoints
the shortcomings of the traditional arguments (selection, learning, and market discipline) for why
CEOs are rational decision-makers. Initially, finance researchers only embraced the possibility that
individual investors might be subject to psychological biases. By documenting biased decision-
making even on the part of CEOs and other top-level managers, behavioral corporate finance has
magnified the importance and implications of psychological elements in finance contexts.
   Despite these important advances, the field of behavioral corporate finance is still young, and
many important questions remain unanswered. Three sets of questions merit emphasis:
   First, with regard to CEO selection, open questions include: What role can "testing" for biases
of CEO candidates play in reducing biased decision-making at the top? How do biases correlate
with other, potentially performance-enhancing personality traits and skills? Do employers and
selection committees value candidate characteristics differently at different stages of the selection
process? Do they misvalue certain attributes?
   Second, with regard to CEO decision-making, questions for future research include: Is it
possible to derive new testable predictions for certain biases when jointly considering all potential
uses of funds; that is, investment, accumulation of cash reserves, and payouts to shareholders?
Which other managerial biases, especially in the realm of nonstandard preferences and heuristics,
affect corporate outcomes? What is the relative importance of different C-suite decision-makers,
and their biases, across corporate policies? What could effective corporate repairs look like?
   Third, with regard to CEO dismissal: Which governance structures (including, but not limited
to, CEO compensation) are optimal when CEOs are subject to biases? How do board members'
biases affect firms and corporate governance effectiveness?
   Encompassing many of these questions, a key challenge for the field is to come up with a
comprehensive "behavioral approach," which recognizes that all parties involved are possibly
subject to biases.



                                                 34
Further Reading
 Banerjee, S., M. Humphery-Jenner, and V. Nanda (2015). Restraining overconfident CEOs through
    improved governance: Evidence from the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. The Review of Financial Studies
    28(10), 2812-2858.
 Goel, A. M. and A. V. Thakor (2008). Overconfidence, CEO selection, and corporate governance. The
    Journal of Finance 63(6), 2737-2784.
 Guenzel, M. (2020). In Too Deep: The Effect of Sunk Costs on Corporate Investment. University of
    Pennsylvania Working Paper.
 Jenter, D. and F. Kanaan (2015). CEO turnover and relative performance evaluation. The Journal of
     Finance 70(5), 2155-2184.
 Kaplan S. N. and M. Sorensen (2019). Are CEOs Different? Columbia Business School Research Paper
    No. 16-27.
 Krüger, P., A. Landier, and D. Thesmar (2015). The WACC fallacy: The real effects of using a unique
    discount rate. The Journal of Finance 70(3), 1253-1285.
 Malmendier, U. (2019). Behavioral Corporate Finance. In D. Bernheim, S. DellaVigna, and D. Laibson
    (Eds.), Handbook of Behavioral Economics, Volume 1. Elsevier.
 Malmendier, U., G. Tate, and J. Yan (2011). Overconfidence and Early-Life Experiences: The Effect of
    Managerial Traits on Corporate Financial Policies. The Journal of Finance 66(5), 1687-1733.


References
 Adams, R. B. and D. Ferreira (2009). Women in the boardroom and their impact on governance and
    performance. Journal of Financial Economics 94(2), 291­309.
 Aggarwal, R., I. Erel, M. Ferreira, and P. Matos (2011). Does governance travel around the world?
    Evidence from institutional investors. Journal of Financial Economics 100(1), 154­181.
 Ai, C. and E. C. Norton (2003). Interaction terms in logit and probit models. Economics Letters 80(1),
     123­129.
 Almeida, H., M. Campello, B. Laranjeira, and S. Weisbenner (2012). Corporate Debt Maturity and the
    Real Effects of the 2007 Credit Crisis. Critical Finance Review 1, 3­58.
 Baker, M., X. Pan, and J. Wurgler (2012). The effect of reference point prices on mergers and acquisitions.
    Journal of Financial Economics 106(1), 49­71.
 Baker, M., J. C. Stein, and J. Wurgler (2003). When does the market matter? Stock prices and the
    investment of equity-dependent firms. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(3), 969­1005.
 Baker, M. and J. Wurgler (2000). The equity share in new issues and aggregate stock returns. The Journal
    of Finance 55(5), 2219­2257.
 Banerjee, S., M. Humphery-Jenner, and V. Nanda (2015). Restraining overconfident CEOs through im-
    proved governance: Evidence from the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. The Review of Financial Studies 28(10),
    2812­2858.
 Barber, B. M. and T. Odean (2000). Trading is hazardous to your wealth: The common stock investment
    performance of individual investors. The Journal of Finance 55(2), 773­806.

                                                   35
Benmelech, E. and C. Frydman (2015). Military CEOs. Journal of Financial Economics 117 (1), 43­59.
Benson, A., D. Li, and K. Shue (2019). Promotions and the peter principle. The Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 134(4), 2085­2134.
Benson, D. and R. H. Ziedonis (2010). Corporate venture capital and the returns to acquiring portfolio
   companies. Journal of Financial Economics 98(3), 478­499.
Berk, J. B. and P. M. DeMarzo (2017). Corporate Finance (4th edition). Pearson Education.
Bias, D. and T. Schmid (2019). Do Outside Directorships Influence CEO Decision Making? Evidence
    from Labor Strikes. SSRN Working Paper No. 2888378.
Bolton, P., M. K. Brunnermeier, and L. Veldkamp (2013). Leadership, coordination, and corporate culture.
    Review of Economic Studies 80(2), 512­537.
Camerer, C. and U. Malmendier (2007). Behavioral Economics of Organizations. In P. Diamond and
   Vartiainen (Eds.), Behavioral Economics and Its Applications, 235­290. Princeton University Press.
Campbell, T. C., M. Gallmeyer, S. A. Johnson, J. Rutherford, and B. W. Stanley (2011). CEO optimism
   and forced turnover. Journal of Financial Economics 101(3), 695­712.
Chen, S.-S. and Y. Wang (2012). Financial constraints and share repurchases. Journal of Financial
   Economics 105(2), 311­331.
Cronqvist, H., A. K. Makha, and S. E. Yonker (2012). Behavioral consistency in corporate finance: CEO
   personal and corporate leverage. Journal of Financial Economics 103(1), 20­40.
Custódio, C. and D. Metzger (2014). Financial expert CEOs: CEO's work experience and firm's financial
   policies. Journal of Financial Economics 114(1), 125­154.
Dessaint, O. and A. Matray (2017). Do managers overreact to salient risks? Evidence from hurricane
   strikes. Journal of Financial Economics 126(1), 97­121.
Dittmann, I., E. Maug, and O. Spalt (2010). Sticks or carrots? Optimal CEO compensation when managers
    are loss averse. The Journal of Finance 65(6), 2015­2050.
Dittmar, A. and R. Duchin (2015). Looking in the rearview mirror: the effect of managers' professional
    experience on corporate financial policy. The Review of Financial Studies 29(3), 565­602.
Donaldson, J. R., N. Malenko, and G. Piacentino (2020). Deadlock on the Board. The Review of Financial
   Studies, Forthcoming.
Duchin, R., M. Simutin, and D. Sosyura (2020). The Origins and Real Effects of the Gender Gap:
   Evidence from CEOs' Formative Years. The Review of Financial Studies, Forthcoming.
Duchin, R. and D. Sosyura (2013). Divisional managers and internal capital markets. The Journal of
   Finance 68(2), 387­429.
Eisfeldt, A. L. and C. M. Kuhnen (2013). CEO turnover in a competitive assignment framework. Journal
    of Financial Economics 109(2), 351­372.
El-Khatib, R., K. Fogel, and T. Jandik (2015). CEO network centrality and merger performance. Journal
    of Financial Economics 116(2), 349­382.
Faulkender, M. and R. Wang (2006). Corporate financial policy and the value of cash. The Journal of
    Finance 61(4), 1957­1990.
Fracassi, C. and G. Tate (2012). External networking and internal firm governance. The Journal of
    Finance 67 (1), 153­194.



                                                 36
Gervais, S., J. B. Heaton, and T. Odean (2011). Overconfidence, compensation contracts, and capital
   budgeting. The Journal of Finance 66(5), 1735­1777.
Giat, Y., S. T. Hackman, and A. Subramanian (2009). Investment under uncertainty, heterogeneous beliefs,
    and agency conflicts. The Review of Financial Studies 23(4), 1360­1404.
Glaser, M., F. Lopez-De-Silanes, and Z. Sautner (2013). Opening the black box: Internal capital markets
   and managerial power. The Journal of Finance 68(4), 1577­1631.
Goel, A. M. and A. V. Thakor (2008). Overconfidence, CEO selection, and corporate governance. The
   Journal of Finance 63(6), 2737­2784.
Goel, A. M. and A. V. Thakor (2009). Do envious CEOs cause merger waves? The Review of Financial
   Studies 23(2), 487­517.
Gompers, P. A., V. Mukharlyamov, and Y. Xuan (2016). The cost of friendship. Journal of Financial
  Economics 119(3), 626­644.
Graham, J. R. (2000). How big are the tax benefits of debt? The Journal of Finance 55(5), 1901­1941.
Graham, J. R. and C. R. Harvey (2001). The theory and practice of corporate finance: Evidence from the
   field. Journal of Financial Economics 60(2-3), 187­243.
Graham, J. R., C. R. Harvey, and M. Puri (2013). Managerial attitudes and corporate actions. Journal of
   Financial Economics 109(1), 103­121.
Graham, J. R., C. R. Harvey, and M. Puri (2015). Capital allocation and delegation of decision-making
   authority within firms. Journal of Financial Economics 115(3), 449­470.
Graham, J. R., S. Li, and J. Qiu (2012). Managerial attributes and executive compensation. The Review
   of Financial Studies 25(1), 144­186.
Greenwood, R. and S. G. Hanson (2014). Waves in ship prices and investment. The Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 130(1), 55­109.
Grenadier, S. R. and N. Wang (2005). Investment timing, agency, and information. Journal of Financial
   Economics 75(3), 493­533.
Guenzel, M. (2020). In Too Deep: The Effect of Sunk Costs on Corporate Investment. University of
   Pennsylvania Working Paper.
Heath, C., R. P. Larrick, and J. Klayman (1998). Cognitive repairs: How organizational practices can
   compensate for individual shortcomings. In Review of Organizational Behavior. Citeseer.
Hilary, G. and K. W. Hui (2009). Does religion matter in corporate decision making in America? Journal
    of Financial Economics 93(3), 455­473.
Hirshleifer, D., A. Low, and S. H. Teoh (2012). Are overconfident CEOs better innovators? The Journal
    of Finance 67 (4), 1457­1498.
Ho, P.-H., C.-W. Huang, C.-Y. Lin, and J.-F. Yen (2016). CEO overconfidence and financial crisis:
   Evidence from bank lending and leverage. Journal of Financial Economics 120(1), 194­209.
Huang, J. and D. J. Kisgen (2013). Gender and corporate finance: Are male executives overconfident
   relative to female executives? Journal of Financial Economics 108(3), 822­839.
Humphery-Jenner, M., L. L. Lisic, V. Nanda, and S. D. Silveri (2016). Executive overconfidence and
  compensation structure. Journal of Financial Economics 119(3), 533­558.
Ishii, J. and Y. Xuan (2014). Acquirer-target social ties and merger outcomes. Journal of Financial
    Economics 112(3), 344­363.


                                                 37
Jenter, D. and F. Kanaan (2015). CEO turnover and relative performance evaluation. The Journal of
    Finance 70(5), 2155­2184.
Kaplan, S. N., M. M. Klebanov, and M. Sorensen (2012). Which CEO characteristics and abilities matter?
   The Journal of Finance 67 (3), 973­1007.
Kaplan, S. N. and M. Sorensen (2019). Are CEOs Different? Columbia Business School Research Paper
   No. 16-27 .
Krüger, P., A. Landier, and D. Thesmar (2015). The WACC fallacy: The real effects of using a unique
   discount rate. The Journal of Finance 70(3), 1253­1285.
Laibson, D. (1997). Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(2),
    443­478.
Lamont, O. A. and R. H. Thaler (2003). Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing in tech stock
   carve-outs. Journal of Political Economy 111(2), 227­268.
Landier, A. and D. Thesmar (2008). Financial contracting with optimistic entrepreneurs. The Review of
   Financial Studies 22(1), 117­150.
Langer, E. J. and J. Roth (1975). Heads I win, tails it's chance: The illusion of control as a function of the
   sequence of outcomes in a purely chance task. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 32(6),
   951.
Laudenbach, C., U. Malmendier, and A. Niessen-Ruenzi (2019a). Emotional tagging and belief formation:
   The long-lasting effects of experiencing communism. In AEA Papers and Proceedings, Volume 109,
   pp. 567­71.
Laudenbach, C., U. Malmendier, and A. Niessen-Ruenzi (2019b). The Long-lasting Effects of Experienc-
   ing Communism on Attitudes towards Financial Markets. SSRN Working Paper No. 3638044.
Lee, J., K. J. Lee, and N. J. Nagarajan (2014). Birds of a feather: Value implications of political alignment
   between top management and directors. Journal of Financial Economics 112(2), 232­250.
Lerner, J. and U. Malmendier (2013). With a little help from my (random) friends: Success and failure in
   post-business school entrepreneurship. The Review of Financial Studies 26(10), 2411­2452.
Ljungqvist, A. and W. J. Wilhelm (2005). Does prospect theory explain IPO market behavior? The
   Journal of Finance 60(4), 1759­1790.
Loughran, T. and B. McDonald (2013). IPO first-day returns, offer price revisions, volatility, and form
   S-1 language. Journal of Financial Economics 109(2), 307­326.
Loughran, T. and J. R. Ritter (2002). Why don't issuers get upset about leaving money on the table in
   IPOs? The Review of Financial Studies 15(2), 413­444.
Loughran, T. and A. M. Vh (1997). Do long-term shareholders benefit from corporate acquisitions? The
   Journal of Finance 52(5), 1765­1790.
Ma, Y. (2018). Bank CEO optimism and the financial crisis. SSRN Working Paper No. 2392683.
Ma, Y., D. A. Sraer, D. Thesmar, and T. Ropele (2020). A Quantitative Analysis of Distortions in
   Managerial Forecasts. NBER Working Paper No. 26830.
Malenko, N. (2013). Communication and decision-making in corporate boards. The Review of Financial
   Studies 27 (5), 1486­1532.
Malmendier, U. (2018). Behavioral Corporate Finance. In D. Bernheim, S. DellaVigna, and D. Laibson
   (Eds.), Handbook of Behavioral Economics, Volume 1. Elsevier.


                                                   38
Malmendier, U., E. Moretti, and F. S. Peters (2018). Winning by Losing: Evidence on the Long-Run
   Effects of Mergers. The Review of Financial Studies 31(8), 3212­3264.
Malmendier, U. and S. Nagel (2011). Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic Experiences Affect Risk-
   Taking? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(1), 373­416.
Malmendier, U., V. Pezone, and H. Zheng (2018). Managerial Duties and Managerial Biases. CEPR
   Discussion Paper No. DP14929.
Malmendier, U. and G. Tate (2005). CEO overconfidence and corporate investment. The Journal of
   Finance 60(6), 2661­2700.
Malmendier, U. and G. Tate (2008). Who makes acquisitions? CEO overconfidence and the market's
   reaction. Journal of Financial Economics 89(1), 20­43.
Malmendier, U. and G. Tate (2015). Behavioral CEOs: The Role of Managerial Overconfidence. Journal
   of Economic Perspectives 29(4), 37­60.
Malmendier, U., G. Tate, and J. Yan (2011). Overconfidence and Early-Life Experiences: The Effect of
   Managerial Traits on Corporate Financial Policies. The Journal of Finance 66(5), 1687­1733.
Miller, D. T. and M. Ross (1975). Self-serving biases in the attribution of causality: Fact or fiction?
    Psychological Bulletin 82(2), 213.
Otto, C. A. (2014). CEO optimism and incentive compensation. Journal of Financial Economics 114(2),
    366­404.
Rau, P. R. and T. Vermaelen (1998). Glamour, value and the post-acquisition performance of acquiring
   firms. Journal of Financial Economics 49(2), 223­253.
Roll, R. (1986). The hubris hypothesis of corporate takeovers. Journal of Business 59, 197­216.
Savor, P. G. and Q. Lu (2009). Do stock mergers create value for acquirers? The Journal of Finance 64(3),
   1061­1097.
Schmidt, B. (2015). Costs and benefits of friendly boards during mergers and acquisitions. Journal of
   Financial Economics 117 (2), 424­447.
Schneider, C. and O. Spalt (2016). Conglomerate Investment, Skewness, and the CEO Long-Shot Bias.
   The Journal of Finance 71(2), 635­672.
Schoar, A. and L. Zuo (2017). Shaped by booms and busts: How the economy impacts CEO careers and
   management styles. The Review of Financial Studies 30(5), 1425­1456.
Shue, K. (2013). Executive networks and firm policies: Evidence from the random assignment of MBA
   peers. The Review of Financial Studies 26(6), 1401­1442.
Thaler, R. (1980). Toward a positive theory of consumer choice. Journal of Economic Behavior &
   Organization 1(1), 39­60.
Thaler, R. H. and S. Benartzi (2004). Save more tomorrowTM: Using behavioral economics to increase
   employee saving. Journal of Political Economy 112(S1), S164­S187.
Weinstein, N. D. (1980). Unrealistic optimism about future life events. Journal of Personality and Social
   Psychology 39(5), 806­820.
Xuan, Y. (2009). Empire-building or bridge-building? Evidence from new CEOs' internal capital alloca-
   tion decisions. The Review of Financial Studies 22(12), 4919­4948.
Yermack, D. (1996). Higher market valuation of companies with a small board of directors. Journal of
   Financial Economics 40(2), 185­211.


                                                 39
