                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




FILLING A NICHE? THE MAIZE PRODUCTIVITY IMPACTS OF ADAPTIVE BREEDING
                  BY A LOCAL SEED COMPANY IN KENYA

                                        Samuel S. Bird
                                       Michael R. Carter
                                       Travis J. Lybbert
                                        Mary Mathenge
                                        Timothy Njagi
                                       Emilia Tjernström

                                      Working Paper 27636
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27636


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                          August 2020, Revised November 2020




This study was commissioned by Acumen, a non-profit impact investment firm, and made
possible through the generous support of Acumen and the American people through the United
States Agency for International Development Cooperative Agreement No. AID-OAA-
L-12-00001 with the BASIS Feed the Future Innovation Lab. We also thank the Agricultural
Technology Adoption Initiative (ATAI) administered by JPAL at MIT and the Bill and Melinda
Gates Foundation for funding. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Samuel S. Bird, Michael R. Carter, Travis J. Lybbert, Mary Mathenge, Timothy Njagi,
and Emilia Tjernström. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Filling a Niche? The Maize Productivity Impacts of Adaptive Breeding by a Local Seed Company
in Kenya
Samuel S. Bird, Michael R. Carter, Travis J. Lybbert, Mary Mathenge, Timothy Njagi, and
Emilia Tjernström
NBER Working Paper No. 27636
August 2020, Revised November 2020
JEL No. O13,O36,Q12,Q16

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper explores the idea that competitive seed systems may underserve farmers in small, agro-
ecological niches, leaving those farmers less productive and poorer than they need be. We develop
a theoretical model of the confluence of demand and supply factors that can result in such an
equilibrium. We then empirically study the disruption of the maize seed market in Western Kenya
that took place when public sector foundation breeding and social impact investment capital
together allowed a local seed company to expand and target the area with adaptively-bred maize
varieties. A three-year RCT reveals that these seed varieties increased farmer yields and revenues,
both for better-resourced farmers (who used non-adapted hybrids and fertilizer prior to the
intervention) as well less well-resourced farmers (who did not). This theoretical and empirical
evidence suggests news ways for thinking about seeds systems in areas typified by high levels of
agro-ecological heterogeneity.

Samuel S. Bird                                          Mary Mathenge
Department of Economics,                                Department of Agricultural Economics
Accounting and Management                               and Agribusiness Management
Luther College                                          Egerton University
Decorah, IA 52101                                       Njoro, Naku
birdsa01@luther.edu                                     Kenya
                                                        mathengemk@gmail.com
Michael R. Carter
Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics       Timothy Njagi
University of California, Davis                         Tegemeo Institute of Agricultural
One Shields Avenue                                      Policy and Development
Davis, CA 95616                                         Egerton University
and NBER                                                Kenya
mrcarter@ucdavis.edu                                    tnjagi@tegemeo.org

Travis J. Lybbert                                       Emilia Tjernström
Agricultural and Resources Economics                    School of Economics
University of California, Davis                         University of Sydney
1 Shields Avenue                                        A02 - Social Sciences Building
Davis, CA 95616                                         NSW 2006
tlybbert@ucdavis.edu                                    Australia
                                                        emilia.tjernstrom@sydney.edu.au
1        Introduction

Since 1960, agricultural productivity in sub-Saharan Africa has grown much more slowly
than in other regions in the developing world. In 1960, cereal yields in sub-Saharan Africa
were just below those of yields in Asia and Latin America. By the early 1990s, this yield gap
had more than tripled to 1.5 tons per-hectare, and by 2017, the gap had doubled again to
over 3 tons per-hectare (Carter et al., forthcoming). The gap is largely attributable to the
region's failure to adopt improved green revolution cereal varieties and other complemen-
tary inputs (Evenson & Gollin, 2003), with fewer than half of Sub-Saharan African farmers
employing improved varieties, in contrast to near universal adoption elsewhere. The puzzle
of this persistently low adoption rate has motivated a large literature, which has identified
a range of constraints, ranging from behavioral biases and other internal or psychological
constraints (Abay et al., 2017; Duflo et al., 2011), to information (Carter et al., forthcom-
ing), risk (Dercon & Christiaensen, 2011; Karlan et al., 2014), and biophysical and other
external resource constraints (Marenya & Barrett, 2009; Suri, 2011). This paper explores an
alternative, and ultimately complementary, explanation for this puzzle, highlighting supply-
side constraints to the innovation of green revolution varieties appropriate for adoption in
sub-Saharan Africa.
        In many ways, Kenya is in an exception to the sub-Saharan African pattern of low
adoption of improved cereal varieties. By the mid-1980s, a majority of Kenyan farmers had
in fact adopted hybrid maize varieties. However, this high average rate of adoption obscures
important heterogeneity across regions of Kenya. As shown in Figure 1, in Kenya's two
largest maize growing regions, the highland and transitional zones, adoption rates have been
above 75% since the 1970s. These hybrid adoption rates contrast with the mid-altitude
zone, where this rate has barely crept above 25% in the years since 1970.1 Foreshadowing
    1
    Throughout this paper we use the agro-ecological zones for maize production in Kenya developed by
the International Center for Improvement of Maize and Wheat (CIMMYT) (Hassan, 1998). These zones are
defined by length of the maize growing season, which itself depends in large part on temperature (degree
days), as well as rainfall and altitude. This paper focuses on the main zones for maize production: the
highland tropical (henceforth, highland) zone composed of farms at or above 1600-2900 meters in altitude,
later discussion, note that the mid-altitude zone is relatively small, constituting only 11% of
Kenya's maize area, and yet is home to substantial numbers of Kenya's poor farm households
(Hassan, 1998).
    This regional divergence in hybrid maize adoption raises the question of its root causes.
Regional differences in adoption are not unique to Kenya. In his classic work on technological
change, Griliches (1957; 1960) studied the uneven rate of hybrid maize adoption across the
US over the decades stretching from the 1930s to the 1950s. He attributed differential
adoption patterns to the uneven rate at which locally adapted hybrid varieties2 became
available based on regional differences in market size, public sector investment, and other
similar factors. Writing about Kenya, Gerhart (1975) hypothesized that hybrid varieties
may have been unprofitable to adopt in some regions because the varieties themselves were
poorly adapted to local agro-ecological conditions. If Gerhart's hypothesis is correct, then
we would expect the introduction of well-adapted varieties to lead to increased adoption and
agricultural productivity. At the same time, even if it is correct, this explanation begs the
question as to why well-adapted varieties historically have not been available in this zone.
    This paper studies the introduction of seed varieties by a local firm dedicated to adap-
tive breeding for the agro-ecology of Kenya's mid-altitude zone. To identify the impact of
this firm's varieties, we take advantage of a unique opportunity to conduct a randomized
controlled trial (RCT) of seed varieties among farmers in communities of western Kenya.
Additionally, we provide theoretically-grounded insight, consistent with the reality of the
experiment, on the question as to why prior seed sector actors had failed to market locally
well-adapted varieties. The results from both exercises all us to draw out implications for
the roles of private and public sectors in the seed market.
    Our theoretical analysis begins with a model of farmer choice between three stylized
the moist transitional (henceforth, transitional) zone from 1200-2000 meters in altitude, and the moist mid-
altitude (henceforth, mid-altitude) zone from 1110-1500 meters in altitude. Figure 1 is constructed based on
the best available data from these zones, which came from Gerhart (1975), Hassan (1998), TAMPA2 (2004),
TAPRA (2010), and the baseline survey for our study.
    2
      Adaptive breeding is the process of tailoring improved varieties to specic agro-ecological niches in order
to address locally-specific problems or environments.


                                                       2
   Figure 1: Persistently low adoption of improved maize in Kenya's mid-altitude zone.

seed varieties: local seeds, non-adapted improved seeds, and locally adapted improved seeds.
When the only varieties available are local and non-adapted improved seeds, the model
predicts that the use of improved seed follows a bi-modal pattern seen in Figure 1, with
poorer farmers using only local seeds and better-off farmers using both non-adapted seeds
and complementary inputs like fertilizer. The model also shows that the introduction of
an improved variety that is well adapted to the local agro-climate can break this pattern
and generate benefits to less well-off farmers, as well as to those better-off farmers who had
previously adopted improved seeds and inorganic fertilizer.
   If farmers can benefit from locally adapted adapted varieties, then why are such varieties
not already available in small, "niche" agro-ecologies like Kenya's mid-altitude zone? Using
a simple model of seed variety innovation, we show that absent public-private partnerships
in the seed sector, and absent buoyant access to capital for locally-based seed companies,
the equilibrium outcome in niche agro-ecologies is one of no innovation of locally adapted
varieties, leading to low adoption and low productivity. However the model suggests that
availability of public-private partnerships and capital to locally-based seed companies may


                                              3
spur the seed innovation needed to break this trap.
      To test the empirical veracity of this theoretically-grounded story, we take advantage of
a unique setting created by the expansion in Kenya of a local seed company, Western Seed
Company (henceforth, Western Seed). Since the early 2000s, Western Seed has benefited
from strong public-private partnership with the International Center for Improvement of
Maize and Wheat (CIMMYT) to innovate well-adapted improved varieties for the mid-
altitude zone. But for much of that time Western Seed's market coverage in Kenya was
limited due to capital constraints, a primary bottleneck for seed companies in the region
(Langyintuo et al., 2010). In recent years, Western Seed has benefited from a partnership
with the social impact investor Acumen to increase the capital to fund its market expansion.
Western Seed's expansion allowed our research team to conduct a RCT to study the impact
of their locally adapted, improved maize varieties.
      In line with the expectations of the theoretical model, the RCT reveals that the intro-
duction of Western Seed varieties caused substantial yield gains for maize farmers in the
mid-altitude zone. Outside of this zone, we find that the new seed varieties provided by
Western Seed performed no differently than the improved varieties already available in the
market. Also as predicted by the theoretical model, the effects in the mid-altitude zone vary
across farmers. For farmers who historically did not use improved maize varieties, our inten-
tion to treat impact estimates reveal that the availability of Western Seed varieties increased
yields by 21% on average, a large effect despite these farmers using little to no complemen-
tary inputs like fertilizers.3 However we would expect farmers who historically used improved
seeds to have done so in part because they had the resources to invest in complementary
inputs like fertilizers. We find this to be true empirically, and that these better-resourced
farmers realized an even average yield gain of 47% percent due to the availability of Western
Seed varieties.
      Stepping back from Kenya, sub-Saharan Africa is known to be comprised of a wide-
  3
    With compliance rates just south of 20% for this group, impacts on those who actually adapted the
seeds are substantially higher, as discussed later in the paper.


                                                 4
variety of different agro-ecologies. We cannot in this paper pin down the extent to which
the broader sub-Saharan African pattern of low use of green revolution technologies can be
attributed to niche agro-ecologies for which locally adapted improved varieties do not exist.
But our results point to a public-private seed sector model that potentially offers benefits
across the wealth spectrum of African cereal farmers.
    The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 models both the demand
for and supply of improved seed varieties in a small agro-ecological niche. Section 3 introduces
the western Kenya study area and lays out the design for the RCT made possible by the
capacity expansion of Western Seed. Section 4 presents average treatment effects for the
mid-altitude zone as well as for other zones included in our study. Section 5 undertakes the
key heterogeneity analysis, identifying the impacts within the mid-altitude zones on farmers
that had and had not been prior users of hybrid seeds. The final section concludes with
reflections on implications for seed systems.



2    Economics of Technological Change in a Niche Agro-

     Ecology

This section models the demand and supply for three stylized seed varieties in an agro-
ecological niche market, such as Kenya's mid-altitude zone. The varieties differ in their aver-
age yields, their substitutability across environments, and their responsiveness to fertilizer.
A local variety is retained from the previous season's harvest and is relatively well-adapted to
the local environment but unresponsive to complementary fertilizer applications. The second
variety is improved and fertilizer-responsive, but was developed for a different agro-ecological
zone without further adaptation to the local environment. We refer to this variety as the
non-locally-adapted (NLA) improved variety. Finally, there is an improved variety that is
fertilizer-responsive and has been adaptively bred for the local agro-ecological conditions.
    The production environment is characterized by linear yield responses to changes in


                                                5
fertilizer application. This is a reasonable specification over the relevant range of small
farmer fertilizer use if maize plants exhibit increasing returns to nutrition at low nutrient
levels and if farmers optimally manage fertilizer application rates (see Appendix A below) .
We thus write per-hectare yields as a function of seed type and fertilizer:


         y v (f v ) = (0
                       v   v v
                         + 1 f )   f < f o ,


where the variety indicator v takes on the value of r for retained local seed, n for NLA
improved variety and a for locally-adapted improved variety. The term f v is the per-hectare
intensity of fertilizer applied to variety v and f o is the agronomically optimal fertilizer rate.4
       Assigning a numeraire price of one for maize, a farmer who devotes H v hectares of land
to variety v will earn the following net income (i.e., less input costs):


         Y v = H v ((0
                     v
                       - sv ) + (1
                                 v
                                   - pf ) f v )


where sv is the per-hectare cost of seed for variety type v , and pf is the price of fertilizer.
       Using this notation, we characterize the three stylized seed technologies as follows:

       · Retained local variety (r)
         The per-hectare cost of local seeds, sr , is low (since farmers can save grain from the
         previous harvest). Fertilizer application is not profitable (pf > 1
                                                                           r
                                                                             ).

       · Non-locally adapted, improved variety (n)
         The cost of NLA seeds is higher than local seeds (sn > sr ), and while this variety is
         fertilizer-responsive (1
                                n
                                  > pf ), its unsuitability to the local environment means that it
         is less profitable than local varieties withou complementary fertilizer application, i.e.
   4                                   v
    In reality, returns to fertilizer, 1 , vary with soil quality (Tjernstrom 2017), farmer skill (Laajaj &
Macours, forthcoming) and weather. Adding in these additional dimensions of farm or farmer heterogeneity
would add complexity (e.g., Figure 3 would increase in dimensionality and the cutoffs would become frontiers)
but little additional insight. As we discuss in more depth below, incorporating weather or other stochastic
factors that affect input productivity would likely strengthen the qualitative characteristic of the primary
results.


                                                     6
   Table 1: Benefits from introducing an adapted hybrid in a niche agro-ecological zone.
                                           Adapted Hybrid More         Non-Adapted Hybrid More
                                           Fertilizer Responsive          Fertilizer Responsive
                                                  (1a > n )                      (1a < n )
                                                         1                              1
 Adapted Hybrid Outperforms                        Case 1                         Case 2
 Retained Variety without Fertilizer        (Both Groups Benefit)       (Only Less Wealthy Benefit)
  a - sa > r - sr )
 (0        0


 Retained Variety Outperforms                      Case 3                           Case 4
 Adapted Hybrid without Fertilizer          (Only Wealthier Benefit)       (Neither Group Benefits)
  a - sa < r - sr )
 (0        0



      ((0
        n
          - sn ) < (0
                    r
                      - sr )).

   · Locally-adapted improved variety (a)
      Also more costly to the farmer than retained seeds, we assume that these varieties are
      no more costly than the NLA hybrid (sn  sa > sr ).

The key question this study addresses is whether a locally adapted hybrid can economically
outperform the retained and NLA seed alternatives. Table 1 shows the different possible
cases. In Case 1, the locally adapted variety would outperform the retained variety even
when fertilizer is not used, and it would also outperform the NLA variety when fertilizer is
used. Case 4 is the opposite case, with the locally adapted variety outperforming neither
retained nor NLA varieties under these conditions. The off-diagonal cases (2 and 3) are where
the the locally adapted variety outperforms one type of seed-fertilizer combination, but not
the other. Later empirical analysis from the RCT will allow us to test these assumptions in
the case of varieties bred by one seed firm for Kenya's mid-altitude zone.
   Figure 2 portrays these different technological options using the stylized representations
of retained seeds and NLA hybrids, and Cases 1 and 4 for the locally adapted hybrid. On
            ~n indicates the fertilizer level below which the NLA is less profitable than the
the x-axis, f
local variety. Fertilizer use is wasted on the local variety since its yields do not increase
with fertilizer. In Case 1, the locally adapted improved variety outperforms the alternatives
irrespective of the level of fertilizer use. In Case 4, it outperforms neither.

                                                7
                      Figure 2: Income under different seed varieties.

   We build on our stylized representation of alternative seed technologies to explore the
demand and supply of improved technologies in a niche agro-ecology. Since an empirical
test of the efficacy of adaptive breeding in general is not feasible, our ultimate goal in this
paper is to empirically test the efficacy of specific adaptively-bred varieties using data from
our RCT. If these particular adaptively-bred varieties do not lead to farm-level impacts,
we cannot conclude that that adaptive breeding in general is ineffective, as it may be that
the particular breeder we examine was ineffective. However evidence of impacts of these
adaptively-bred varieties would support the efficacy of adaptive breeding.


2.1    Demand for Improved Seeds under Liquidity Constraints

While improved seed varieties may have the potential to increase the incomes of farmers,
farmer demand for improved seeds faces several constraints. In our model, farmers face two
constraints. First, the farm household lacks access to credit markets and hence must self-
finance input purchases using prior earnings, or what we will call cash-on-hand, z1 . Input



                                              8
purchases thus compete directly with current consumption needs.
       Second, improved seed varieties are packaged in bags of no less than two kilograms in
Kenya (and elsewhere), which is enough to sow one-fifth of an acre. This limitation creates
a minimum farm area that can be devoted to improved seed varieties, which we denote Hv ,
with Hr = 0 and Hn , Ha > 0. While seed bags can in principal be opened and sub-divided,
we assume that the well-known problem of counterfeit seeds makes farmers unwilling to buy
less than a single bag of seed.5
       We assume that the farming input choices of a household with H
                                                                    ¯ units of land and z1

units of cash-on-hand, are guided by the following two-period model:


(1)       M ax           u(c1 ) + u(c2 )
         ~ v ,I v ,f v
         H

                            subject to :

                                       c1  z1 -                    H v sv + pf f v
                                                        v =r,n,a

                                       c2                   H v (0
                                                                 v   v v
                                                                   + 1 f )
                                                 v =r,n,a

                                                          ¯
                                                      Hv  H
                                           v =r,n,a

                                       I v (I v - 1) = 0, v
                                        ~ v - Hv )I v  0, v
                                       (H
                                           ~ v · I v , v
                                       Hv  H

                                       f v  0, v


where u( ) is a concave utility and  < 1 is the per-period discount factor.6 As written in
problem (1), the household chooses the notional area, H
                                                      ~ v , that it would devote to variety v
   5
     In our study area, Western Seed and other companies faced such significant problems of counterfeit
seeds (unscrupulous individuals would collect used seed bags and refill them with local seeds) that they
began enclosing tickets that could be used to certify the seeds' authenticity through an SMS-based message
system.
   6
     We assume that this per-period discount factor is greater than the rate of return on savings so that the
household consumes in the first period rather than saving for the second period.

                                                                   9
if there were no seed bag size limit. The constraints then transform this notional area to an
                                    ~ v < Hv . Otherwise, H v = H
effectively cultivated area of 0 if H                           ~ v . Denote the optimum area

that will be planted to variety v as H v (z1 , H
                                               ¯ ).7

       For purposes of our analysis here, we are only interested in characterizing when the farm
household would begin using improved seed technologies, that is, when it would jump from
planting no area to improved varieties to planting at least Hv of those varieties. Given the
binary nature of this decision, we only need to compare optimized household well-being when
the household only plants the local variety, V r (z1 , H
                                                       ¯ |H n , H a = 0), with the stream of utility

available when planting Hv . We first consider the case when only the NLA improved variety
is available, and then consider the implications of introducing a locally adapted improved
variety.


2.1.1      Choice of Retained Seeds versus a Non-Locally Adapted Improved Variety

To analyze the farm household's decision to adopt the NLA improved variety, we evaluate
optimal behavior per maximization problem (1) conditional on the household devoting the
minimum possible area to the NLA improved variety, Hn .8 The first order condition for
optimal fertilizer choice under this conditional problem is:


         ~ (f n , z1 )pf  n
                          1



      ~ (f, z1 ) =   u1 (~
                         c1 )
where                u2 (~c2 )
                                 is a measure of the shadow price of liquidity, c
                                                                                ~1 = z1 -Hn (sn + pf f n ) -
 ¯ - Hn sr and c
 H             ~2 = Hn (0
                        n   n n
                          + 1      ¯ - Hn 0
                              f )+ H      r
                                            . Note that first period consumption is
cash-on-hand less spending on inputs for the NLA variety and the seed costs of the retained
variety (recall that under our technology assumptions, fertilizer cannot be profitably applied
to the local variety such that f r = 0 under optimal choice).
   7
     In principal, this seed bag integer problem should continue, but as our analysis only concerns the adoption
decision, we will ignore that aspect of the problem.
   8
     In what follows, we all assume that it the farm household always finds it optimal to fully cultivate its
available land. While this assumption could be relaxed, it would add complexity without additional insight
for the problem at hand.


                                                        10
    Note that ~ (f n , z1 ) is increasing in fertilizer investment and decreasing in cash-on-hand.

An interior solution with f n > 0 would equate the marginal returns to fertilizer to its full cost,
marked up by the shadow price of liquidity. For a sufficiently poor household with low z1 , the
full cost of fertilizer will always exceed its return even when evaluated at f n = 0. Conditional
on adopting the improved variety, the best such a household could do would be to apply no
fertilizer. However, under the technology assumptions above, we know that the household
will generate less spendable income employing the NLA variety any time it chooses f n < f~n .
As can be more formally demonstrated, for these sufficiently poor households, optimized
                                                                               ¯ |H n = Hn ),
utility conditional on minimal adoption of the NLA improved variety, V e (z1 , H
will be strictly less than the non-adoption alternative, V (z1 , H
                                                                 ¯ |H n , H a = 0). Note that a

more realistic model that included risk considerations would only serve to strengthen this
result.9
    More generally, defining the difference between these two value functions as


      nr = V n - V r


                       nr
we can show that      z1
                            > 0 and that there is a critical cash on hand level, z
                                                                                 ~n where nr
becomes positive and adoption of the improved NLA variety will begin with fertilizer levels
             ~n (see Appendix B).
no less than f
    Letting (z1 ) and (z1 ) respectively denote the pdf and cdf for the distribution of initial
cash-on-hand in the small agro-ecological niche, Figure 3 illustrates the implications of this
model for the demand for NLA improved seeds. Only farm households with initial cash in
excess of z
          ~nf would demand the NLA improved seed variety and optimally apply a non-trivial
amount of fertilizer to them. In short, when only the NLA improved and retained varieties
are available, we would expect to see bifurcation, with 1 - (~
                                                             z nf ) fraction of the population
   9
     In a model with risk, fertilizer applied to the NLA variety would increase expected yields as well as
the variance of net income under the defensible assumption that fertilizers do not decrease yield variance.
Assuming households are risk averse, they would apply even less fertilizer under risk than they would in
our simplified model with certain yields. This would increase the benefits from planting the retained variety
without fertilizer over the NLA variety with low fertilizer use relative to the case without risk.


                                                     11
           Diagram assumes the Case 1 parameter values in which adaptive breeding works.

Figure 3: Initial cash-on-hand distribution and thresholds for adoption of improved seeds.

adopting (and applying fertilizer) to the improved varieties, and the complementary fraction
((~
  z nf )) employing only local, retained varieties without fertilizers. The magnitude of these
fractions of course depends on the actual distribution of cash-on-hand and the magnitude of
the key technology parameters.


2.1.2   Demand for Locally Adapted Improved Varieties

We now consider how farm household variety choice changes after the introduction of a
locally adapted improved seed variety. Under Case 1 in Table 1 (where adaptive breeding
offers gains both to famers who can afford fertilizers as well as to those who cannot), no
farm household would ever adopt the NLA variety rather than the adapted variety. There
will again appear a critical cash-on-hand value, z
                                                 ~a , at which the farm household will find it
optimal to adopt the minimum acreage to the locally adapted improved variety. In contrast
to the NLA variety, some farmers who cannot afford to purchase fertilizer will adopt the

                                                12
locally adapted improved variety (under the Case 1 assumption that (0
                                                                    a
                                                                      - sa ) > (0
                                                                                r
                                                                                  - sr )).
There will appear a second critical level of cash-on-hand, z     ~nf , at which the farm
                                                           ~af < z
household will adopt the improved variety and apply a positive amount of fertilizer (see
Appendix B for more details).
   The implications of this Case 1 analysis are again illustrated in Figure 3. With the
introduction of the locally adapted improved variety, the farming population now falls into
three sub-groups:

  1. (~
      z a ) of the population will continue to cultivate only retained, non-improved varieties;

  2. (~         z a ) of the population will cultivate the locally adapted improved varieties
      z af ) - (~
      without using fertilizers, but will enjoy higher yields than a counterfactual group that
      had access to only NLA varieties and chose neither use them nor employ fertilizer; and,

  3. 1 - (~
          z af ) of the population will deploy the new varieties and apply fertilizer. Note
      that this group would be predicted to have higher yields than a counterfactual group
      that only had access to NLA varieties and utilized them in conjunction with fertilizer.

All of these implications of course depend critically on the Case 1 parameter assumptions
about the relative productivity of locally adapted hybrids. Under the Case 4 assumptions,
the introduction of the locally adapted varieties would be meaningless as no farmer would
adopt them. Cases 2 and 3 are the intermediate cases. In Case 3, some farmers would
switch from retained varieties to the improved varieties but better endowed farmers would
stay with the NLA hybrid (i.e., z
                                ~a would exist, but z
                                                    ~af would not). In Case 4, we would
have the opposite configuration with less well-endowed farmers sticking strictly with retained
varieties and the better off switching to the locally adapted hybrid.
   After examining the circumstances under which the seed sector will supply locally adapted
varieties, we will return to the experience of Western Seed in western Kenya to see if, in fact,
local adaptive breeding can provide benefits to population sub-groups 2 and 3. In the specific
case of the Western Seed hybrids studied below, the company itself advertised that farmers

                                              13
who moved from retained seeds without fertilizer to Western Seed hybrids without fertilizer
would experience a 50 percent yield increase. The company further suggested that proper
fertilization could boost yield by 300 percent compared to farmer-retained seeds (Partners, no
date). A separate document prepared by an impact investment fund suggested that Western
Seed hybrids would offer a 25 percent yield increase compared to other hybrid maize varieties
(Fund, 2010). In short, these promotion documents claim that Case 1 is correct, a claim
that we will later examine empirically using data from our RCT.


2.2    Supply of Locally Adapted Improved Seed Varieties

If farmers are willing to adopt locally adapted seeds (as some would be true in all but Case
4 above), then this raises the question of what conditions are needed to support private seed
companies to introduce adapted seed varieties in a small, niche agro-ecology. In other words,
what accounts for the 30 years of a stagnant hybrid adoption rate in Kenya's mid-altitude
zone? One explanation is that improved varieties cannot be successfully adapted to this
region (Case 4 in Table 1, above). In this section, we consider an alternative explanation by
putting forward a stylized model concerning the innovation and supply of improved, locally
adapted seed varieties. Innovate here means to conduct a breeding program that leads to the
development and marketing of a locally adapted improved variety. Our distinction between
innovation and supply of seed varieties is analogous to the innovation and product markets
in the conceptual model of Spielman et al. (2014).
   In our model, a key factor is how the firm obtains parent lines for local adaptive breeding.
If parent lines are owned and maintained by the firm itself, then the firm pays no royalties
for using the parent varieties. Given the high cost of developing and maintaining parent
breeding lines, this option is only available to large, multinational firms. Smaller firms can
access parent material by purchasing use rights from other private sector firms at a royalty
cost of  per-kilogram of adapted seed produced. In addition, firms may have the option




                                              14
to use without royalty parent seed produced by the public sector.10 When public sector
breeders make parent lines freely available, smaller firms can avoid paying royalty costs for
parent material.
       Given access to parent seed lines, firms incur a non-trivial fixed cost to breed seed vari-
eties for the local agro-ecology. These costs are related to not only acquiring farm land on
which to experiment, but also to acquiring the knowledge about local conditions that limit
crop performance. We assume that local firms, which typically emerge from farms already
producing in the local area, have a fixed cost advantage over multinational or other non-local
firms who need to both acquire land and learn about the particularities of local farm pro-
duction. Specifically we assume that F < F m , where the first term measures the fixed costs
of adaptive breeding for the local firm and the second the fixed costs for the multinational
or non-local firm.
       Taking seed prices as given,11 we can write the short-term returns to innovation for three
types of seed companies:


          (q ) = q (pa - c - ) - F

             p (q ) = q (pa - c) - F

            m (q ) = q (pa - c) - F m


where q is the quantity of adapted seed sold, pa is its market price, and c is the per-kilogram
production or seed multiplication costs once the variety mix is established. The term  (q )
measures returns for a local firm that must pay royalties for parent seed,  p (q ) are returns
for a local company with a public partnership that allows it to freely access quality parent
seed, and  m (q ) are returns for the multinational or non-local firm. Figure 4 graphs these
  10
     The public sector has long filled this role, which has, for example, contributed to regional differences
in the development and adoption of hybrid maize in the United States (Griliches, 1960; Kantor & Whalley,
2019). In developing countries, public sector investments are supplemented by investments by international
organizations through the CGIAR networks, in particular CIMMYT for maize.
  11
     In this sub-section, we also consider how this problem might change if firms acted as monopolists and
set prices for the niche market.


                                                     15
              Figure 4: Firm profits for locally adapted seeds as a function of sales.

different functions.


2.2.1      Economics of Innovating Locally Adapted Improved Seed Varieties

To analyze whether a firm chooses to innovate, we evaluate the firm's optimal seed sales
conditional on it choosing to innovate. We assume that the marginal variable profits from
seed sales are positive for all firm types:




        pa > c + x +  > c + x


Under this assumption, firm profits increase with seed sales conditional on the firm choosing
to innovate.12
      Given the fixed cost structure of local adaptive breeding, we can define for each type of
 12
      Firms will of course not invest in adapting local varieties if this condition is not met.


                                                        16
firm a critical seed sales volume (q
                                   ~) where revenues just cover the fixed and variable costs of
production:



                  F         p    F        m   Fm
         ~ 
         q              , q
                          ~           , q
                                        ~           .
              pa - c -         pa - c        pa - c

For theses sales volumes, firms would recover their fixed costs of innovation, but earn zero
profits. Since firm profits increase with seed sales conditional on the firm choosing to inno-
vate, the firm will not innovate for markets smaller than the critical market size.
       In what follows, we ignore the entry of other firms offering locally adapted hybrids. Given
that our focus is on areas that heretofore have seen no entry, this assumption appears as a
reasonable starting point. We could of course imagine more complex structures in which firms
have conjectures about the entry of other firms. In this case, the market size constraints we
derive below become necessary but not sufficient conditions for innovation of locally adapted
varieties and entry into the niche market. If anything, the competitive deterrent of this
alternative structure would reenforce the tendency of niche markets remaining underserved
by innovation.
       Abstracting from potential competition from other seed companies that might engage in
locally adaptive breeding, we now focus on two primary constraints that may block innovation
and entry into a niche market. The first is the size of the agro-ecological zone for which
breeding will be undertaken.13 Letting N denote the number of farmers in the agro-ecological
zone and assuming that each farmer has H
                                       ¯ units of land, then using the notation developed

in Section 2.1 above, we can define the effective market demand for adapted improved seeds
as the sum of seed demand across all households in the zone given the distribution of wealth
or cash-on-hand:
  13
    In practice, the size constraint is the size of the agro-ecological zone within a nation's borders. Seed
industries are highly regulated at the national-level such that seed companies incur fixed costs to entering
each individual country. Relaxing these regulatory bottlenecks at the national-level would effectively relax
the market size constraint for firms considering investing in adaptive breeding.



                                                    17
                           ~af
                           z                            
                    sa
         q   max
                   = aN          H v (z1 )(z1 )dz1 +         H v (z1 )(z1 )dz1
                    p     ~a
                          z                            ~af
                                                       z



where all the terms are as defined above.14 As shown above, farm households with cash-on-
hand below z
           ~a will not use any of the improved seeds, and hence this group is excluded from
the integral terms. Note that this expression highlights two features that shape potential
market demand: size of the agro-ecological zone (N ) and the distribution of wealth. In
practice, we might expect these two objects to be correlated. A too-small zone may not
be offered improved adapted varieties and hence more households may be locked into a low
productivity, low income trap that keeps many farm households below the critical cash-on-
hand levels needed for adoption.15
       A second constraint that may limit a firm's economic ability to invest in adaptive seed
breeding is the firm's own capital constraint. Using the simple notation of our model, we
can express this constraint for a local firm without a public partner as:


                       ¯
         q (c + ) + F  K


where K
      ¯ is the capital that the firm can leverage for investment. This expression, and its

analogue for the other firm types, defines a maximum amount of seed production that the
                                         ¯ -F
firm can afford to finance, qK           K
                                          c+
                                                . While all firms potentially face capital constraints,
capital constraints are most likely bind for local firms (Langyintuo et al., 2010).
       Returning to Figure 4, we can now explore the basic intuition from this model. If q max <
  14
      This expression assumes the case 1 parameter values (see Table 1) in which the locally adapted varieties
outperforms retained seeds with fertilizer and outperforms non-locally adapted hybrids with fertilizer. Under
the other parameter cases, the limits of integration in the above expression would need to be adjusted to
eliminate demand from the sub-population(s) of farmers who would not benefit from locally adapted hybrids.
   15
      Entering firms could in principal exercise power over the prices they charge. In this case, q max would
become a decreasing function of price charged. At the same time, q~ would decrease with price charged. While
it would be possible to write down an integrated monopolist's problem in which seed price is optimally chosen,
doing so would not alter the core implications of the model concerning innovation and entry.



                                                       18
~m , the multinational firm will not find it profit-maximizing to invest in adaptive breeding
q
for the local agro-ecological zone. Similarly, even if q max > q
                                                               ~ , the local firm without a
public partner will not invest if qK < q
                                       ~ . In markets with only these two types of firms, there
could be a range of small (niche) agro-ecologies that are simply not supplied with any locally
adapted improved seed, resulting in the kind of bifurcated adoption behavior described in
Section 2.1 above and illustrated by Figure 1. As we will see in the next section, this
appears to have been the case for the relatively small mid-altitude region of Kenya prior to
the introduction of locally adapted improved seeds.


2.2.2   Supplying Seed Technologies by Relaxing Capital Constraints

As the prior discussion makes clear, it may not be profitable to invest in the breeding needed
to innovate adapted improved seed varieties for niche agro-ecological zones for either large
multinational actors or capital-constrained local seed companies. However, as displayed in
Figure 4, a well-financed local company with access to publicly provided foundation seed
may find it profitable to innovate for those niche zones.
   Financing to relax capital constraints also can enable seed companies with locally adapted
varieties to expand their production of those varieties. In the case of Kenya described in
the introduction, Western Seed not only had a partnership with a public source of quality
parent line seed, it also received a major infusion of capital that allowed it to rapidly expand
its seed multiplication capacity. As the next sections now explore, the expansion of this seed
company gave us the opportunity to explore whether the seed system in Kenya was indeed
leaving money on the table by failing to realize profitable innovation of locally adapted
improved maize seeds.




                                              19
3          Empirical Context and Experimental Design

The theoretical model laid out in the prior section demonstrates that while locally adapted
improved varieties can benefit both worse- and better-off farmers, there may not be a supply
of such varieties to small agro-ecological zones unless capital and public goods are provided
to local seed firms that enjoy informational and other cost advantages over multinational
and other larger scale competitors. In this section, we first show that Kenya's mid-altitude
region largely fits the predictions of the model. We then lay out our research design intended
to allow identification of the impact of the introduction of locally adapted improved varieties
on the yields of smallholders farmers.


3.1         Maize in Kenya's Mid-altitude Zone

Our stylized model suggests regional differences in adoption seen in Figure 1 may be due to
the adaptive breeding of maize hybrids for some zones, but not others. In the 1960s, the
government of Kenya supported research and development of hybrid maize for the highland
zone, which covers almost one-third of Kenya's maize-growing areas and has high agricul-
tural potential (Gerhart, 1975; Hassan, 1998). Significantly less investment was made to
develop varieties for other regions, including the mid-altitude zone. As shown earlier, hybrid
varieties were quickly adopted by almost all farmers in the highland zones and the neigh-
boring transitional zone, but hybrid varieties were not adopted elsewhere, including in the
mid-altitude zone (Gerhart, 1975).16
         As shown in Figure 1, these differences in hybrid maize adoption persist to this day. The
gap in hybrid maize adoption across regions of Kenya was the focus of an in-depth study to
chart a path for future maize research by CIMMYT (Hassan, 1998). The study recommended
the development of parent lines for maize varieties that can mature during the shorter growing
    16
     In essence hybrid maize development in Kenya exemplifies the model from Byerlee & Traxler (2001)
of public-sector investment in agricultural research and development. In this model, a budget-constrained
country with both small and large agro-ecological zones adopts a two-part strategy with intensive research
effort devoted to develop varieties adapted for in the large zone and NLA technologies transferred to the
smaller zone.

                                                   20
      Source: Commercial recommendations for hybrid varieties from company websites among varieties
                 registered by Kenya Plant health inspectorate Service (KEPHIS, 2018)

Figure 5: Yields and recommended planting altitude for registered maize varieties as of 2010.


seasons typical of the mid-altitude zone of western Kenya. Subsequently, public investment
in research and development, as well as reforms to seed markets,17 spurred private investment
in innovation and product markets. In innovation markets, the shift in public-sector research
by CIMMYT laid the groundwork for the private sector to develop maize hybrids for the mid-
altitude zone of western Kenya. In particular, Western Seed emerged as a leader in varietal
research and development for the lower potential, mid-altitude zone of western Kenya.
      While the different agro-ecological zones are not defined exclusively based on altitude (see
footnote 1 above), the Kenyan Plant Health Inspectorate Service (KEPHIS) issues annual
reports on the performance of different seed varieties at a recommended altitude and season
length. Using these data, Figure 5 shows that in the 1000-1500 meter altitude range typical
of the mid-altitude agro-ecological zone, Western Seed produces many of the varieties with
the greatest yields.
 17
      In the early 1990s, the seed market in Kenya was liberalized.




                                                      21
3.2       Expansion of Western Seed and the Randomized Controlled

          Trial

With its new varieties, the geographic footprint of Western Seed maize hybrids slowly ex-
panded over time from the transitional zone into the mid-altitude zone near Lake Victoria.18
However, Western Seed's seed multiplication and market expansion was constrained by its
available capital (Partners, no date). In 2008 and in 2010, two impact investment organi-
zations (Pearl Capital Partners and Acumen Fund) made debt and equity investments in
Western Seed totaling $3 million with the intention of rapidly tripling WSC's seed supply
capacity. Within a few years, this new supply capacity was on-line, opening the door for
both Western Seed's geographic expansion and coincidentally creating a unique opportunity
to establish an RCT around the locally adapted hybrids.
       In partnership with Western Seed and Acumen, the research team established a research
design that would allow identification of the impact of the introduction of WSC hybrids in
new areas in western and central Kenya. Specifically, Western Seed had resources to establish
100 new demonstration plots at key points across these regions for the 2013 planting season.
Each demonstration plot was designed to provide information to villages within a 5 to 10
mile radius of the plot and the sites were spaced with that distance in mind. At the research
team's request, Western Seed identified 125 potential demonstration plot sites (25 more than
they wanted) with the understanding that the team would randomly allocate up to 25 sites
to a control group where no demonstration plots nor marketing would take place. Matching
Western Seed's expansion plan, the sites were spread across western and parts of central
Kenya.
       Figure 6 maps the study sites across central and western Kenya. The background shading
on the mapping shows the different altitude ranges of highland areas (above 2000 meters),
transitional areas (1500-2000 meters) and mid-altitude areas (below 1500 meters). While
  18
    Tegemeo Institute's TAPRA data set (see TAPRA (2010)) allows us to see the expansion of Western
Seed hybirds into the mid-altitude zone between the 2004 and 2010 TAPRA survey rounds.



                                                22
                               Map area




                                                               Altitude zones     Village cluster
                                                                                  classifications
                                                                  < 1000 m
                                                                  1000 - 1500 m       Mid-altitude
                                                                  1500 - 2000 m       Transitional
                                                                  > 2000 m            Highland



                         Figure 6: Study sample in western Kenya.

these altitude designations do not completely describe Kenya's agro-ecological zones (see
footnote 1), they give insight into the geography of the study area. Each study site is
marked by the symbol corresponding to its actual agro-ecological zone classification based
on Hassan (1998).
   Each site typically contained 3-5 villages within its zone of influence. The easterly, central
sites all lie within the transitional zone, while the western sites are divided between the mid-
altitude, transitional, and highland zones. For purposes of the analysis that follows, the 2
highland sites were grouped with the western transitional zone sites. The 36 sites randomly
selected for the study were grouped into matched pairs based on physical proximity, altitude,
and climate. One member of each pair was then allocated to the seed treatment and one to
control status. The timeline in Figure 7 displays the full life of the intervention and study.
A random sample of 50 farmers was selected for interview in each site, resulting in a total
sample size of 1800 farm households.


                                              23
       The seed treatment consisted of three components, with each one following Western
Seed's standard seed marketing practice. The first component was the establishment of a
nearby demonstration plot for the 2013 main maize season19 so that farmers could observe
the performance of the Western Seed varieties. The second component was the provision of
a small sample packet to farmers to try on their own farm for that same season. A Western
Seed marketing representative visited each community to distribute the packets and provide
further information on the Western Seed hybrids. Sample packets had 250 grams of seed,
enough seed to plant one-fortieth of an acre. Farmers were asked to plant their trial packet
separately and to keep track of its performance, which most did (see Tjernstrom, 2017).
Given the small size of the seed packet, we expected it to inform farmers' future planting
decisions, but not to influence their yields or income for the 2013 maize growing season.
The third and final component was the offer to pre-order Western Seed hybrids and have
them delivered to their village prior to the 2015 maize season. As discussed below, this third
element was added following low uptake of Western Seed seed varieties in 2014.
       In addition to the core seed treatment, we also implemented a fertilizer intervention
for the 2014 maize season that gave fifty kilograms of high-quality fertilizer to randomly
selected farmers in both treatment and control sites in the western study areas. At each
site, the research team held a public lottery amongst survey participants, with half receiving
fertilizer and the others a token gift of cell phone time. The motivation behind this ancillary
intervention was to test the claim that the yield gains with Western Seed varieties are much
greater for farmers applying fertilizer. We did not implement the fertilizer intervention in
the central study area as baseline fertilizer use was quite high.
       In summary, in the western study areas, assignment to the treatments randomly divided
a total of 1200 farm households into four equally-sized groups:

   1. A Control group;
  19
     The primary maize growing season in western Kenya stretches from March to September; some farmers
also plant a second maize crop in October, although this second season is typically less productive and
receives fewer inputs from most farmers who plant it. The primary maize growing season in central Kenya
is the October planting, with a less productive season from March to September.

                                                  24
                                      Figure 7: Study timeline.

   2. A Seed Only treatment group that received Western Seed information and free 250
       gram trial seed packets in 2013 and an option to have WSC delivered (at cost) to their
       home in 2015;

   3. A Fertilizer Only group that received fertilizer in 2014, but received no seed treatment;

   4. A Seed and Fertilizer group that received each of the treatments received by groups 2
       and 3.

In the central study area, 600 households were divided evenly between groups 1 and 2 only.
As shown in Figure 7, baseline, midline and endline surveys were held in both the central
and western areas following the 2013, 2014 and 2015 main maize season harvests for western
Kenya.


3.3      Baseline Characteristics and Compliance

Table 2 summarizes baseline characteristics of households in each zone: mid-altitude, transi-
tional, and central.20 We restrict the sample to only those households that reported planting
  20
    The sample includes 1200 households in western Kenya, of which 700 are in the mid-altitude zone, 400
are in the transitional zone, and 100 are in the highland zone. Given the small sample in the highland zone
and the highland zone's similar growing conditions and history of hybrid adoption to the transitional zone,
we include observations from the highland zone in our sample from the transitional zone in western Kenya.


                                                    25
maize in each year of the study, as we do in the subsequent empirical analysis. We summarize
baseline characteristics in levels for ease of interpretation.

                        Table 2: Baseline characteristics and compliance.

                                                       Mid-Altitude                 Transitional
                                                 All     Non-Users     Users     Western      Central
 % Main Maize Seasons used Hybrids              26%         11%         96%        84%          83%
 % Main Maize Seasons used Fertilizer           26%         20%         56%        81%          92%
 Dry maize yield (kg/acre)                       234        211          342        553         428
 Acres Farmed in Total                          1.65        1.58        1.97        1.92        1.29
 Acres Planted to Maize                         1.32        1.29        1.44        1.32        0.76
 Income per-capita (100 Kenya Sh.)               228        210          305        351         507
 % Net Income from Ag                           34%         37%         22%        36%          69%
 % Gross Ag Income from Maize                   43%         42%         44%        39%          22%
 Average Poverty Probability                    32%         33%         26%        32%          13%
 % Food insecure                                66%         70%         47%        63%          44%
 Compliance: % Using Western Seed
  2014 (Midline), Treated                       16%         12%         33%        25%          5%
  2014 (Midline), Control                        1%          1%          2%        16%          1%
  2015 (Endline), Treated                       20%         18%         33%        31%          10%
  2015 (Endline), Control                        2%          1%          8%        17%          0%
 Observations                                    589        482          104        428         508
Notes: "Non-Users" are households that did not plant hybrids in at least 4 of the 5 pre-study main maize
seasons and "Users" are households that planted hybrids in at least 4 of the 5 pre-study main maize seasons.


    The first column summarizes characteristics of households in the mid-altitude zone. Prior
to Western Seed's expansion, on average households planted any hybrids in only 26% of
previous 5 main maize seasons, and used fertilizer at the same low rate. Unsurprisingly,
maize yields also are low, at 234 kilograms per acre. Yet maize is central to the livelihoods
of smallholder households in the region; in our sample, households on average plant maize
on 80% of their land. Maize is an important source of income and food for smallholder
households. In the mid-altitude zone, average annual income per capita is low, at 22,800

                                                    26
Kenyan shillings, or approximately 228 USD, with agriculture contributing 34%, and maize
contributing to 43% of agricultural income. This measure of low household income in the
mid-altitude zone is substantiated by a separate asset-based index indicates that, on average,
a household has almost a 1/3 probability of living on less than 1.25 USD per person per day.
Food insecurity is common among households in the sample, with almost 2/3 of households
being food insecure at some point during the year.
       The theory in Section 2 above suggests that absent well-adapted hybrids, the small
farming population will bifurcate into a group using exclusively local seeds and another
group relying on hybrids and applying fertilizer. The second and third columns of Table 2
divide up mid-altitude respondents based on their pre-intervention use of hybrids. Hybrid
users are those who had planted hybrids in at least 4 of the 5 pre-study main maize seasons.
Hybrid non-users are those who planted hybrids in less than 4 of those seasons.21 As can
be seen in the table, the smaller hybrid-users group almost exclusively relies on hybrids,
applying fertilizer almost 60% of the time. The larger non-users group rarely uses hybrids
and uses fertilizer at about one third rate of the users group. As expected, yields are much
higher at baseline for the hybrid users group, at 342 kilograms per acre compared with the
non-user group average of 211 kilograms per acre.22 Incomes for the users group is about
50% higher, due in large part to greater non-agricultural income, although food security and
predicted poverty rates are relatively similar across the users and non-users groups.
       Columns 4 and 5 of Table 2 report characteristics of farms in the higher altitude tran-
sitional zone in both western and central Kenya. Consistent with Figure 1, hybrid and
fertilizer use are uniformly high and maize yields top those of even hybrid users in the
mid-altitude zones, as would be expected given that existing hybrids are better adapted to
this agro-ecological zone. Incomes are higher and poverty indicators are lower than in the
  21
     Of the 700 households in the mid-altitude zone, we categorize 125 as users of hybrids in the seasons
preceding the study. This includes four households that planted maize in fewer than 4 of the 5 pre-study
main maize seasons, but planted hybrids in each of the seasons in which they planted maize.
  22
     Two mid-altitude households have missing data for past hybrid use, which is why the observations for
the non-user and user samples do not sum to the total number of observations in the mid-altitude sample.



                                                   27
mid-altitude zone, especially for farmers in the central region who are able to grow coffee
and other cash crops and who correspondingly get much less of their agricultural income
from maize. While farmers in the transitional zone are largely better-off than those in the
mid-altitude zones, material well-being is still low relative to global standards.
       The lower portion of Table 2 reports compliance with the seed treatment, defined as
the percentage of farmers who responded to the informational treatment and purchased a
Western Seed variety during the midline and endline seasons. As can be seen, compliance
was modest in 2014. Field reports indicated a number of factors that conspired to to lower
uptake that year.23 These challenges motivated a seed delivery program in 2015. Adoption
in 2015 was 5-6 percentage points greater than adoption in 2014 for each of three agro-
ecological zones. The different intensity of treatment in 2014 and 2015 of course could lead
different types of households to adopt Western Seed hybrids in those years; because of this,
in Section 5 we report separate estimates for the endline year.
       Finally, our ability to make inferences from the RCT critically depends on the assumption
that random assignment of households to treatment groups being uncorrelated household
characteristics, both observable and unobservable. To shed light on the validity of that
assumption, Appendix C presents balance tables for observable characteristics for our sample.
In general, baseline differences between treatment groups are not large in magnitude relative
to average baseline levels in the control group. Balance on observables gives us confidence
that omitting these variables from our estimation will not bias our treatment effect estimates.
However, our treatment effect estimates may be biased due if a baseline variable with modest
imbalance across treatment groups is strongly correlated with the dependent variable. Since
this is most likely to be true for baseline levels of the dependent variable, we estimate
ANCOVA specifications that control for baseline levels of dependent variables. Finally,
balance on baseline measures of household characteristics gives us confidence that we also
  23
   Adoption in 2014 was lower than anticipated due to a number of factors, including the former parastatal
Kenya Seed subsidizing its seeds, offering added incentives to agro-dealers to sell Kenya Seed. In addition,
Western Seed faced challenges in expanding their seed promotion to new regions like central Kenya.



                                                    28
have balance on household characteristics that we cannot observe.



4          Average Effects on Yields by Agro-Ecological Zone

This section uses data from our RCT to test whether Western Seed's adapted improved seed
varieties increase farmer yields. To account for differences in socioeconomic status and maize
seed markets across agro-ecological zones, we estimate the effects of Western Seed hybrids
separately for each zone. We find large impacts in the mid-altitude zone, but little to no
impact in the transitional zones of western and central Kenya.
         To identify the impact of Western Seed maize hybrids on maize yields of smallholder
farmers in our study areas, we estimate average treatment effects of the random variation
in access to Western Seed varieties. In the mid-altitude and transitional zones, following
McKenzie (2012) we estimate average treatment effects on maize yields, yivspt , using a pooled
analysis of covariance intention to treat specification.24 The specification for farm i in village
v , site s, matched pair p and time period t is:


(2)                         0
            yivspt = 0 + 1 yivsp      W
                                 + 1 Isp      F
                                         + 2 Iivsp      W
                                                   + 3 Isp    F
                                                           × Iivsp + [µp + ivspt ] , t = 1, 2


where yivsp
       0
            is baseline maize yields, Isp
                                       W
                                          and Iivsp
                                               F
                                                    are binary indicators for assignment to
the Western Seed and fertilizer treatments respectively, µp is a matched pair fixed effect
included to account for stratification of the seed treatment following Bruhn & McKenzie
(2009). The error term (ivspt ) is clustered by village, the level of stratification for the
fertilizer treatment. In the central region, where there was no fertilizer lottery, we estimate
equation 2 after eliminating the terms involving Iivsp
                                                  F
                                                       .
         Table 3 reports the estimated coefficients for equation 2 by agro-ecological zone. To lessen
    24
    Our preferred specification estimates a single set of treatment effects by pooling observations from both
of the post-treatment years of observations. When separating observations by these two post-treatment
years, treatment effect estimates are qualitatively similar to the estimates from our preferred specification,
both for the analysis in this section as well as the heterogeneity analysis in the subsequent section.



                                                     29
the role of outliers, we transform yields using the inverse hyperbolic sine function. The lower
half of the table reports the implied percentage effects of the different treatments following
the method of Bellemare & Wichman (2019).25 As reported in the table, for the mid-altitude
zone, we estimate that the seed treatment increased average yields by 25%. Given that this
is an intention to treat estimate (with a compliance rate of about 20% as reported in Table
2), the actual yield increases experienced by those who adopted Western Seed because of
the seed treatment (impact of the treatment on the treated) is approximately five-times
greater, indicating substantial yield gains among adopters of Western Seed. Given that
the mid-altitude area is one with relatively low hybrid use, impacts of Western Seed likely
come from two sources. The first are first generation adoption effects from the intervention
inducing households to switch from local varieties to hybrid varieties. The second are second
generation adoption effects from the intervention inducing households to switch from other
hybrid varieties to Western Seed locally adapted hybrid varieties. In the next section, we
explore this issue further to distinguish the magnitudes of the two effects.
       In addition to the primary seed treatment effect on yields in the mid-altitude zone,
the other striking result in Table 3 is the negative interaction effect between the seed and
fertilizer treatments. As discussed in Sub-Section 3.2 above, in-kind grants of fifty kilograms
of fertilizer were made to randomly selected study households in order to see if relaxing
constraints to fertilizer acquisition might boost returns to the seed treatment. If access to
fertilizer had proven not to be a constraint, we might have expected to see the impact of the
fertilizer grant, both alone and in combination with the seed treatment, to be zero. Instead,
Table 3 shows a positive effect of the direct impact and a negative impact of the interaction
effect. In order to better understand this unexpected outcome, we look more closely at the
impact of the different treatments on fertilizer use in Appendix D. We find substantially
greater midline leakage from fertilizer lottery winners in seed treatment communities than in
  25                                                                                        ^1 - 0.5^
                                                                                                      2
   For example for the seed treatment, the estimated percentage change is calculated as exp(          ^1 ) - 1,
where  2                             ^
      ^ is the estimated variance of 1 .
          ^1
          




                                                      30
                       Table 3: Effects on maize yield (IHST of kg/ac).
                                                  Mid-Altitude    Transitional
                                                   All Farms   Western Central
            Seed Treatment, ^1                       0.23*       -0.17     0.10
                                                     (0.13)     (0.12)    (0.15)
            Fertilizer Treatment, ^2                 0.23**      0.11        ­
                                                     (0.11)     (0.09)      ­
            Seed*Fertilizer Treatment, ^3            -0.23*       0.20       ­
                                                     (0.14)     (0.12)      ­
            Baseline Yield, ^1                      0.11***    0.15*** 0.20***
                                                     (0.03)     (0.02)    (0.05)
            Percent effects
              Seed Treatment                            25%       -17%       9%
              Fertilizer Treatment                      26%        11%        ­
            Control mean                                5.97       6.86     6.27
            Observations                                1178       856      1016
            R-squared                                   0.07       0.06     0.11
            Pair indicator variables included as controls.
            Standard errors clustered by village.
            * = 10% significance, ** = 5%, *** = 1%


non-seed treatment communities, consistent with the interpretation that there was greater
rates of social taxation of "windfall fertilizer" in treatment sites. Given this configuration,
it is unsurprising that households that benefited from both the seed treatment and the
fertilizer lottery basically only benefited from the seed treatment, with the added benefit
of fertilizer largely erased. This pattern of differential social taxation across treatment and
control villages is thus consistent with the pattern of estimated treatment effects shown in
Table 3.
   While we do see significant impacts of the seed treatment in the mid-altitude zone, in
the transitional zone the estimated treatment effects on yields are relatively small and do
not differ from zero at the five percent significance level. Recall that hybrid use was already
quite high in this zone prior to the study, and that net compliance was also quite low (see
Table 2).




                                                   31
5    Heterogeneous Effects on Yields by Past Hybrid Use

As reported above, we find substantial yield impacts of Western Seed varieties in the mid-
altitude zone. Given that prior adoption of hybrids in this area was modest, the question
remains whether the observed impacts reflect the fact that Western Seed varieties outperform
local varieties as well as other commercially available hybrids (largely bred for higher altitude
maize-growing areas). The simple theoretical model developed in Section 2 is silent on the
question as to which group will benefit most from a well-adapted improved seed: those who
make the switch from local, unimproved seed or those that switch from less well-adapted
improved seed. To gain empirical purchase on this question, this section splits our mid-
altitude sample between households that consistently used hybrids prior to the study period
and those that did not (see Table 2).

Table 4: Heterogeneous impact of locally adapted improved seeds in the mid-altitude zone
(IHST of kg/ac).
                                                      Mid-Altitude Zone
                                              Hybrid Non-Users    Hybrid Users
                                              Pooled Endline Pooled Endline
           Seed Treatment, ^1                    0.20   0.26*   0.40** 0.78***
                                               (0.15)   (0.15)  (0.16)   (0.21)
           Fertilizer Treatment, ^2              0.22    0.18   0.35** 0.54**
                                               (0.13)   (0.14)  (0.16)   (0.21)
           Seed*Fertilizer Treatment, ^3        -0.21    -0.21   -0.25   -0.44*
                                               (0.17)   (0.18)  (0.24)   (0.26)
           Baseline Yield, ^1                 0.12*** 0.09**      0.02    -0.02
                                               (0.03)   (0.04)  (0.05)   (0.05)
           Percent effect
           - Seed Treatment                     21%         29%        47%    113%
           - Fertilizer Treatment               23%         18%        39%    68%
           Control mean                         5.92        6.03       6.13    5.98
           Observations                         964         482        208     104
           R-squared                            0.06        0.03       0.19    0.22
           Pair indicator variables included as controls.
           Standard errors clustered by village.
           Users planted hybrids in 80-100% of main seasons (2007-2012).
           * = 10% significance, ** = 5%, *** = 1%




                                                32
       Table 4 displays the ITT estimates for equation 2 for the hybrid users and non-users
sub-samples. As shown in the bottom panel of the table, the estimated impacts of the
seed treatment are 21% for the non-user group and 47% for the user group, with only the
latter estimate attaining conventional levels of statistical significance. As shown in Table
2, net compliance for the users group was 31% in the midline and fell to 25% at the time
of the endline (with the decline driven by a substantial uptick in WSC seed use by the
control group). For the non-users group, net compliance was only 11% in midline, rising
to 17% in the endline following the ancillary seed delivery intervention. This lower level
of compliance explains at least in part the smaller magnitude and statistical insignificance
of the ITT estimate for the non-users group. For the users group, the estimated 47% ITT
impact translates into a robust impact for those that actually adopted the seeds.
       Given the compliance issues that especially surrounded the midline year, the research
team implemented an ancillary seed delivery service, as described in Section 3.3 above.
While the delivery was less effective than anticipated, it did boost compliance among the
non-users group.26 The second and fourth columns of Table 4 thus present separate estimates
for the endline year data only. As can be seen, for the non-users group, the estimated impact
rises and becomes statistically significant and indicates an ITT treatment effect of a 29%
yield increase. The estimated impact for the hybrid users group retains its significance and
jumps substantially to an implied 113% yield increase. The fact that the impacts on the level
of yields for the baseline hybrid user population are larger than for the non-user population
(even after accounting for differences in the net compliance rate) would seem puzzling at
first glance. However, this finding is consistent with an interpretation that the ability of
the more resource-constrained non-user farm households to garner the full genetic benefits
of Western Seed hybrids bred for their agro-ecological zone.
       Because we derive our results from theory for farm households whose key outcome is net
  26
     Phone orders for the seed were quite high, with 55% of treatment farmers ordering seed. Unfortunately,
at time of delivery, only 16% of treatment farmers bought seed via the delivery intervention. Many farmers
proved unwilling or unable to pay for the seed despite the fact that it had been made clear that the seeds
were being sold at the market price and not given away for free.


                                                    33
income, we use our estimates of impacts on yields to calculate the change in net revenues
that two stylized types of mid-altitude farmers (hybrid non-users and hybrid users) would
receive from adopting locally adapted Western Seed hybrids. Adjusting the Table 4 ITT
estimates for the compliance rates, we calculate that "non-user" farmers who switched from
local seeds would have experienced a 339 kilogram increase in production per-acre (a 161%
increase), while farmers who switched from other hybrids and used fertilizers would have
experienced a 482 kilogram increase per-acre (a 141% increase).27 Using market prices for
outputs, seeds and fertilizer, these increases imply a 130% increase in net revenues for non-
user farmers switching from local seeds, and a 245% increase for user farmers switching from
NLA hybrids to WSC varieties.28 These financial figures place the impacts squarely in Case
1 of Table 1 above, with both an intercept and a slope effect and both low resource and
better resourced farmers benefit from the Western Seed adaptive breeding program.



6        Conclusion

While the average Kenyan farmer deviates from the sub-Saharan African pattern of low
hybrid maize adoption, the mid-altitude zone of Kenya more closely resembles the rest of
the continent: persistently modest hybrid use over the last 50 years. A simple theory of the
supply and demand for hybrid seeds suggests a rationale for this persistent pattern. Large-
scale seed companies do not supply well-adapted hybrid varieties to small markets. Neither
do local seed companies who may enjoy informational (and, perhaps, cost-) advantages, but
are constrained by their lack of capital. Given the lack of supply of adapted varieties, our
model suggests that adoption of the available (non-adapted) hybrids will be low and restricted
to better-resourced farmers within the niche market. Absent locally-adapted hybrids, farmer
productivity and incomes stagnate, especially among the poorest farmers.
    27
     For these calculations, we use the pooled ITT estimates from Table 4 for both the hybrid users and
non-user groups and the compliance rates reported in Table 2. These treatment on the treatment percent
change in yield are then applied to the baseline yield levels, also reported in Table 2.
  28
     Consistent with the survey data, we assume that the non-user group applies on inorganic fertilizer, while
the user group applies 50 kilograms per acre, the median value for this group in the sample.

                                                     34
   An external infusion of impact investor capital to a local seed company based in Kenya's
mid-altitude zone allowed us to explore the impacts of disrupting this seed market equilib-
rium. By 2010, Western Seed had developed and registered hybrid maize varieties--building
on publicly-provided parent seed lines from CIMMYT--and were supplying high-performing
locally-adapted seed varieties to the mid-altitude niche market. The impact investment
capital allowed the company to rapidly expand its seed production capacity and expand
its marketing to the mid-altitude and the (higher) transitional zone. In collaboration with
Western Seed, we established a three-year RCT to study the impact of offering the new seed
varieties.
   The key findings from the empirical analysis are that the new varieties offered substantial
benefits to farmers located in the mid-altitude region. On average, the ITT estimate of the
yield impact implies a 25% yield increase. Given the modest compliance rates, the actual
impact on adopters is estimated to be five times that amount. In the higher-altitude zones
where Western Seed also expanded, the yield benefits are both economically and statistically
negligible, consistent with the expectation that the seed sector has already adapted varieties
for these larger and more lucrative zones.
   Consistent with our theoretical model, the data reveal that prior to the experimental
introduction of Western Seed hybrid, farmers in the mid-altitude zone could be divided into
two groups: a larger group (82% of the sampled farmers) who almost never use improved
seeds and rarely use fertilizer, and a smaller group (18%) who almost always use improved
seeds and fertilizer. While our statistical power suffers as we sub-divide the mid-altitude
farmers into these two groups, we estimate that the yield impacts on farmers already using
hybrids are actually larger than those on the farmers who switched from local, unimproved
seed varieties. In the last year of the RCT, we estimate that the productivity increases
for those who actually adopted Western Seed are on the order of 100-150% for those who
switched from local seeds, and 150% for prior hybrid adopters who are able to apply fertilizers
to their maize. While large, these figures are in line with the seed company's claims about


                                              35
the yield potential of their varieties in the mid-altitude region.
       Stepping back, these results indicate that the seed system was leaving substantial productivity-
enhancing opportunities on the table. While our data do not allow us to test the performance
of different seed systems per se, the patterns that we observe are consistent with a theoret-
ical model in which small agro-ecological niches will remain underserved absent the hybrid
partnerships (public investments in foundation seed and impact investment capital) that al-
lowed Western Seed to expand. Our results cautiously suggest that such a hybrid system has
much to offer other areas of sub-Saharan Africa where cereal yields lag even further behind.29
These observations do not say that the other constraints discussed in the introduction do
not matter. However, better adapted and more profitable improved varieties would alter
incentives for risk averse or even time-inconsistent farmers to adopt them.
       Entry of new actors into niche breeding may transform innovation markets for agricultural
technologies in regions like mid-altitude Kenya to more closely resemble the present in regions
like transitional and highland Kenya, where many firms compete in hybrid development.
Such a change would shift research priorities toward studying the implications of competition
and product differentiation between firms on the productivity and welfare of agricultural
households in these environments. From this perspective, our finding that locally well-
adapted varieties offer important benefits to both poor and better-resourced farmers indicates
that such adaptive breeding, whatever its source, can offer substantial economic and social
benefits.




  29
    However, we should stress that our modeling assumes that local companies have lower fixed costs of hybrid
development due to greater knowledge of the local growing conditions. While we believe this assumption
approximates the case of hybrid development in Kenya in the early 2000s, recent advances in big data analysis
may soon tilt cost advantages in favor of large multinational firms that can realize economies of scope from
drawing on genetic markers and data from agronomic test trials in agro-ecological environments around the
world. While development of hybrids by Western Seed arose from public investments by CIMMYT's breeding
program that drew on its international scope of research, in the future multinational companies may realize
even greater economies of scope independently, raising the potential of these large firms entering the market
for niche breeding at low cost.


                                                     36
Acknowledgements
We are grateful for comments from Jim Gaffney, GianCarlo Moschini, Wendong Zhang, and seminar partici-
pants at Iowa State University, the University of California­Davis, and the University of Wisconsin­Madison.
We thank our survey respondents for their enthusiasm, generosity, and patience during the course of this
research.
    Funding: This work was supported by Acumen, a non-profit impact investment firm; the American
people through the United States Agency for International Development Cooperative Agreement No. AID-
OAA-L-12-00001 with the BASIS Feed the Future Innovation Lab; and the Agricultural Technology Adoption
Initiative (ATAI) administered by JPAL at MIT and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. The contents
are the responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of Acumen, USAID, the US
Government, or other funders. Declarations of interest: none.




References

Abay, Kibrom, Blalock, Garrick, & Berhane, Guush. 2017. Locus of control and technology
  adoption indeveloping country agriculture: Evidence from Ethiopia. Journal of Economic
  Behavior and Organization, 143(November), 98­115.

Bellemare, Marc F., & Wichman, Casey J. 2019. Elasticities and the Inverse Hyperbolic Sine
  Transformation. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 82(1), 50­61.

Bruhn, Miriam, & McKenzie, David. 2009. In Pursuit of Balance: Randomization in Practice
  in Development Field Experiments. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
  1(4), 200­232.

Byerlee, Derek, & Traxler, Greg. 2001. The Role of Technology Spillovers and Economies
  of Size in the Efficient Design of Agricultural Research Systems. Chap. 9, pages 161­186
  of: Alston, Julian M., Pardey, Philip G., & Taylor, Michael J. (eds), Agricultural Science
  Policy: Changing Global Agendas. Baltimore and London: The Johns Hopkins University
  Press.



                                                    37
Carter, Michael R., Laajaj, Rachid, & Yang, Dean. forthcoming. Temporary Subsidies and
  Green Revolution Technology Adoption by Farmers and Their Social Networks. American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics.

Dercon, Stefan, & Christiaensen, Luc. 2011. Consumption risk, technology adoption and
  poverty traps: evidence from Ethiopia. Journal of Development Economics, 96(2), 159­
  173. working paper.

Duflo, Esther, Kremer, Michael, & Robinson, Johnathan. 2011. Nudging Farmers to Use
  Fertilizer: Theory and Experimental Evidence from Kenya. American Economic Review,
  101(6), 2350­2390.

Evenson, R. E., & Gollin, D. 2003. Assessing the impact of the Green Revolution, 1960 to
  2000. Science, 300(5620), 758­762.

Fund, Acumen. 2010. Acument Fund announces investment in Western Seed Company Lim-
  ited. Tech. rept.

Gerhart, John. 1975. The diffusion of hybrid maize in Western Kenya--Abridged by CIM-
  MYT. Tech. rept. Centro Internacional de Mejoramiento de Maiz y Trigo, Mexico City.

Griliches, Zvi. 1957. Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of Technological
  Change. Econometrica, 25(4), 501­522.

Griliches, Zvi. 1960. Hybrid Corn and the Economics of Innovation. Science, 132(3422),
  275­80.

Hassan, R M. 1998. Maize Technology Development and Transfer: A GIS Application for
  Research Planning In Kenya. Wallingford and New York: CAB International.

Kantor, Shawn, & Whalley, Alexander. 2019. Research Proximity and Productivity: Long-
  Term Evidence from Agriculture. Journal of Political Economy, 127(2).



                                          38
Karlan, Dean, Osei, Robert, Osei-Akoto, Isaac, & Udry, Christopher. 2014. Agricultural
  Decisions after Relaxing Credit and Risk Constraints. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  597­652.

KEPHIS. 2018. National Crop Variety List - Kenya. Tech. rept. Kenya Plant Health In-
  spectorate Service, Nairobi.

Laajaj, Rachid, & Macours, Karen. forthcoming. Measuring Skills in Developing Countries.
  Journal of Human Resources.

Langyintuo, Augustine S., Mwangi, Wilfred, Diallo, Alpha O., MacRobert, John, Dixon,
  John, & Bänziger, Marianne. 2010. Challenges of the maize seed industry in eastern and
  southern Africa: A compelling case for private-public intervention to promote growth.
  Food Policy, 35(4), 323­331.

Marenya, P., & Barrett, C. B. 2009. State-conditional Fertilizer yield response on western
  Kenyan farms. Amer. J. Agr. Econ., 91(4), 991­1006.

McKenzie, David. 2012. Beyond baseline and follow-up: The case for more T in experiments.
  Journal of Development Economics, 99(2), 210­221.

Partners, Pearl Capital. no date. Impact investment Understanding financial and social
  impact of investments in East African agricultural businesses. Tech. rept. The Gatsby
  Charitable Foundation.

Spielman, David J, Kolady, Deepthi, Cavalieri, Anthony, & Rao, N Chandrasekhara. 2014.
  The seed and agricultural biotechnology industries in India: An analysis of industry struc-
  ture, competition, and policy options. Food Policy, 45, 88­100.

Suri, Tavneet. 2011. Selection and Comparative Advantage in Technology Adoption. Econo-
  metrica, 79(1), 159­209.




                                             39
TAMPA2. 2004. Tegemeo Agricultural Monitoring and Policy Analysis Project. Tech. rept.
  Egerton University - Tegemeo Institute of Agricultural Policy and Development and Michi-
  gan State University, Nairobi.

TAPRA. 2010. Tegemeo Agricultural Policy Research Analysis Project. Tech. rept. Egerton
  University - Tegemeo Institute of Agricultural Policy and Development and Michigan State
  University, Nairobi.

Tjernstrom, Emilia. 2017. Learning from Others in Heterogeneous Environments.




                                           40
Appendix A: Linear Returns to Fertilizer

As Section 2 describes, standard agronomic practice recommends that farmers who cannot
apply the optimal amount of fertilizer to their entire crop, should apply the optimum rate
to a portion of their crop rather than applying fertilizer at a diluted rate to the entire crop.
Using a simple economic model that has roots in the efficiency wage literature's portrayal
of the response of human work capacity to nutrition (see ?), this appendix shows that
optimized returns to fertilizer will be linear under profit maximization whenever the farmer
is constrained in her purchase of fertilizer.
    Figure 8 graphs the additional production per-hectare (q ) that occurs as fertilizer intensity
(f ) increases under the assumption that marginal returns to fertilizer exhibit increasing
returns over a range and then diminishing returns thereafter. Without fertilizer, farmers
receive a fixed amount 0 , and q (f ) is the additional output received in addition to the
base, no fertilizer amount. In the figure, the slope of the ray from origin is the average
product of fertilizer (q/f ), or the bang for the buck spent on fertilizer. As can be seen by
visual inspection, f  is the fertilizer intensity that maximizes additional production per-unit
fertilizer given the S-shaped production function. No other intensity will give more. We
denote the slope of the ray that intersects the function q at input level f  as 1 .
    Consider the case where f  = 100 kg/ha and a farmer with one hectare of maize has
only 50 kg of fertilizer, then she will maximize output and income by concentrating the 50
kg on 0.5 hectare and putting zero fertilizer on the rest. As can easily confirmed visually,
alternative allocations (e.g., 50 kg/hectare on her entire maize plot, yielding a fertilizer
               f
intensity of    2
                  )   will yield less output for the same input expenditure because it fails to fully
exploit the increasing returns portion of the returns to fertilizer function, q (f ).30 That is,
  30
     This argument is exactly identical to the initial contributions to the efficiency wage literature in which
an employer (who is indirectly buying nutrition by paying workers a wage) will never pay a worker less
than the efficiency wage because worker productivity falls off more quickly than cost when descending the
increasing returns portion of the efficiency wage curve.




                                                      41
                                 Figure 8: Returns to Fertilizer

for this case of constrained access to fertilizer:


      0.5q (0) + 0.5q (f  ) > 0.5q () + 0.5q (f  - ), .


For this case, when fertilizer is optimally applied, marginal returns to additional units of
fertilizer will always be a constant 1 , not because marginal returns do not change, but
because the farmer optimally adjusts fertilizer application to obtain the constant, maximal
return. Once the farmer can apply fertilizer at intensity f  on all her land, further use
of fertilizer will face diminishing returns as beyond that level, the function q (f ) is strictly
concave.




                                                42
      This intuition can be captured by the following profit maximization problem:


(3)                 ¯
        M ax Q - pf F
        F, Tf


                subject to :
                                                  ¯ - Tf q (0)
                               Q = Tf q (F/Tf ) + T

(4)                            pf F  K
                                    ¯
                               Tf < T


where pf is the price of fertilizer and K is the working capital available to purchase fertilizer.
Note that this simple specification allows any number of possible outcomes, including zero
use of fertilizer (F, Tf = 0), which will occur when 1 < pf ; and, use of fertilizer in excess of
f  (Tf = T
         ¯ and F > f  T
                      ¯), which will happen when K > pf T
                                                        ¯f  and 1 > pf . As discussed

in Sub-Section 2.1, the relevant case for low income small scale farmers, who cannot borrow
against their future income to buy fertilizer, is that K < pf T
                                                              ¯f  . For these farmers, the

optimized production function they face can thus be written as 0 + 1 f , with constant
marginal returns to fertilizer. As further analyzed in Sub-Section 2.1, variety choice and the
decision whether or not to use any fertilizer will be based on those linear returns for liquidity
constrained farmers.




                                                     43
Appendix B: Proofs of Results on the Demand for Im-

proved Seed Varieties

First we demonstrate that, for sufficiently poor households, optimized utility conditional on
minimal adoption of the NLA improved variety will be strictly less than the non-adoption
alternative (    nr
                      < 0 for small z1 ). For an arbitrary and small value , we can construct a
level of cash-on-hand:




                   ¯ - H )sr +
        z1  Hsn + (H


      The corresponding utility conditional on minimal adoption of the NLA improved variety
is:




                  ¯ |H n = H ) = u( ) + u(H
        V n (z1 , H                       ¯ 0
                                            n      r
                                              - H (0   n
                                                     - 0 ))


where we have assumed that the return from planting the retained variety without fertilizer is
strictly greater than the return from planting the NLA variety without fertilizer (0
                                                                                   r  n
                                                                                     -0 > 0).
      The corresponding utility under the non-adoption alternative is:




                  ¯ |H n = H a = 0) = u(H (sn - sr ) + ) + u(H
        V l (z1 , H                                          ¯ 0
                                                               n
                                                                 )


which is strictly greater than utility conditional on minimal adoption of the NLA improved
variety, since we have assumed that NLA seed varieties are more expensive than retained
seed varieties (sn > sr ).
      Second, we demonstrate that the difference in the value functions increases with initial


                                                44
cash on hand. The difference in value functions varies with initial cash on hand as follows:



       nr          f n  n
          = u (.)H     (1 - pf )
      z1           z1

   Thus the difference in the value functions increases with initial cash on hand when two
conditions are met. First, returns to fertilizer use on the NLA variety must be large relative
                      n
to the discount rate ( pf
                        1
                          >  ), which we assume to true. Second, fertilizer use on the NLA
variety must increase with initial cash on hand, which we formally derive by applying the
implicit function theorem to the household's first-order condition:



      df n           u (.)Hpf
           =                    n 2
                                     >0
      dz1    u (.)((Hpf )2 +  (H1 ))

   Finally, given that the difference in value functions and the level of fertilizer use increase
with initial cash on hand, we can define a critical cash on hand level and corresponding level
of fertilizer use (~   ~n ) at which adoption of the NLA improved variety begins. Households
                   zn, f
with cash on hand greater than this critical level will adopt the NLA improved variety and
apply more fertilizer than the critical level. Households with cash on hand less than this
critical level will not adopt the NLA improved variety.




                                              45
                      Table 5: Balance at baseline, Western (N=1017)

                                       Summary Stats           Estimates from         OLS
                                        (1)      (2)       (3)         (4)                (5)
                                      Pooled Control      Seed         Fert            Seed*Fert
  Hybrid main seasons (0-1)               0.51    0.52    0.00        -0.06**             0.06
                                        (0.44)  (0.45) (0.04)        (0.03)             (0.04)
  Fertilizer main seasons (0-1)           0.49    0.53   -0.02        -0.07**             0.03
                                        (0.46)  (0.46) (0.04)        (0.03)             (0.05)
  Dry maize yield (kg/ac)              368.49   375.01    7.50       -12.75             -18.17
                                     (425.64) (428.83) (37.21)      (26.93)            (40.24)
  Acres (maize)                           1.32     1.38  -0.26***      0.03               0.19
                                        (1.17)  (1.32) (0.09)        (0.10)             (0.12)
  Acres (total)                           1.76     1.82  -0.27**       0.06               0.16
                                        (1.51)  (1.59) (0.12)        (0.12)             (0.15)
  Income per capita (100 ksh)          279.60   252.91   25.31        10.52              38.22
                                     (391.37) (347.63) (34.66)      (30.42)            (43.33)
  Poverty (0-1)                           0.32     0.33  -0.02        -0.00               0.01
                                        (0.23)  (0.24) (0.02)        (0.02)             (0.03)
  Dietary diversity (0-12)                6.68    6.52    0.28**       0.07              -0.03
                                        (1.62)  (1.65) (0.14)        (0.14)             (0.19)
  Food insecure (0/1)                     0.65     0.70  -0.07**      -0.03               0.00
                                        (0.48)  (0.46) (0.04)        (0.04)             (0.06)
  Pooled and Control report means (standard deviations). Seed, Fert, and Seed*Fert
  report point estimates obtained by OLS with pair indicators as controls (standard
  errors clustered by village). Significance: * = 10%, ** = 5%, *** = 1%


Appendix C: Balance Checks in Western and Central

Table 5 estimates how baseline characteristics differ by treatment status in Western. Table
6 estimates how baseline characteristics differ by treatment status in Central.




                                                 46
       Table 6: Balance at baseline, Central (N=508).

                                    Summary Stats     OLS
                                     (1)      (2)      (3)
                                   Pooled Control     Seed
Hybrid seasons (0-10)                  7.78    7.82   -0.06
                                     (3.55)  (3.49) (0.36)
Fertilizer seasons (0-10)              8.65    8.64    0.02
                                     (2.91)  (2.94) (0.35)
Dry maize yield (kg/ac)             428.46   432.64   -5.14
                                  (489.72) (515.44) (39.63)
Acres (maize)                          0.76    0.74    0.04
                                     (0.70)  (0.70) (0.08)
Acres (total)                          1.29    1.27    0.04
                                     (1.14)  (1.08) (0.14)
Income per capita (100 ksh)         507.28   424.16 167.74**
                                  (738.67) (552.79) (70.15)
Poverty (0-1)                          0.13     0.13  -0.01
                                     (0.17)  (0.18) (0.01)
Dietary diversity (0-12)               7.63    7.63   -0.01
                                     (1.45)  (1.40) (0.15)
Food insecure (0/1)                    0.44     0.46  -0.03
                                     (0.50)  (0.50) (0.05)
Pooled and Control report means (standard deviations). Seed reports
point estimates obtained by OLS with pair indicators as
controls (standard errors clustered by village).
Significance: * = 10%, ** = 5%, *** = 1%




                                47
Appendix D: The Fertilizer-Seed Interaction Puzzle

In order to explore to the impact of fertilizer treatment, we define a set of four mutually
exclusive dummy variables: DS indicates those farms that were assigned to the seed treat-
ment but lost the fertilizer lottery; DF are farms that won the fertilizer lottery but were not
assigned to the seed treatment; and, DSF are farms that were assigned to the seed treatment
and won the fertilizer lottery. Using these terms, we can write the following regression for
the amount of fertilizer used by farm household i in matched pair p in time period t, where
t = 1, 2, 3 covers the baseline, midline and endline survey rounds:

                3
                     C   S S      F F      SF SF
      fist =         t + t Dist + t Dist + t Dist + µp + ist
               t=1


Under this specification, the t
                              C
                                parameters capture the fertilizer use by the pure control
group (farm households that were not assigned to the seed treatment and did not win the
fertilizer lottery). The other parameters capture the additional effect of being in one of
the three mutually exclusive treated groups at baseline, midline and endline. Estimation
included a matched pair fixed effect and standard errors were clustered at the village level.
   Table 7 gives the parameter estimates for this model. The estimates evidence substan-
tially greater midline leakage from fertilizer lottery winners in seed treatment communities
than in non-seed treatment communities. Looking at total use of fertilizer on all crops on
the farm, we find that in control sites without the seed treatment, the average winner of
the fertilizer lottery increased use of fertilizer in 2015 by 35 kilograms (kg) from the base-
line year, whereas the grant provided 50 kg. In addition, losers of the lottery in these sites
increased fertilizer use by 10 kg from the baseline year, consistent with the interpretation
that a portion of the fertilizer windfall was shared with lottery losers. In sites with the seed
treatment, winners of the fertilizer lottery increased fertilizer use by only 24 kg (31% less
than in control villages) from the baseline year, while lottery losers increased fertilizer use
by 12 kg (20% more than in control villages).


                                              48
       These estimates are consistent with the interpretation that there was greater social taxa-
tion of "windfall fertilizer" in treatment sites. One explanation for this greater social taxation
is the seed treatment information campaign in treatment sites emphasized the importance of
fertilizer to improving maize yields (especially when applied to hybrids). From this perspec-
tive, it is not surprising that fertilizer lottery losers in treatment sites would have put greater
pressure on winners to share their windfall fertilizer than losers would have done in control
sites. When we carry out the same statistical exercise on fertilizer used on maize, we obtain
a similar picture. Given this configuration, it is unsurprising that households that benefited
from both the seed treatment and the fertilizer lottery basically only benefited from the seed
treatment, with the added benefit of fertilizer largely erased by this pattern of sharing. This
pattern of differential social taxation across treatment and control villages is thus consistent
with the pattern of estimated treatment effects shown in Table 3.31




  31
    Additional directional evidence for this interpretation would be if increased fertilizer use was socially
taxed most for lottery winners with high degree centrality to their social networks. We are unable to conduct
that analysis, however, due to a lack of any network data in our seed control communities and only partial
network data in our seed treatment communities from a study related to this work.


                                                     49
   Table 7: Effects on total fertilizer use on farm (kg).
Control Households
Baseline Mean                                  9.69

Midline                                       9.86
                                              (3.48)
Endline                                        5.42
                                              (2.72)
Additional "Seed Treatment Only" Effect
Baseline                                  3.07
                                        (2.85)
Midline                                  2.35
                                        (5.61)
Endline                                  -0.31
                                        (3.89)
Additional "Fertilizer Winner Only" Effect
Baseline                                 -0.43
                                        (1.65)
Midline                                25.46
                                        (5.51)
Endline                                  5.10
                                        (3.64)
Additional "Seed Treatment & Fertilizer Winner" Effect
Baseline                                 -1.03
                                        (3.41)
Midline                                 16.40
                                        (5.03)
Endline                                  3.12
                                        (5.21)
Observations                             1750
Matched Pair Fixed Effects             Included
All specifications include pair indicator variables as controls.
17 observations dropped with extreme values (greater than 500 kg).
Standard errors clustered at the village-level in parentheses.
* = 10% significance, ** = 5%, *** = 1%




                               50
