                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




QUID PRO QUO, KNOWLEDGE SPILLOVER, AND INDUSTRIAL QUALITY UPGRADING:
               EVIDENCE FROM THE CHINESE AUTO INDUSTRY

                                            Jie Bai
                                       Panle Jia Barwick
                                        Shengmao Cao
                                          Shanjun Li

                                      Working Paper 27644
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27644


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                          August 2020, Revised November 2020


We thank David Atkin, Lauren Bergquist, Loren Brandt, Davin Chor, Kerem Cosa, Dave
Donaldson, Je ery Frankel, Asim Khwaja, Gabriel Kreindler, Gordon Hanson, James Harrigan,
Hanwei Huang, Wolfgang Keller, Robert Lawrence, Ernest Liu, Benjamin Olken, Jessica Pan,
Ivan Png, Yu Qin, Dani Rodrik, Heiwai Tang, Shaoda Wang, Shangjin Wei, Daniel Xu, and
seminar and conference participants at Baruch College, the Beijing International Trade and
Investment Symposium, Bank of Canada-Tsinghua PBCSF-University of Toronto Conference on
the Chinese Economy, China Economics Summer Institute, Georgetown University, George
Washington University, Harvard Kennedy School, Johns Hopkins University, Microsoft
Economics, MIT, National University of Singapore, NBER Chinese Economy Workshop, NBER
Development/BREAD (pre-conference), Stanford, trade seminar at Hong Kong Universities,
University of Toronto, University of Virginia, University of Zurich, UPenn China Seminar, U.S.
Census Bureau, World Bank Development Research Group, and Yale for helpful comments. We
thank Ann Xie and Minghuang Zhang for generous data support and Luming Chen, Yikuan Ji,
Yiding Ma, Binglin Wang, and Yukun Wang for excellent research assistance. All errors are our
own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jie Bai, Panle Jia Barwick, Shengmao Cao, and Shanjun Li. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Quid Pro Quo, Knowledge Spillover, and Industrial Quality Upgrading: Evidence from the
Chinese Auto Industry
Jie Bai, Panle Jia Barwick, Shengmao Cao, and Shanjun Li
NBER Working Paper No. 27644
August 2020, Revised November 2020
JEL No. F23,O14,O25

                                           ABSTRACT

While there is a vast body of research on the benefits of FDI in developing countries, whether and
how the form of FDI matters have received limited attention. This paper studies the impact of
FDI via quid pro quo (technology for market access) on facilitating knowledge spillover and
quality upgrading. Our context is the Chinese automobile industry, where foreign automakers are
required to set up joint ventures (the "quid") with domestic automakers in return for market
access (the "quo"). The identification strategy exploits a unique dataset of detailed vehicle quality
measures along multiple dimensions and relies on within-product quality variation across
dimensions. We show that affiliated domestic automakers adopt more similar quality strength as
their joint ventures, compared to non-affiliated pairs. The results suggest that quid pro quo
generates additional knowledge spillover to affiliated domestic automakers, on top of any
industry-wide spillover. We rule out endogenous joint venture network formation, overlapping
customer bases, or direct technology transfer via market transactions as alternative explanations.
Analyses leveraging additional micro datasets on worker flows and shared upstream suppliers
among automakers demonstrate that labor mobility and supplier network are important channels
in mediating knowledge spillover. On the other hand, while quid pro quo facilitates learning, such
a requirement is not a prerequisite for knowledge spillover. Counterfactual exercises show that
quid pro quo is not the primary driver of the overall quality improvement experienced by
domestic automakers.


Jie Bai                                           Shengmao Cao
Harvard Kennedy School                            Economics Department
79 JFK Street                                     Stanford University
Cambridge, MA 02138                               Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER                                          shengmao@stanford.edu
jie_bai@hks.harvard.edu
                                                  Shanjun Li
Panle Jia Barwick                                 Cornell University
Department of Economics                           405 Warren Hall
Cornell University                                Ithaca, NY 14853
462 Uris Hall                                     and NBER
Ithaca, NY 14853                                  SL2448@cornell.edu
and NBER
panle.barwick@cornell.edu
1        Introduction

The past several decades have witnessed significant liberalization among developing economies to foreign
trade and investment as advocated by various international organizations (UNCTAD, 2018; World Bank,
2018).1 Nevertheless, emerging economies such as China, India, and Brazil continue to impose consider-
able restrictions on foreign direct investment (FDI) in certain sectors for strategic considerations. One
such policy is "quid pro quo " (technology for market access), which requires multinational firms to form
joint ventures (JVs) with domestic firms, often with a significant cap on foreign equity, in return for
gaining access to the domestic market of the host country (Holmes, McGrattan, and Prescott, 2015).2
While the joint venture requirement more directly exposes firms in developing countries to foreign tech-
nology, multinational firms consider it a form of coerced technology transfer and a significant barrier
to investing in developing countries. Quid pro quo lies on the front line of the US-China trade debate,
and concern over this policy was a key stated justification behind the Trump administration's decision
to impose tariffs on $50 billion of Chinese imports in 2018.3
        Despite the controversy surrounding quid pro quo, little is known about its benefits to the host
country, compared to unrestricted FDI. The vast literature on FDI has paid relatively little attention
to whether and how the form of FDI matters (see Harrison and Rodr´
                                                                 iguez-Clare (2009) for a review).
In this paper, we attempt to fill the knowledge gap by examining the importance of the joint venture
requirement under quid pro quo in facilitating knowledge spillover from foreign to domestic firms in
developing countries. Unlike previous studies that mostly rely on firm-level TFP (i.e., the Solow residual)
as the outcome measure, we exploit a rich set of direct measures of product quality that embody firms'
fundamental technological capabilities. These quality measures give us a tangible way of measuring
knowledge spillover and allow us to look inside the black box of TFP. Understanding the determinants
of quality upgrading, an important engine of economic growth, is also a first-order question for both
academics and policy makers in developing countries (Verhoogen, 2020).
        Our context is the Chinese automobile industry, where quid pro quo was first introduced in the
country and henceforth became a major industrial policy. Foreign automakers are required to set up
joint ventures (the "quid ") with domestic automakers in order to produce and sell cars in China (the
    1
     Restrictions on foreign investment and technology transfer were common in developing and even OECD countries
before the 1990s. Economic and trade liberalization in the 1980s and 1990s brought about a more laissez-faire attitude
toward foreign investment and technology transfer, and many restrictions were removed during that period (Karabay,
2010).
   2
     China keeps a 50% foreign ownership cap in 38 "restricted access" industries. Vietnam has a 49% foreign ownership
cap for all publicly listed companies. The Philippines has a 40% foreign ownership cap on telecommunication and utility
companies. In India and Brazil, foreign ownership was restricted in numerous key industries until recently.
   3
     The Office of the US Trade Representative (USTR) issued a report in 2018 on its investigation into China's poli-
cies and practices related to technology transfer, intellectual property, and innovation. Forced technology transfer
using foreign ownership restrictions is considered a key component in China's technology transfer regime. Source:
https://ustr.gov/sites/default/files/Section 301 FINAL.PDF.




                                                          1
"quo "). A fixed cap of 50% is imposed on foreign ownership share, and it is binding in all cases. China
has been the largest automobile market in the world since 2009. All major multinational automakers
compete in this large market, including 23 JVs (e.g., BMW-Brilliance), 12 domestic automakers that
are affiliated with the JVs but have independent production (e.g., Brilliance Auto),4 and 7 domestic
automakers without any JV affiliation (e.g. BYD).
      The automobile industry is a classical industry for studying knowledge spillover given the multitude
of technologies embodied in the final products, including propulsion, electronics, safety, fuel efficiency,
emission control, materials, and most recently AI. In recent years, Chinese domestic automakers have
developed high-quality indigenous brands, potentially benefiting from knowledge spillover from foreign
automakers via the JVs. The rich industry dynamics allow us to study the following questions: Has
the ownership affiliation stipulated under the quid pro quo policy been effective in inducing knowledge
spillover from foreign automakers to domestic automakers? If so, to what extent, and what are the
underlying mechanisms? What will happen if quid pro quo is lifted - a question that speaks directly to
the current trade debate between the US and China?
      To answer these questions, we have compiled to our knowledge the most comprehensive data on
China's automobile industry. Our primary dataset consists of direct observations of quality along
multiple dimensions of vehicle performance for nearly the universe of car models produced in China from
2009 to 2014.5 We map the rich and granular quality data on to the entire ownership network to trace
out the patterns of knowledge flow. We further complement the quality and ownership information with
production location for each car model, patent transfers between JVs and domestic automakers, worker
flows among automakers, and information on upstream parts and components suppliers to examine
alternative explanations and potential channels of knowledge flow.
      We begin by documenting descriptive patterns of quality catch-up of Chinese domestic automakers.
The malfunction rates of car models produced by both affiliated and non-affiliated domestic automakers
were cut in half in less than a decade from 2009 to 2014, demonstrating an impressive record of quality
improvement. At the same time, the quality gap between domestic models and JV models produced in
China has greatly narrowed: the malfunction rate of domestic models was twice as high as that for JVs
in 2009. By 2014, the gap has shrunk to 33 percentage points.
      While many factors may explain the overall quality upgrading of the industry, including industry-
wide spillovers due to the presence of foreign automakers, we focus on the role of quid pro quo. The joint
venture requirement creates a set of domestic automakers that are affiliated with foreign automakers
  4
     Brilliance Auto is the domestic partner of BMW and owns 50% of the equity of the JV, BMW-Brilliance. The JV
produces BMW models that are sold in China. At the same time, Brilliance Auto has its own independent production
facilities and produces indigenous models under the Brilliance brand.
   5
     The data are sourced from J.D. Power, a leading marketing firm best known for its research on quality rankings of
automobile vehicles. These measures are widely regarded as industry standards: https://www.vox.com/the-goods/2018/
11/27/18105479/jd-power-car-commercials.



                                                          2
through the JVs. These domestic automakers are the primary beneficiaries of the policy, with direct
access to foreign technology.6 Therefore, to isolate knowledge spillover as a result of ownership affiliation
under quid pro quo, we examine whether the affiliated domestics automakers ("followers") learned more
from their affiliated foreign automakers ("leaders") compared to non-affiliated domestic automakers.
       The key identification challenge is the potentially endogenous JV formation whereby foreign and
domestic automakers strategically choose each other as partners based on quality. This type of sorting,
positive or negative, could confound the estimated spillover effect. Our analysis takes advantage of
detailed quality measures along multiple dimensions and exploits within-model relative strength across
dimensions. Specifically, we examine whether affiliated domestic followers adopt the quality strength
of the JV leaders in their independent production. An example helps illustrate our empirical strategy.
BMW-Brilliance, a JV between the German automaker, BMW, and the domestic automaker, Brilliance,
produces BMW models that have strong engine performance. Nissan-Dongfeng, a JV between the
Japanese automaker, Nissan, and the domestic automaker, Dongfeng, produce Nissan models that
are fuel efficient. We examine whether Brilliance produces indigenous models that have good engine
performance, and Dongfeng sells models that are fuel efficient, relative to their average quality.
       Our empirical framework forms an exhaustive list of pairs between domestic models and JV models
and regress the quality of a domestic model in a specific dimension on the quality of a JV model in
the same dimension. To account for the endogenous formation, the main specification controls for the
overall quality of each model in each period. In addition, it also controls for industry-wide technology
progress in different quality dimensions (e.g., fuel-saving technologies) and quality strength common
across vehicle segments (e.g., better safety features in luxury segment).7 We find that when a JV model
scores one standard deviation higher in a quality dimension, indigenous models by its affiliated domestic
automaker in the same vehicle segment score 0.138 standard deviation higher in the same dimension,
relative to models by other domestic automakers.
       While our main specification addresses JV formation based on the overall quality level, one may
still be concerned about endogenous formation based on relative strength. For example, domestic
automakers may seek foreign partners that have strength in certain quality dimensions to compensate
their weakness or augment their advantage. To address this issue, we first exploit an institutional
feature by limiting our sample to JVs formed prior to 2000. At that time, China's passenger vehicle
market was in its infancy. Most of the domestic automakers had very limited technological know-how
in passenger vehicle production. Therefore, it is unlikely that partners of JVs were matched based on
quality strength. Nevertheless, the pattern of shared quality persists for this sub-sample. Second, we
   6
     As a common practice under quid pro quo, foreign automakers offer existing product lines and knowhow as equity
while domestic partners provide capital and manufacturing facility when setting up a JV.
   7
     Following the standard classification system, we classify models into eight segments: mini sedan, small sedan, compact
sedan, medium sedan, large sedan, small-medium SUV, large SUV, and MPV. Quality is measured in different dimensions
such as engine, transmission, and interior, to be discussed below.


                                                            3
directly control for any initial correlation in quality strength between followers and leaders by partialling
out model by quality dimension fixed effects and only exploit temporal co-movement in quality measures
between the pair. Our results survive this more demanding specification.
       In addition to endogenous JV formation, another confounding factor that may lead to shared qual-
ity strength between JVs and affiliated automakers is that both groups might target the same set of
consumers and hence design similar products. However, analyses using the household vehicle owner-
ship surveys indicate that models by JVs and affiliated domestic partners are not considered as close
substitutes by most car buyers. JVs models are concentrated in the high-end markets, while indige-
nous brands produced by domestic automakers tend to target the low-end market. Lastly, the observed
patterns of knowledge spillover might be driven by market transactions, such as patent licensing and
assignment. Using records from the universe of patent applications and transfers, we find no patent
transfer activity from JVs to affiliated SOEs during our sample period.
       Having demonstrated the presence of knowledge spillover from JVs to their affiliated automakers,
we consider two potential mechanisms for knowledge spillover, worker flows and supplier network, both
of which have been documented in the literature. As carriers of technology know-how, workers move
across automakers and serve as a conduit of knowledge spillover.8 We construct worker flows between
each pair of JV and domestic automakers using data from LinkedIn (China), whose number of users
in the auto industry closely mimics the local volume of auto production. We find higher rates of
worker flows between affiliated pairs than non-affiliated pairs. The flows from JVs to affiliated domestic
automakers, rather than the reverse, are associated with knowledge spillover. In addition, high-tech
workers (engineers and designers) appear more relevant for knowledge spillover, though the estimate is
insignificant. These findings corroborate well the results in the existing literature and are consistent with
anecdotal evidence that domestic automakers benefit from recruiting talents from foreign automakers
with advanced technology. Worker flows that domestic automakers receive from affiliated JVs explain
58% of knowledge spillover via ownership affiliation.
       The second mechanism that we investigate is motivated by the observation that high-quality parts
and components directly affect the overall performance of the downstream product. JVs' high quality
standards for their suppliers in the host country often enhance the performance of the latter. If the
affiliated domestic automakers source from the same set of part suppliers that serve JVs, they could
directly benefit from the `shared supplier spillover' (Kee, 2015).9 Using the supplier network data
   8
     Studies that document the role of worker flows in transmitting knowledge between firms include Castillo et al. (2020);
Stoyanov and Zubanov (2012a); Maliranta, Mohnen, and Rouvinen (2009); Boschma, Eriksson, and Lindgren (2009);
Møen (2005), and between foreign multinationals and domestic firms include Balsvik (2011); G¨      org and Strobl (2005);
Poole (2013); Fosfuri, Motta, and Rønde (2001).
   9
     There exists a large body of work documenting the positive impact of trade and FDI on the development of the local
intermediate inputs market and spillover via backward linkages (e.g., Javorcik (2004); Blalock and Gertler (2008); Javorcik
and Spatareanu (2008); Havranek and Irsova (2011); Gorodnichenko, Svejnar, and Terrell (2014); Kee (2015); Eslava,
Fieler, and Xu (2015); Kee and Tang (2016)).


                                                            4
from MarkLines, which provides online information services for the automobile industry, we calculate
the number of common part suppliers shared by pairs of JV and domestic models. JVs and affiliated
domestic firms have a significantly greater supplier overlap, which contributes to 32% of knowledge
spillover via ownership affiliation.
   Finally, we turn to the policy question of what would happen to domestic automakers' quality if quid
pro quo were lifted in 2009, the beginning of our sample period. First, we conduct several additional
reduced form analyses to shed light on whether ownership affiliation stipulated by the quid pro quo policy
is a prerequisite for knowledge spillover. By exploiting the partial overlap in ownership and geographic
networks, we show that while spillover is the strongest between affiliated JV-domestic pairs in the same
city, there exists sizeable knowledge spillover from JVs to non-affiliated automakers located in the same
city. Such spillover from JVs to non-affiliated automakers persists even in cities without any affiliated
domestic automakers. Together, these results suggest that ownership affiliation, as required by quid pro
quo, is not a necessary condition for knowledge spillover, and the presence of affiliated domestic partners
is not a necessary "conduit" for knowledge to flow from foreign to domestic automakers. Evidence from
the upstream parts and components industry further shows that ownership affiliation does not confer
significant advantage in terms of knowledge spillover compared to full foreign ownership.
   We end with a quantification exercise where we remove quid pro quo and simulate the quality
evolution of domestic models. Ceteris paribus, lifting quid pro quo in 2009 would have reduced the
quality improvement experienced by domestic models by 5.7% to 16.5%. The results suggest that
quid pro quo is not the primary driver of quality upgrading in our setting, partly because knowledge
spillover and learning could happen through other channels even if foreign automakers were to operate
as wholly owned companies. These findings speak directly to the current US-China trade debate.
Amid recent tensions with the US regarding forced technology transfers via the quid pro quo policy,
the Chinese government has pledged to remove the foreign ownership requirement in several strategic
sectors, including the auto industry, by 2022. Our findings suggest that doing so would not significantly
hinder the upgrading of the domestic industry.
   It is important to acknowledge several caveats of our analyses. First, our study focuses on the
benefits of quid pro quo to domestic firms, but does not speak about the costs to foreign firms, both
in terms of the profit split and potential IP risks. Understanding the former takes us one step closer
to evaluating the full costs and benefits of the policy, and thereby its current relevance. Second, and
relatedly, our analysis focuses on spillover to domestic automakers conditioning on the existing set of
products and technologies introduced by foreign automakers. Future work is needed to examine foreign
automakers' incentives to introduce products and technology in light of global knowledge spillover (Buera
and Oberfield, 2016; Bilir and Morales, 2016). Finally, the data coverage prevents us from evaluating
the historical efficacy of quid pro quo, i.e., what would have happened if China did not have the policy



                                                    5
from the beginning. It is conceivable that market-for-technology policies are more effective as an infant
industry takes off and less effective when the industry matures.
   Our study contributes to several strands of literature. While there is an extensive empirical literature
on FDI spillover (see Harrison and Rodr´
                                       iguez-Clare (2009) for a recent review), whether and how
the form of FDI affects quality upgrading in the host country has received relatively little attention
(Blomstr¨
        om and Sj¨
                 oholm, 1999; Aitken and Harrison, 1999; Javorcik, 2004; Javorcik and Spatareanu,
2008; Fons-Rosen et al., 2013). Our study shows that while quid pro quo facilitates knowledge spillover,
it is not the primary driver of quality upgrading among domestic automakers in our setting.
   Second, most of the FDI literature relies on industry-level variation in FDI presence or intensity to
identify the impact on the host country (e.g., Haddad and Harrison (1993); Aitken and Harrison (1999);
Javorcik (2004); Keller and Yeaple (2009)). However, entry of foreign firms could be endogenous to
unobserved industry-level shocks, such as changing demand conditions and government policies, which
may directly affect the performance of domestic firms in the same industry. In addition, many studies
focus on TFP improvement as the key outcome variable (e.g., Haskel, Pereira, and Slaughter (2007);
Keller and Yeaple (2009); Abebe, McMillan, and Serafinelli (2018)), which reflects both the positive
spillover effect and the negative competition effect (Kosova, 2010; Lu, Tao, and Zhu, 2017; Fons-Rosen
et al., 2017). We contribute to the literature by using direct measures of quality at the product level that
embed firms' technological capability. Our identification relies on within-product (i.e., vehicle model)
quality strength, enabling us to control for industry-wide and firm-level potential confounds that might
be correlated with the joint-venture formation. In addition, we shed light on the potential mechanisms of
knowledge spillover, which remains relatively understudied in the literature (e.g., Balsvik (2011); Poole
(2013); Kee (2015); Newman et al. (2015)). Our results highlight worker flows and supplier network as
two important pathways of knowledge flow from foreign to domestic firms.
   Third, our paper relates to the growing body of work in trade and development that aims at
understanding the importance of technology innovation and quality upgrading in economic growth,
especially in developing countries (see Verhoogen (2020) for an excellent review). The existing literature
mostly focuses on indirect measures of technology and quality improvement, such as market shares and
prices (Khandelwal, 2010), as quality is rarely observed in standard firm surveys. Our study adds to a
nascent literature leveraging detailed quality measures for specific industries (e.g., Atkin, Khandelwal,
and Osman (2017); Medina (2017)) to examine the impact of FDI on innovation and product quality.
   Lastly, this research relates to an emerging literature on understanding the impacts of industrial
policies on firm behavior, innovation, and economic growth (e.g., Kalouptsidi (2017); Igami and Uetake
(2019); Chen and Lawell (2019); Chen et al. (2019); Barwick, Kalouptsidi, and Zahur (2019)). Our
analysis allows us to examine the role of China's longstanding but controversial quid pro quo policy in
an important industry (Holmes, McGrattan, and Prescott, 2015; Howell, 2018; Jiang et al., 2018).



                                                     6
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the industrial background
and data. Section 3 illustrates the empirical strategy. Section 4 presents the main empirical results and
robustness checks. Section 5 investigates the mechanisms. Section 6 discusses policy implications and
performs a quantification exercise. Section 7 concludes.


2     Background and Data

2.1    The Chinese Auto Industry and Quid Pro Quo

When China started its reform and open-up policy in 1978, China's automobile manufacturing was
concentrated in heavy trucks and buses with virtually no production capacity of passenger cars. To
develop its domestic passenger car sector, the Chinese government allowed international automakers
to enter but required them to partner with domestic automakers to set up a production facility. In
forming joint ventures (JVs), foreign automakers offer know-how and product lines as equity, which
is capped at 50%, while domestic automakers provide manufacturing facilities and labor.10 Quid pro
quo is implemented in many industries that are considered strategically important, from advanced
manufacturing such as aircraft and shipbuilding to service sectors such as banking and higher education.
There are at least two rationales for the policy. The first is to protect young and small domestic
producers in nascent industries (i.e., the infant industry argument). The second is to enhance domestic
technical capabilities and allow domestic firms to learn from their foreign partners.
    The first joint venture for automobile manufacturing was set up in 1983 between American Motors
Corporation (AMC, later acquired by Chrysler Corporation) and Beijing Automotive Company (now
Beijing Automotive Industry Corporation, BAIC) to produce the Jeep models. In 1984, Volkswagen
joined with Shanghai Automotive Company (now Shanghai Automotive Industry Corporation, SAIC)
to form VW-SAIC. In the early years, foreign automakers used joint ventures as a strategy to avoid
the high tariff of around 250% at that time. The majority of manufacturing activities were made up of
"knock-down kit" assembly. As a result, technology transfer was limited.
    Prior to 2000, most of the affiliated domestic automakers relied on the JVs for production of pas-
senger vehicles.11 There were few indigenous brands in the country, as shown in Appendix Figure B.1.
In 2004, the central government announced an explicit goal of developing domestic automotive tech-
  10
     In 1978, China's First Ministry of Machinery, in charge of automobile production, invited major international au-
tomakers to visit China and negotiated with them terms on technology transfer with the goal of developing the domestic
auto industry. GM was the first to send a delegation to China in October 1978 and met with the Vice Premier Li
Lanqing. During the meeting, GM CEO Thomas Murphy put forward the idea of a joint venture, which was a foreign
concept to the Chinese hosts. Using joint ventures to incentivize foreign automakers to provide technology was quickly
reported to the pragmatic leader Deng Xiaoping, who supported the idea. It then became a long-standing policy. Source:
https://media.gm.com/media/cn/zh/gm/news.detail.html/content/Pages/news/cn/zh/2011/Aug/0802.html.
  11
     SAIC stopped producing its own indigenous brand SH760 in 1991, after the joint venture with VW became very
successful. See https://www.autohome.com.cn/culture/201212/440381-5.html.



                                                          7
nology and promoting indigenous brands through supporting the establishment of R&D facilities using
tax incentives. The 2009 Automotive Adjustment and Revitalization Plan encouraged mergers and the
reorganization of automobile firms and called for the creation of new indigenous brands, both for export
and domestic sales. Under these government policies, affiliated domestic automakers started to launch
their own brands of passenger vehicles. For example, SAIC launched Roewe, and FAW launched its
first indigenous brand, Besturn, both in 2006. Dongfeng built its own assembly plants in 2007 and
introduced its first indigenous model in 2009. By 2014, the affiliated domestic automakers had caught
up with non-affiliated domestic automakers in product offering.
    Figure 1 presents a snapshot of the ownership network for the Chinese auto industry as of 2014.
Many international automakers formed multiple joint ventures with different domestic partners and
vice versa. For example, in addition to VW-SAIC, Volkswagen partnered with First Automobile Works
Group (FAW) to form VW-FAW in 1991. At the same time, one domestic firm can have multiple foreign
partners. In total, there are seven big affiliated groups, as shown by the dotted blocks in Figure 1. To
avoid complications in intellectual property rights, foreign automakers transfer the production line of a
given brand exclusively to one domestic partner. For example, VW-SAIC produces Passat and Tiguan,
while VW-FAW sells Audi and Jetta. There is no product-line overlap between any pair of JVs. All
of the affiliated domestic automakers during our sample period are state-owned enterprises (SOEs).
The non-affiliated domestic automakers (those without foreign partners) include both SOEs and private
firms. They constitute the category of non-affiliated domestic automakers throughout this paper.
    The industry has witnessed unprecedented growth after China entered the WTO in 2001. Sales of
new passenger vehicles increased from 0.85 million units in 2001 to 24.7 million units in 2017, surpassing
the US in 2009 to become the world's largest market.12 In 2017, China alone accounts for more than
33% of the global auto production and sales. The industry is highly competitive and consists of 48
firms with production exceeding 10,000 units in 2014. The number of JVs has also steadily increased
(Appendix Figure B.2): by 2009, most of the major international automakers have launched JVs in
China. Appendix Table B.1 lists the JVs and their sales and market shares in 2014. While the JVs
have been dominating the industry, sales of domestic firms have also been growing over the past decade
(Figure B.3). This is especially true in the SUV segment, where the market shares by domestic firms
grew from 27% to 36% between 2009 and 2014.
    Under the terms of WTO, explicit technology transfer requirements for market access are not per-
mitted. Hence quid pro quo in China has been mostly carried out implicitly via ownership restrictions on
joint ventures to facilitate technology transfer from the foreign firms. It is considered by some countries
as part of China's broad industrial policy that creates unfair advantages for its domestic companies.
Because of the emphasis on technology transfer, this policy is criticized as state-sponsored efforts to
  12
     Passenger vehicles in China include sedans, sport utility vehicles (SUVs), and multi-purpose vehicles (MPVs). Minivans
and pickup trucks are considered commercial vehicles.


                                                            8
systematically pry technology from foreign companies. According to the 2018 China Business Climate
Survey Report conducted by the American Chamber of Commerce, 21% of 434 companies surveyed in
China faced pressure to transfer technology. Such pressure is most often felt in strategically important
industries such as aerospace (44%) and chemicals (41%).13
       Amid recent trade tensions with the US, the Chinese government pledged to further open up its
automobile market through lifting the foreign ownership cap by 2022, representing a major shift from
the quid pro quo policy in place for around four decades. This effectively allows foreign automakers to
have solely owned production facilities in China. Following the pledge, BMW and its domestic partner
Brilliance reached an agreement where BMW pays Brilliance $4.1 billion for a 25% stake in the joint
venture to increase BMW's ownership share to 75% by 2022.14 Many have speculated that this could
have a profound impact not only on the Chinese market but also on the global industry. Understanding
the role played by ownership affiliation serves as a crucial step in understanding the implications of
removing quid pro quo.


2.2      Data

Our empirical analysis benefits from a multitude of datasets on the Chinese auto industry. We describe
each of them in detail below.


Vehicle quality measures             Quality measures come from the annual Initial Quality Study (IQS) and
Automotive Performance, Execution and Layout Study (APEAL) that are conducted by JD Power be-
tween 2009 and 2014. Between April and June each year, JD power recruits subjects who have purchased
a vehicle for less than a year in over 50 cities in China, and surveys their user experience during the first
six months of vehicle ownership. The survey covers major passenger vehicle models in China, accounting
for over 9% of market shares in terms of sales in 2014. The total number of survey correspondents in
2014 is 18,884, or around 110 car owners per model. The IQS study reports the number of problems
experienced per 100 vehicles during the first 90 days of ownership. The survey asks 227 questions, cov-
ering a complete spectrum of vehicle functionalities, which are aggregated to nine quality dimensions:
exterior problems, driving experience, feature/control/displays, audio/entertainment/navigation, seat
problems, HVAC problems, interior problems, and engine and transmission.15 Industry experts believe
that initial quality is an excellent predictor of long-term reliability, which has a significant impact on
owner satisfaction and brand loyalty.
  13
     Source: http://www.iberchina.org/files/2017/amcham_survey_2017.pdf.
  14
     Shares of Brilliance traded in Hong Kong plunged 30% after the news of the agreement as the joint venture accounted
for the majority of Brilliance's profit in 2017. The shares of other Chinese automakers also fell from the concern that their
foreign partners may also increase the control of the joint ventures.
  15
     IQS includes questions such as "Engine doesn't start at all" (engine), "Emergency/parking brake won't hold vehicle"
(driving experience), and "Cup holders - broken/ damaged" (interior).



                                                             9
       The APEAL study elicits user satisfaction ratings over 100 vehicle quality attributes, which are
grouped to ten performance dimensions: interior, exterior, storage and space, audio/entertainment/
navigation, seats, heating/ventilation/air-conditioning, driving dynamics, engine/transmission, visibil-
ity and driving safety, and fuel economy.16
       Figure 2 presents the residualized figures on vehicle prices and the two quality measures. Panel A
plots prices against IQS, with the left figure controlling for vehicle size and horsepower/weight (proxy
for acceleration) and the right figure further controlling for year fixed effects, segment fixed effects,
and ownership type fixed effects. Panel B shows the relationship between prices and APEAL with the
same controls as in Panel A. The remarkably tight correlations between price and IQS/APEAL provide
strong evidence that IQS and APEAL are reliable measures of vehicle quality, with high quality car
models consistently commanding high prices.

Worker flow        To examine worker mobility, we collect data on the employment history for all past
and current employees in the Chinese auto industry who are registered on LinkedIn (China). The data
contains 52,898 LinkedIn users who have worked in 60 JVs and domestic firms. The spatial distribution
of these users is consistent with the spatial distribution of automobile production: the correlation
coefficient between the number of LinkedIn users in a province and the provincial automobile production
in 2018 is 0.89. The two provinces with the largest auto production, Guangzhou and Shanghai, also
have the highest number of users in our data.17 One might be worried that workers from affiliated
automakers and those from non-affiliated automakers may have different a propensity to use LinkedIn,
and hence create a selection issue. Among LinkedIn users in our data, the ratio of users from affiliated
automakers to non-affiliated automakers is 0.95, compared to the ratio of vehicle sales of 1.12 between
these two types of automakers in 2014.
       We identify 4,099 users who have moved at least once from one automobile company to another.
For each job switch, we compile information on firm name and location before and after the switch, as
well as worker characteristics such as current occupation and education level. The majority of workers
who changed jobs switched once (81%) or twice (16%). Our final sample covers 3,086 job switches after
dropping observations with missing location data. 617 of them moved from JVs to domestic firms. The
data allow us to examine worker flows as a mechanism of knowledge spillover.

Supplier network Data on the auto-part supplier network is compiled from Marklines' Who Supplies
Whom database.18 Our final sample covers 1378 distinct part suppliers, 271 vehicle parts under 31 part
  16
     The APEAL study includes questions such as "smoothness of gearshift operation" (engine/transmission), "braking
responsiveness/effort" (driving dynamics), and "interior materials convey an impression of high quality" (interior).
  17
     Ge, Huang, and Png (2020) found that LinkedIn provides more accurate measures of worker mobility than commonly
used patent databases.
  18
     Marklines collects the supplier information in a number of ways. Some information is directly sourced from supplier
companies or downstream assembly firms. Some is obtained from vehicle tear-downs where supplier information is retrieved


                                                          10
categories, and 459 vehicle models.19 Since data at the annual level is sparse, especially in early periods
of our sample, we pool information from all years to construct the supplier network. Each auto-part
company supplies on average 2.8 parts to 11 vehicle models, and there is a small number of large
suppliers that cover many parts and models. For an average model, we have supplier information on 39
vehicle parts. While the data is not complete enough to be regarded as a census of suppliers, it provides
valuable information on the production network and captures the major suppliers for many models.


Geographical network            We identify the plant location of each model using information from official
websites of the auto firms (Table B.2). Figure B.4 maps vehicle models to their production cities.
Each circle represents a city. Colors of the circle indicate the ownership composition of all the models
produced in a given city. There is a partial overlap between the ownership network and location network.
For example, DongFeng, one of the largest affiliated SOE firms, has a plant that located in the same
city, Wuhan, as one of its JVs' plants (Honda-Dongfeng). It also has a plant in Liuzhou that does not
host any of its JVs. At the same time, Geely, a private firm without any JV affiliation, has a plant in
Shanghai that hosts two joint ventures (VW-SAIC and GM-SAIC). Our empirical analysis explores this
partial overlap between ownership and geographical networks to assess whether ownership affiliation is
a prerequisite for knowledge spillover.


Patent database         Data on patent transfers and licensing is collected by China's State Intellectual
Property Office and cover the universe of patent transfers between any firms up till the most recent
year. There are two types of transactions: patent licensing and patent assignment. The former is a
permission from the patent owner to use the licensee for a fee or royalties during a specified time period.
The latter is a permanent transfer of the intellectual property right from the owner to the assignee for a
payment. This information allows us to examine the extent of market-based direct technology transfers
between JVs and domestic firms.


Household vehicle ownership survey Finally, we complement the above data sets with a large
nationally representative household-level survey conducted annually by the China National Information
Center from 2009 to 2014. Each household in the survey reports the vehicle purchased and alternative
models considered. We use these choices to assess whether JVs and affiliated SOEs serve consumers
with correlated preferences for quality.
from the label or stamp on vehicle parts. Press releases and news articles are another important source.
   19
      For example, part categories include the ventilation system, the engine's lubrication system, interior accessories,
exterior accessories, etc. A part category contains multiple parts. For example, the lubrication system of the engine
includes a sump, oil galleries, oil pump, and a filter.




                                                           11
2.3    Descriptive Patterns of Quality Upgrading

We begin by documenting descriptive patterns of quality upgrading across ownership type. JD Power's
raw IQS scores report the malfunction rates of parts and components and represent an objective measure
of vehicle performance. Panel A of Table 1 reports the summary statistics of IQS scores by year and
ownership type for each of the nine quality dimensions. Two important patterns emerge. First, vehicle
models produced by JVs have significantly higher quality than those by domestic firms in all quality
dimensions in 2009. Second, vehicle quality has improved overall for both JVs and domestic models,
but the improvement among domestic models has been more pronounced.
    Figure 3 plots the dramatic improvement in the overall IQS score over time, summed across all nine
quality dimensions, for JVs, affiliated SOEs, and non-affiliated domestic automakers, respectively (note
that a smaller number of defects indicates higher quality). In 2009, JVs have significantly higher quality
than the other two types: the number of defects per 100 vehicles was 143 for JV models, in contrast
to 236 for models produced by affiliated domestic firms and 271 for those produced by non-affiliated
domestic firms. By 2014, the overall IQS score of the domestic models has largely converged to that of
the JVs': the number of defects per 100 vehicles is 94 for JV models, 123 for models by affiliated domestic
firms, and 134 for those by non-affiliated automakers. We observe similar convergence patterns in each
of the quality dimensions as shown in the second and third graphs of Figure 3. Our empirical strategy
seeks to isolate the role of ownership affiliation under quid pro quo in driving the quality improvement
of domestic models.20
    Our second quality measure, APEAL scores, represents a more subjective evaluation of the driving
experience. Panel B of Table 1 displays summary statistics of APEAL scores by year and ownership
type. The change in APEAL scores over time is modest, in contrast to the significant improvement in
IQS scores. The comparison highlights that APEAL scores, measuring consumer satisfaction, may be
affected by consumer perception and could evolve over time as consumers become more knowledgeable
about quality. For example, owners of luxury models may have a higher expectation than owners
of entry models, which could be reflected in their evaluations. Our empirical analysis addresses this
issue by including a rich set of fixed effects (model by year, car segment by quality dimension, and
quality dimension by year) to capture the difference in consumer perceptions across models and over
time and only relying on within-model perceptions across different quality dimensions. We also perform
robustness checks using IQS and APEAL scores separately and obtain very similar results.
    Since the raw IQS and APEAL scores (the malfunction rates) differ substantially in magnitude
    20
       It is tempting to conclude from Figure 3 that ownership affiliation does not matter since both affiliated and non-
affiliated domestic firms experienced rapid quality catch-up. However, given that all of the affiliated automakers are SOEs
and the majority of the non-affiliated ones are private, it is difficult to draw conclusions from the observation data given
how different the two groups of firms are in terms of organizational structure, efficiency level, competition incentives and
growth dynamics (e.g., Song, Storesletten, and Zilibotti (2011); Brandt et al. (2017)).




                                                            12
across different quality dimensions, we separately standardize the responses for each of the 227 IQS
survey questions and 100 APEAL questions using all model-year observations. Then we aggregate
the standardized z-scores to the nine IQS dimensions and ten APEAL dimensions as listed in Table
1. Appendix Table B.3 reports the summary statistics for the standardized scores in each dimension.
We observe similar patterns of catch up and convergence in most quality dimensions. Note that there
is significant heterogeneity in quality performance across different dimensions among firms within an
ownership type, a key source of variation we exploit in our empirical strategy.


3     Empirical Strategy

3.1    Empirical Framework

The goal of our empirical analysis is to identify knowledge spillover induced by the stipulated ownership
affiliation under quid pro quo on top of any industry-wide learning and quality improvement due to the
presence of foreign firms. Therefore, we look for differential spillover from JVs to affiliated domestic
firms, relative to the spillover received by non-affiliated domestic firms. As knowledge spillover is rarely
observed, we use similarity in product quality strength as evidence of knowledge spillover. For example,
German brands such as BMW, Mercedes Benz, and Volkswagen are often associated with high quality in
engine, driving dynamics, and safety dimensions. If models produced by affiliated domestic automakers
exhibit higher quality measures in these same dimensions than non-affiliated models, ceteris paribus,
we take this as an indication of knowledge spillover via the ownership affiliation.
    However, the complicated ownership structure as discussed in Section 2.1 among JVs and domestic
partners poses a significant challenge to our empirical analysis. Take First Auto Works as an example.
It has a JV with three foreign firms: VW, Toyota, and Mazda. While VW is known for its engine
power and reliability and Toyota is better at fuel efficiency, the average quality among cars produced
by both VW and Toyota does not reflect the quality strength of either firm. In addition, the quality
scores averaged over all foreign partners of an affiliated domestic firm masks the significant heterogeneity
among different products across firms.
    To address this issue, we exploit quality variation across different dimensions at the model-pair level.
To ease the interpretation, we multiply the raw IQS scores by negative one, so that a larger IQS number
(e.g., a less negative number) implies better quality (fewer defects), as does APEAL. We proceed in two
steps. First, we construct the residualized (i.e., relative) quality strength for model i in vehicle segment
s for quality dimension k in year t by partialling out fixed effects for model-year it (e.g., BMW-Brilliance
X3 in 2014), segment-dimension sk (e.g., engine of small-medium SUV), and dimension-year kt (e.g.,
engine in 2014):
                                   Scoreikt = kt + sk + it + Scoreikt                                   (1)


                                                    13
The rich set of product level and temporal fixed effects in Equation (1) helps mitigate common un-
observables that affect quality improvement. Quality dimension by year fixed effects (kt ) control for
dimension-specific time trends, such as an industry-wide improvement in the power train or the navi-
gation system over time. Segment by dimension fixed effects (sk ) capture factors that are specific to
a vehicle segment and quality metric. For instance, vehicles in the luxury segment commonly adopt
advanced technologies (such as lane change assist and blind spot assist that enhance vehicle safety) that
other segments rarely use. Model by year fixed effects (it ) absorb time varying changes that affect the
overall model quality. Scoreikt captures model i's relative strength in a quality dimension k in year t,
after partialling out dimension-year, segment-dimension, and model-year fixed effects.
   In the next step, we construct all possible follower-leader pairs using models in the same year, where
a leader is a JV model (e.g., BMW-Brilliance X3) and a follower is a model by an affiliated (e.g.,
Brilliance H230) or non-affiliated domestic automaker (e.g. BYD F3). We regress follower i's relative
quality strength on that of leader j :


                    DMScoreikt =  + 0 JVScorejkt + JVScorejkt × Zij 1 +      ijkt                     (2)


where DMScoreikt and JVscorejkt are residualized scores for model pair {i, j } in year t and metric k .
Zij is a vector of pair attributes, such as whether the pair is produced by affiliated automakers (i.e.,
a domestic automaker and its affiliated JVs), which is our primary focus. We also examine pairs that
belong to the same vehicle segment. This vector of pair attributes allows us to investigate the scope
and channel of knowledge spillover.
   The identification of 0 and 1 relies on two sources of variation: the cross-sectional association
in relative strength (or weakness) and contemporaneous co-movement in quality (net of overall time
trend). Our identification strategy is best illustrated using a specific example. Figure 4 shows engine
quality and fuel efficiency of four models, two by JVs (BMW-Brilliance and Nissan-Dongfeng) and two
by the affiliated domestic automakers (Brilliance and Dongfeng). The JV model by BMW-Brilliance has
a more reliable engine but is less fuel efficient than the model by Nissan-Dongfeng. The two domestic
models that are produced by Brilliance and Dongfeng exhibit similar relative strength and weakness.
We take this as evidence of knowledge spillover. Our empirical analysis below examines whether such
patterns hold true systematically.
   Our empirical framework represents a significant departure from the existing literature on knowledge
spillover from FDI to domestic firms, which mainly relies on TFP variations at the industry level while
controlling for standard panel fixed effects (e.g., Haddad and Harrison (1993); Aitken and Harrison
(1999); Javorcik (2004); Keller and Yeaple (2009)). The key identification concern is that these fixed
effects may be inadequate in controlling for other industry-time level shocks that affect both the entry
of foreign firms and the performance of domestic firms, such as government policies targeting certain


                                                   14
industries. By focusing on different dimensions of quality measures within a product-year, our analysis
explores a much finer level of variation and allows us to control for time-varying unobservables at the
firm and product level. At the same time, this rich set of controls soak out industry-wide quality
improvement. Therefore, if spillover from JVs benefits both affiliated automakers and non-affiliated
automakers by the same magnitude, the estimate of 1 will not capture this ­ rightly so ­ as ownership
affiliation is not required for this to happen.21
       Finally, the two-step procedure in Equations (1) and (2) has advantages over the standard one-step
estimation with all the fixed effects. First, this allows us to control for the time-varying average quality
for the domestic models and JV models separately. The standard one-step estimation can only control
for the average quality for the followers. Second, as shown by Lee and Lemieux (2010), partialling out
fixed effects first can increase the efficiency of key parameter estimates 1 while maintaining consistency
under very mild conditions. We present our main results using the two-step estimation procedure and
perform robustness checks using the standard fixed-effect model in Section 4.1.


3.2      Evidence of Relative Strength

A premise for our empirical analysis is that models produced by different JVs have differential quality
strengths that domestic firms learn from. Figure 5 illustrates graphically JV models' quality variation
along three performance dimensions: driving dynamics, engine, and fuel efficiency. It is evident that
firms have different comparative advantages. For example, models by VW-FAW and Hyundai-BAIC
enjoy better driving dynamics. VW-FAW and BMW-Brilliance have more powerful and reliable engines.
Nissan-Dongfeng excels at fuel efficiency. These patterns are consistent with the common perception
that German brands have prime engine performance while Japanese brands are more fuel efficient.
       To quantify the extent of similarity in quality strength among models produced by the same JV
firm, we estimate Equations (1) and (2) using JV pairs. We randomly assign half of all JV models as
leaders and the rest as followers. Then we take all models in a year to form an exhaustive list of pairs
and compute the residualized scores for each JV model and regress follower scores on leader scores. This
exercise also serves as a proof of concept for our spillover analysis below. If the framework is capable
of identifying relative strength among products within the same JV firm, we can use it to examine
similarity in relative quality strength between JV models and domestics models.
       As shown in Table 2, the coefficient estimate on the interaction term between LeaderScore and
SameFirm, 1 , is positive and statistically significant.22 It is also economically meaningful. When we
  21
     One may be concerned that part of the industry-wide quality improvement is due to the quid pro quo policy - the
non-affiliated domestic firms may have benefited more from the presence of the JVs compared to a world with unrestricted
foreign entry. We discuss this in Section 6 and perform additional analysis to shed light on this counterfactual.
  22
     As the follower and leaders are randomly assigned, the coefficient estimate of 0 has no causal interpretation and is
purely the correlation in quality between a random pair of models.




                                                           15
control for firm fixed effects, as well as dimension-year and dimension-segment fixed effects, a reduction
of 10 defects in a JV model is associated with a reduction of 1.4 defects in the same quality dimension
among other models by the same firm. The coefficient is stable across different columns of Table 2, with
different combinations of firm, firm-year, model, and model-year fixed effects. Such within-firm cross-
model correlation corroborates the patterns in Figure 5. Firms indeed specialize in different quality
dimensions, which enables our analysis below examining spillover from JVs to domestic firms.


4     Results on Knowledge Spillover

4.1   Main Results

Our unit of observation is a domestic-JV pair by quality metric by year, with a total of 591,280 observa-
tions. There are 12,634 distinct domestic-JV pairs and 639 belong to affiliated pairs. We have nineteen
quality metrics: nine IQS quality dimensions and ten APEAL performance dimensions.
    Table 3 presents estimation results for Equation 2. While our main specification controls for product
by year fixed effects it , we also report less demanding specifications in Columns (1) to (5) with fixed
effects for firm, firm-year, or firm-year and model. These alternative specifications absorb endogenous
selection at the firm or model level: for example, the average quality of affiliated domestic firms might
be systematically higher than that of non-affiliated automakers, or models introduced by affiliated-firms
are different from those by non-affiliated automakers.
    Column (1) partials out firm, dimension-year and dimension-segment FEs. The null coefficient on
the JVScore itself should not be surprising, given that a domestic model's leader is defined to be all JV
models, regardless of whether there is an ownership affiliation. SameGroup dummy flags follower-leader
pairs that come from JVs (e.g., BMW-Brilliance) and their affiliated domestic partners (Brilliance).
The interaction term between JVScore and SameGroup dummy is positive and statistically significant,
suggesting a positive association in the relative quality strength between two models within the same
group. The coefficient estimate (0.03) is much smaller than that for pairs of the same JV firm (0.14)
in Table 2. This is intuitive in that the association between a JV model and a model from an affiliated
domestic firm is naturally weaker than that between two models from the same firm.
    Column (2) adds interaction terms to flag pairs that belong to the same vehicle segment (SameSeg-
ment) and ownership group (SameGroup). Once we control for the interaction between SameGroup and
SameSegment, the SameGroup coefficient becomes small and insignificant. This indicates that spillover
occurs primarily among products in the same segment (e.g., sedan or SUV). Therefore, for the remain-
ing empirical analysis, we primarily focus on follower-leader pairs belonging to the same segment. In
Columns (3) to (6), we gradually add more FEs to absorb firm-year, model, and model-year variations.
The results remain robust. Taking the most demanding specification in Column (6), our main specifica-


                                                   16
tion, the coefficient estimate of the interaction between SameGroup and SameSegment is economically
significant: 13.8% of the quality improvement observed in a JV model would be transmitted to the
affiliated domestic models in the same segment. This is similar in magnitude to the estimated shared
quality strength among models within the same JV firm but across different segments (Table 2).23


Robustness checks Our baseline regressions focus on contemporaneous changes in leader quality.
Table B.4 analyzes the dynamic spillover effects based on leaders' past quality measures. As there is a
proliferation of new models in our sample period, a large number of models are observed for only a short
time span. For this exercise, we use a balanced subsample of JV and domestic models that were sold
every year between 2009 and 2014. Column (1) repeats the baseline regression. Knowledge spillover
is stronger for this subsample than all affiliated model-pairs: the key coefficient 1 is 0.258 vs 0.138 in
Column (6) of Table 3. These are older and more popular models that have longer exposure to their
leaders. Columns (2) to (4) lag a leader's quality score by one, two, and three years. The coefficient
of past leader score is remarkably persistent, even in the specification with a three-year lag. These
results are consistent with a dynamic learning process: domestic firms observe production techniques
of affiliated JVs models, then gradually learn and incorporate them into their own production process.
      Our regressions so far are based on residualized quality measures after partialling out the model-
year, score-segment, and score-year fixed effects, separately for leaders and followers. Table B.5 reports
the results of running fixed effect regressions instead of taking residuals first, using the same fixed
effect combinations as in Table 3. Mathematically, these regressions are not the same as the two-step
procedure in Equations (1) and (2), but the estimates are similar, and all of them suggest that knowledge
spillovers occur in the same segment and same group.
      Standard errors in Table 3 are two-way clustered by i's firm and quality dimension as well as j 's
firm and quality dimension. This allows for cross-sectional and temporal correlation of a given quality
dimension (e.g., engine) across models in the same firm. Table B.6 reports the standard errors clustered
in six different levels, including clustering by the leading firm and following firm, by the firm pair, or
by firm-year. Our results are robust to all of these different levels of clustering.


4.2     Alternative Explanations

So far we have interpreted the finding that domestic models mimic quality strength of their affiliated JV
models as evidence of knowledge spillover. Next we examine several alternative interpretations, including
endogenous JV formation, overlapping customer bases, and market transactions of technologies.
 23
   Most JVs have only one model in each vehicle segment. Therefore, we cannot examine the interaction between
SameFirm and SameSegment in Table 2.




                                                     17
Endogenous JV formation         One might be concerned that the ownership network ­ the set of domes-
tic firms that form a joint venture with foreign auto producers ­ is not random. For example, domestic
automakers may seek foreign partners who have strength in different quality dimensions in order to
overcome their weakness. The initial negative correlation in quality strength between the follower and
the leader could bias the coefficient estimates downward, masking evidence of knowledge spillover. On
the other hand, if foreign firms choose to partner with domestic firms with similar quality strength, it
would bias the estimates upward.
   To address this issue, we first exploit an important institutional feature. Most major JVs in the
Chinese auto industry were formed between the 1980s and the early 2000s, a period when domestic
automakers had limited technological capacity and strength in any given quality dimension. Most of
the domestic automakers started as producers of agricultural machinery (such as tractors) or heavy-duty
trucks, and had very limited technological know-how in passenger vehicle production. The domestic
automakers did not start to develop their own indigenous brands until the mid 2000s. Therefore, for
these early JVs, it would have been very difficult, if not impossible, for the foreign automakers to
predict the strength/weakness of the potential Chinese partners decades later, let alone to base their
partnership decisions on those predictions. Table 4 Column (2) repeats our baseline specification by
restricting the sample to JVs that were formed prior to 2000, which are unlikely driven by strategic
partnership considerations based on relative quality strength due to reasons discussed above. Compared
to the baseline estimate in Column (1), if anything, spillover appears to be stronger from these earlier
JVs. The results alleviate the concerns of endogenous ownership formation.
   To further control for any initial (either negative or positive) correlation in quality strength between
follower and leader pairs, we partial out model by quality dimension fixed effects in Column (3). This
specification absorbs any time-invariant quality strength of the followers and leaders in each quality
dimension. Thus, the identification purely relies on temporal co-movement in quality measures between
the followers and leaders, independent of any initial selection effect. Our results of positive spillover
from JVs to their affiliated domestic partners continue to hold under this demanding specification.


Overlapping customer bases         The second identification threat is that models by affiliated automak-
ers are designed to appeal to the same group of consumers, leading to a positive correlation in product
quality. We use household choices reported in the vehicle ownership survey to evaluate whether JVs
and domestic automakers have overlapping customer bases. We estimate the following equation:


      Log (TopTwoChoicesijt + 1) =  + 1 SameGroupij + 2 SameGroupij × SameSegmentij
                                     + Xijt  + t + ijt




                                                   18
The sample consists of all pairwise combinations of models in the same year. TopTwoChoicesijt counts
the number of times model pair {i, j } is listed as the top two choices by some household. A larger
number suggests that the model pair is considered by more households as close substitutes and is
evidence that both models compete for similar customers. The key regressors are SameGroup dummy
and its interaction with SameSegment dummy as defined in section 4.1. Controls include for same
segment, same ownership type, same firm, as well as differences in prices, car sizes, and engine powers.
   There is no evidence that affiliated model pairs are more likely to attract similar customers than a
random pair of JV and domestic models, ceteris paribus (Table 5). If anything, the estimates suggest
that an affiliated model pair in the same segment are slightly less likely to be considered top two choices.
This is not surprising given that JV models are considerably more expensive than indigenous models
and target wealthier households.
   One might be concerned that even if JV and domestic models target different customer groups, con-
sumer perception of quality strength, as reflected by APEAL scores, might be affected by the ownership
affiliation. For example, consumers may perceive that Brilliance produces models with strong engine
performance because it has a joint venture with BMW (BMW-Brilliance). To address this concern, we
examine IQS and APEAL scores separately. While APEAL measures consumer attitude and perception,
the IQS survey is designed to be objective and reports the number of defects. Table 6 shows that the
estimate for knowledge spillover is remarkably stable whether we use IQS, APEAL, or both. Together,
these results indicate that association in relative strength across different quality dimensions is unlikely
to be driven by demand-side confounding factors.


Direct technology transfer         A common challenge in the broad literature that studies the impact
of FDI on knowledge spillover is that data on market transactions of technology transfer are rarely
observed (Keller, 2004). One could argue that the identified spillover might be driven by unobserved
market transactions.
   To address this concern, we obtain data on all patent transfers from the National Intellectual Prop-
erty Administration (i.e., the Chinese Patent Office). During the period between 2009 and 2016, there
were 116,440 cases of patent licensing and 140,499 cases of patent assignment nationwide, of which 899
and 2,744 happened in the auto industry. Among the 899 cases of patent licensing, 880 were between a
parent company and a subsidiary company, or between two subsidiary companies under the same parent
company. However, only four cases originated from a foreign automaker and none originated from a JV.
Among the 2,744 cases of patent assignment among automakers, none of them originated from a JV.
   The lack of direct patent transfer from JVs to domestic firms is consistent with the findings in
Holmes, McGrattan, and Prescott (2015), which shows that JVs file a small number of patent ap-
plications in China compared to either Chinese domestic firms or foreign multinationals, highlighting
the intellectual property challenge faced by JVs. During 2005 to 2010, JVs only filed 142 patents to

                                                    19
the Chinese Patent Office compared to 14,500 patents filed by foreign automakers. Affiliated domestic
automakers filed 936 patents and non-affiliated automakers filed 3,277.

         In sum, we have shown that domestic models share similar quality strengths with affiliated JV
models, and this pattern is not driven by endogenous JV formation, overlapping customer bases or
direct technology transfers.24 The results support the interpretation of knowledge spillover via the
ownership network. Next, we investigate potential underlying mechanisms of such knowledge spillover.


5         Mechanisms of Knowledge Spillover

The vehicle production process includes interrelated stages from product planning (e.g., market anal-
ysis), design and engineering (e.g., chassis, power train, exterior and interior), sourcing of parts and
components, testing, and assembly. The whole process involves complex interactions of technologies,
equipment, and workers. Knowledge spillover could occur during all stages of the production process
and through many different channels, including deliberate communication among the partners, flow of
know-how through shared parts suppliers, knowledge exchange embodied in workers changing jobs, etc.
In this section, we examine two potential mechanisms, namely worker flows and supplier network. We
focus on pairs of domestic and JV models in the same vehicle segment, for which we have observed
the strongest spillover effect (Table 3). The main takeaways are robust when we expand the sample to
include all pairs.25


5.1        Worker Flows

Flow of workers, as carriers of knowledge, can lead to knowledge spillover across firms. Before foreign
automakers entered China, passenger vehicle production was nearly non-existent and the labor force
in the auto industry was small with few experienced technicians or executives. The JVs provided a
training ground for both engineering skills and managerial knowhow. As workers move from JVs to
domestic automakers, they bring valuable knowledge with them. Many high-level managers and skilled
workers in domestic automakers have gained valuable experiences in JVs.
         Using job switches that are compiled from user profiles on LinkedIn (China), we first document that
workers are considerably more likely to move from JVs to affiliated SOEs.26 Among all workers who
switched jobs from a JV to a domestic firm, 27.2% moved to the JV's affiliated domestic firm. This
    24
     There could be other time-varying unobservables that push the JVs and domestic automakers to specialize in similar
quality dimensions, such as joint input purchases or marketing activities. Our discussion with industry experts suggests
that these joint activities are uncommon. JVs and affiliated domestic automakers are independent business entities.
  25
     The results are available upon request.
  26
     Among all job switchers, 52.6% moved from a JV to another JV, 47.4% moved from a JV to a domestic automaker,
36.8% from a domestic automaker to a JV and 63.2% moved for a domestic automaker to another domestic automaker.




                                                          20
fraction would have been 9.3% if worker movements were random.27
       We then examine the extent to which worker flow mediates knowledge spillover through ownership
affiliation. We measure the intensity of worker flow using the number of job switchers between each
pair of JV and domestic firms and standardize it across all observations. Then we interact worker flow
with the same-group dummy. Table 7 summarizes the results. Column (1) shows that spillover is on
average 14.3% between affiliated pairs. Column (2) shows that spillover is 6.3% when worker flow is at
the national average and increases by 3% for each standard-deviation increase in the volume of worker
flow. The estimates suggest that worker flow explains 58% of knowledge spillover from JVs to affiliated
automakers.28
       Some underlying factors, such as closer connections between firms, could result in both a larger
worker flow and more knowledge spillover. Column (3) additionally controls for the reverse worker flow
from the domestic firm to the JV, which is a proxy for business connections between the two firms.
We find similar effects for JV-to-domestic worker flows, and no appreciable effect for domestic-to-JV
flows. The asymmetric results are consistent with anecdotal evidence that domestic firms benefit from
recruiting technicians with working experience at JVs, especially in key production areas with technology
bottlenecks (Liu, 2019). Column (4) examines whether the effect is larger for the flow of skilled workers.
To do that, we limit the sample to observations with positive JV-to-domestic flows and compute the
share of technicians, classified based on job titles.29 Consistent with the previous literature (e.g., Poole
(2013)), we find that knowledge spillover is positively correlated with the movement of technicians. The
coefficient is large and positive, though not precisely estimated.
       While variations among worker flows across firms are not exogenous, these patterns provide sugges-
tive evidence that worker flows play an important role in mediating knowledge spillover. These findings
are consistent with the existing literature, which has documented that the benefit to a receiving firm
is more pronounced when workers move from more productive firms to less productive firms, rather
than the other way around, and that the flow of skilled workers brings greater knowledge transmission
compared to non-skilled workers (Poole, 2013; Stoyanov and Zubanov, 2012b). Our finding also cor-
roborates a popular view among industry experts that the presence and growth of JVs have trained a
large number of technicians for the Chinese auto industry, generating an important positive externality
to domestic firms.
  27
     For this, we hold the number of workers moving from and to each firm fixed, and randomize who moves where. For
example, if 30% of worker outflows come from firm A and 20% of worker inflows go into firm B, the fraction of workers
moving from A to B would be 6% if the flow is random.
  28
     An affiliated pair has an average worker flow z-score of 2.78. Additional worker flow from JVs to affiliated automakers
contributes 2.78 × 0.03 = 0.083, or 58% of knowledge spillover (baseline is 0.143).
  29
     We classify workers into tech-relevant and non-tech-relevant workers using the occupation classification by LinkedIn.
Tech-relevant workers include designers, mechanical engineers, software engineers, procurement, quality control, and R&D.
The rest are considered non-tech-relevant workers. Examples include operations, sales, media and outreach.




                                                            21
5.2    Supplier Network

Supply network can serve as another important conduit for knowledge spillover. This is especially
true for the automobile industry, where quality of parts and components is a key determinant of a
vehicle's performance. The presence of JVs have been argued to have helped and incentivized domestic
part suppliers to improve their product quality, which benefited domestic automakers.30 JVs' sourcing
decisions may also provide valuable information to domestic partners and help the latter identify reliable
and high-quality suppliers. Here, we examine the importance of the shared supplier spillover.
    Our data affirm that ownership linkages have a sizable impact on supplier overlap. Affiliated model
pairs share on average 12 common suppliers, compared to an average of 5.4 common suppliers between
non-affiliated pairs.31 We examine to the extent to which the shared quality strength between affiliated
pairs could be driven by common part suppliers. For each model pair, we compute the Szymkiewicz-
Simpson overlap ratio, which equals to the number of common suppliers divided by the smaller number
of suppliers among the two firms. Then we standardize the overlap ratio across all observations and
interact the standardized overlap ratio with the same-group dummy.32 Table 8 reports results. A larger
supplier overlap is indeed associated with stronger knowledge spillover. Estimates from Columns (1)
and (2) imply that supplier overlap explains 32% of the knowledge spillover via ownership affiliation.33
    The importance of shared supplier spillover echos findings from the existing literature. For example,
using variation in supplier network generated by a trade policy shock in Bangladesh's garment industry,
Kee (2015) finds that shared supplier network explains about 1/3 of the productivity spillover from
FDIs to domestic firms. We obtain a similar estimate despite differences in context and methodology.


6     Policy Implications

Finally, we turn to the policy counterfactual of what will happen to domestic firms' quality if quid pro
quo is lifted. Like many industrial policies, the quid pro quo policy was introduced nationwide. The
counterfactual of 100% foreign ownership is never observed in this empirical setting. Our identification
strategy therefore exploits a different type of variation, leveraging rich within-product information
across different quality dimensions. While our rich set of controls mitigates the concerns of endogenous
selection, it does leave open the question of whether we can extrapolate our findings to shed light on
  30
     China's 1994 Auto Policy, which was lifted after China's WTO entry in 2001, required all JVs to localize at least 40%
of their parts and components. This has led to the development of the upstream industry. For example, the localization
rate for FAW-VW Jetta was only 24 percent in 1994 and reached 84 percent by 2000 (Gallagher, 2003).
  31
     Marklines focuses on first-tier suppliers. On average, a JV model has 64 suppliers, while a domestic model has 32
distinct suppliers.
  32
     We drop 3% of pairs where at least one model has fewer than five distinct suppliers to reduce measurement error in
the overlap ratio. Results are similar with the full sample.
  33
     An affiliated pair has an average worker flow z-score of 1.10. Additional worker flow contributes 1.1 × 0.039 = 0.043,
or 31% of knowledge spillover (baseline is 0.138).



                                                            22
what would happen in the absence of quid pro quo.
       To address the policy question, we present a set of additional reduced form evidence in this section,
exploring the partial overlap between ownership and geographical networks as well as variations in
ownership structure in the upstream industry. We end this section with a quantification exercise where
we lift the quid pro quo policy in 2009 and simulate counterfactual quality evolution of domestic models.


Is Quid Pro Quo a prerequisite for knowledge spillover?                        Our first analysis examines whether
ownership affiliation stipulated by the quid pro quo policy is a prerequisite for knowledge spillover. To
that end, we ask whether unaffiliated automakers, who are not the direct beneficiaries of this policy, also
benefit from the JVs. Exploring the partial overlap between the ownership network and geographical
network as shown in Figure B.4, we construct a dummy for two models located in the same city and
interact the ownership dummies (SameGroup and DiffGroup) with the location dummies (SameCity
and DiffCity). Column (1) of Table 9 replicates Column (6) of Table 3, focusing on follower-leader pairs
in the same vehicle segment. Column (2) presents the full interaction between ownership and geography
dummies. While the spillover between affiliated pairs in the same city is the strongest, there remains
substantial knowledge spillover from JVs to non-affiliated domestic firms located in the same city. The
estimated coefficient is 0.144, positive and statistically significant at 10 percent level. This provides
evidence that while the ownership affiliation as required by quid pro quo facilitates learning, it is not a
prerequisite for knowledge spillover.


Are affiliated domestic automakers necessary for knowledge spillover?                              A skeptical view of
the findings above is that spillover to non-affiliated automakers could only happen with some form of
quid pro quo in place, and that affiliated domestic partners are crucial conduits for knowledge to flow
from foreign firms to domestic firms. To shed light on this, we exploit the fact that there are cities that
host non-affiliated domestic firms together with JVs but without the presence of affiliated domestic
automakers (see Figure B.4).34 If the presence of an affiliated domestic firm is crucial in mediating
knowledge spillover to non-affiliated domestic firms, we would expect the latter to benefit less from a
JV in the absence of the former. Results are reported in Table 10. The sample consists of model pairs
between non-affiliated domestic firms and JVs. The omitted group is non-affiliated domestic-JV pairs
in different cities. The two key regressors are whether the model pair is located in cities with or without
any affiliated domestic plant. If anything, the spillover from JVs to non-affiliated domestic firms in the
same city is larger when there are no affiliated domestic firms, with a p-value of 0.016 for the equality
of these two coefficients. This suggests that the presence of affiliated automakers is not a necessary
  34
    One example of a city that hosts only non-affiliated plants and JV plants (i.e. the blue-purple circles in Figure B.4)
is Chengdu. It has a plant by Geely (a private firm), plants by both Toyota-FAW and VW-FAW (JVs), but no plant by
FAW or any other affiliated domestic firm.



                                                           23
conduit for knowledge spillover, which could happen via channels other than ownership affiliation.


Evidence from the auto parts industry While the downstream auto assembly industry is subject
to quid pro quo, the upstream parts and components industry features a dynamic environment with both
JVs and wholly foreign-owned firms and considerable variation in ownership composition across cities
(as shown in Figure B.5).35 Our third analysis further leverages the variation in ownership type in the
upstream industry to examine whether wholly foreign-owned FDIs benefit domestic firms significantly
less in terms of knowledge spillover compared to JVs.
    We begin by constructing quality measures for the upstream suppliers in the following steps. First,
we map the micro-level IQS scores (covering 227 components and functionalities for each model) to
vehicle parts and components categories. This delivers a quality measure for each part category of each
model in a given year. After that, using the supplier information in Markline, we construct a quality
measure for each supplier i in part category k as the average of IQS scores over all models that source
part k from supplier i, weighted by each model's sales.
    We have compiled quality information for 1020 out of suppliers in MarkLine and non-missing owner-
ship information for 660 of them. Among these firms, 347 are domestic, 127 are joint ventures, and 206
are wholly foreign-owned. For each supplier, we observe quality measures over 1 to 13 part categories
(of 25 categories in total), with an average of 3 part categories per supplier.
    Next, following our main empirical strategy, we form follower-leader pairs using all domestic and
JV/foreign suppliers in the same year (from 2009 to 2014) for the same part category, and replicate our
analysis as outlined in Equations (1) and (2) for the upstream industry. We are interested in examining
whether spillover to domestic firms is smaller from wholly foreign-owned firms than from JVs.
    Table 11 shows the regression results. The results are qualitatively robust across columns with
different combinations of fixed effects.36 While domestic firms appear to benefit more from foreign firms
located in the same city (Columns (1) and (3)), whether the latter is a wholly foreign-owned entity or a
joint venture does not appear to matter (Columns (2) and (4)). We do not find evidence that knowledge
spillover from wholly foreign-owned FDIs is significantly less than that from joint ventures.
    In general, the existing literature has documented mixed evidence on whether domestic firms benefit
more from JVs compared to wholly foreign-owned firms. For example, Blomstr¨
                                                                          om and Sj¨
                                                                                   oholm (1999)
show that the degree of foreign ownership at the industry level does not affect the degree of spillover
   35
      Figure B.5 shows the distribution of ownership type by the number of firms and sales revenue across cities using the
annual survey of manufacturing firms conducted by the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS). There are two approaches
in the literature to identify a firm's ownership type, either using the registration type (Yu, 2015) or the shareholder
information based on registered capital (Brandt, Van Biesebroeck, and Zhang, 2012; Hsieh and Song, 2015). Since our
focus is on the distinction between joint venture and sole foreign ownership, we follow the second approach to define a
firm's ownership type. Results are robust to the alternative definition.
   36
      Due to the relatively small number of part categories per supplier (on average 3), we take out firm or firm-category
instead of firm-year fixed effects. The latter gives us qualitatively similar findings. Results are available upon requests.



                                                            24
to domestic firms. On the other hand, using firm-level data from Lithuania and Romania, respectively,
Javorcik (2004) and Javorcik and Spatareanu (2008) document spillover to upstream suppliers (vertical
spillover) from joint ventures but not from wholly foreign-owned investment. Conceptually speaking,
whether the spillover is stronger from JVs depends on the absorptive capacity of domestic firms, tech-
nology gaps between the two and the nature of competition. Our finding from the upstream parts and
components sector is probably more relevant for the auto industry, given the similarity in technology
progress and the absorptive capacity of domestic firms.


Effects of lifting Quid Pro Quo in 2009 We end our policy discussions with a simple quantification
exercise of what would have happened to the quality of domestic automakers if quid pro quo was lifted
in 2010. Since our empirical identification is based on relative quality strength between followers and
leaders, additional assumptions are needed to quantity the policy's impact on the overall quality levels
of domestic models. We make the following assumptions. First, we take the linear specification in
Equation (2) literally and assume that the size of spillover among the affiliated pairs is proportional
to the quality gap between the two. Second, for followers with multiple leaders, we use the average
predicted quality. Appendix A provides more details. It also illustrates how knowledge spillover of this
nature translates into shared relative quality strength between leader and follower models, and that
estimates based on relative quality strength (Equations (1) and (2)) capture the intensity of spillover.
       We experiment with two different assumptions on the dynamics of knowledge spillover. The first
scenario assumes that knowledge spillover and learning are proportional to the difference between current
JV model quality and domestic model's quality in 2009.37 The second scenario assumes that learning
occurs cumulatively each year. The benefit affiliated domestic automakers receive in a particular year
embodies all past learning with no depreciation, where learning in a given year is proportional to the
quality difference in that year.38 Which assumption is more appropriate depends on the nature of
learning (the frequency of model redesigns, persistence of the acquired technical skills, etc.). We use
the two scenarios to bound our predictions on the effects of quid pro quo.
       Figure 6 shows results based on our baseline estimate in Table 3. We take 2009 as the baseline
year and assume that the effect of the policy removal starts to take place in 2010. We use total IQS
score as the quality measure of interest. The solid lines plot observed annual average IQS scores for
JV, affiliated domestic models, and non-affiliated domestic models. The dashed line plots the predicted
quality of affiliated domestic models in the absence of quid pro quo. In the first scenario, lifting quid
pro quo in 2009 would reduce average domestic quality in 2014 by 9% (around 12 more defects per
model) for affiliated models, and 5.7% for all domestic models. Without quid pro quo, the affiliated
  37
    For this exercise we use a subsample of domestic models that were released by 2009.
  38
    One limitation of the cumulative learning assumption is that as time goes by, knowledge spillover from JVs could
exceed 100% and explain all quality upgrading of domestic automakers.



                                                        25
domestic automakers, all of which are SOEs, would have been outperformed by their non-affiliated
counterparts by 2014. With cumulative learning, the effect increases to a 23% reduction (around 33
more defects per model) for affiliated models and 16.5% for all domestic models. Note that in both
exercises, any industry-wide knowledge spillover due to the presence of foreign automakers, absorbed
by quality dimension by year fixed effects and quality dimension by segment fixed effects, is kept the
same. Thus the key focus is on the role of quid pro quo 's stipulated ownership requirement.
    Overall, our results show that while quid pro quo does facilitate domestic learning, it is not a prereq-
uisite for knowledge spillover and does not account for the majority of the overall quality improvement
experienced by domestic automakers. In light of the trade dispute between China and the US and the
debate regarding the current relevance of the quid pro quo policy, our analysis suggests that removing
the policy would not significantly hinder the process of domestic quality improvement.


7    Conclusion

This paper studies the effect of quid pro quo, the policy of technology transfer for market access, in
facilitating knowledge spillover from developed countries to developing countries. Leveraging unique
datasets on quality ratings, supplier networks, worker flow, and household surveys, we document con-
sistent patterns of additional knowledge spillover from JVs to domestic automakers as a result of quid
pro quo over the general spillover induced by the presence of foreign automakers. Consistent with
the existing literature, worker flows and supplier network are the primary channels of such knowledge
spillover. On the other hand, our analysis suggests that while ownership affiliation facilitates learning,
it is not a necessary requirement for knowledge spillover and does not account for the majority of the
quality upgrading experienced by domestic automakers during our study period.
    Our findings imply that the recent pledge by the Chinese government to end quid pro quo in the
automobile industry would not significantly hinder domestic quality upgrading. With a majority stake
or even sole-ownership, foreign automakers could have stronger incentives to bring the most advanced
technology to the Chinese market as they can better guard their know-how. How such incentives are
shaped by global knowledge diffusion is an important open area for future empirical research.




                                                    26
References
Abebe, Girum, Margaret S McMillan, and Michel Serafinelli. 2018. "Foreign direct investment and
 knowledge diffusion in poor locations: Evidence from Ethiopia." Tech. rep., National Bureau of
 Economic Research.

Aitken, Brian J and Ann E Harrison. 1999. "Do domestic firms benefit from direct foreign investment?
  Evidence from Venezuela." American economic review 89 (3):605­618.

Atkin, David, Amit K Khandelwal, and Adam Osman. 2017. "Exporting and firm performance: Evi-
  dence from a randomized experiment." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (2):551­615.

Balsvik, Ragnhild. 2011. "Is labor mobility a channel for spillovers from multinationals? Evidence from
  Norwegian manufacturing." The review of economics and statistics 93 (1):285­297.

Barwick, Panle Jia, Myrto Kalouptsidi, and Nahim Bin Zahur. 2019. "China's Industrial Policy: an
  Empirical Evaluation." Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bilir, L Kamran and Eduardo Morales. 2016. "Innovation in the global firm." Tech. rep., National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Blalock, Garrick and Paul J Gertler. 2008. "Welfare gains from foreign direct investment through
  technology transfer to local suppliers." Journal of international Economics 74 (2):402­421.

Blomstr¨om, Magnus and Fredrik Sj¨ oholm. 1999. "Technology transfer and spillovers: Does local par-
  ticipation with multinationals matter?" European Economic Review 43 (4):915 ­ 923.

Boschma, Ron, Rikard Eriksson, and Urban Lindgren. 2009. "How does labour mobility affect the
  performance of plants? The importance of relatedness and geographical proximity." Journal of
  Economic Geography 9 (2):169­190.

Brandt, Loren, Johannes Van Biesebroeck, Luhang Wang, and Yifan Zhang. 2017. "WTO accession
  and performance of Chinese manufacturing firms." American Economic Review 107 (9):2784­2820.

Brandt, Loren, Johannes Van Biesebroeck, and Yifan Zhang. 2012. "Creative accounting or creative
  destruction? Firm-level productivity growth in Chinese manufacturing." Journal of development
  economics 97 (2):339­351.

Buera, Francisco J and Ezra Oberfield. 2016. "The global diffusion of ideas." Tech. rep., National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Castillo, Victoria, Lucas Figal Garone, Alessandro Maffioli, Sofia Rojo, and Rodolfo Stucchi. 2020.
  "Knowledge Spillovers through Labour Mobility: An Employer­Employee Analysis." The Journal of
  Development Studies 56 (3):469­488.

Chen, Yuan and C-Y Cynthia Lin Lawell. 2019. "Supply and Demand in the Chinese Automobile Market:
  A Random Coefficients Mixed Oligopolistic Differentiated Products Model." Working Paper.

Chen, Yuan, C-Y Cynthia Lin Lawell, and Yunshi Wang. 2020. "The Chinese automobile industry and
  government policy." Research in Transportation Economics :100849.

Chen, Yuyu, Mitsuru Igami, Masayuki Sawada, and Mo Xiao. 2019. "Privatization and Productivity in
  China." Working Paper.


                                                  27
Eslava, Marcela, Ana Cec´
                        ilia Fieler, and Daniel Yi Xu. 2015. "(Indirect) Input Linkages." American
  Economic Review 105 (5):662­66.

Fons-Rosen, Christian, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Bent E Sørensen, Carolina Villegas-Sanchez, and Vadym
  Volosovych. 2013. "Quantifying productivity gains from foreign investment." Tech. rep., National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Fons-Rosen, Christian, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Bent E Sorensen, Carolina Villegas-Sanchez, and Vadym
  Volosovych. 2017. "Foreign investment and domestic productivity: Identifying knowledge spillovers
  and competition effects." Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Fosfuri, Andrea, Massimo Motta, and Thomas Rønde. 2001. "Foreign direct investment and spillovers
  through workers' mobility." Journal of international economics 53 (1):205­222.

Gallagher, Kelly Sims. 2003. "Foreign technology in China's automobile industry: implications for
 energy, economic development, and environment." China Environment Series) :1­18.

Ge, Chunmian, Ke-Wei Huang, and Ivan Png. 2020. "Engineer/Scientist Careers: Patents, Online
 Profiles, and Misclassification Bias." Strategic Management Journal .

G¨
 org, Holger and Eric Strobl. 2005. "Spillovers from foreign firms through worker mobility: An empirical
 investigation." Scandinavian Journal of Economics 107 (4):693­709.

Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, Jan Svejnar, and Katherine Terrell. 2014. "When does FDI have positive
 spillovers? Evidence from 17 transition market economies." Journal of Comparative Economics
 42 (4):954 ­ 969.

Haddad, Mona and Ann Harrison. 1993. "Are there positive spillovers from direct foreign investment?:
  Evidence from panel data for Morocco." Journal of Development Economics 42 (1):51 ­ 74.

Harrison, Ann and Andr´ es Rodr´
                               iguez-Clare. 2009. "Trade, foreign investment, and industrial policy for
  developing countries." Handbook of Development Economics 5:4039­4214.

Haskel, Jonathan E., Sonia C. Pereira, and Matthew J. Slaughter. 2007. "Does Inward Foreign Direct
  Investment Boost the Productivity of Domestic Firms?" The Review of Economics and Statistics
  89 (3):482­496.

Havranek, Tomas and Zuzana Irsova. 2011. "Estimating vertical spillovers from FDI: Why results vary
  and what the true effect is." Journal of International Economics 85 (2):234 ­ 244. URL http:
  //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S002219961100081X.

Holmes, Thomas J, Ellen R McGrattan, and Edward C Prescott. 2015. "Quid pro quo: technology
  capital transfers for market access in China." The Review of Economic Studies 82 (3):1154­1193.

Howell, Sabrina T. 2018. "Joint ventures and technology adoption: A Chinese industrial policy that
  backfired." Research Policy 47 (8):1448 ­ 1462.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Zheng Michael Song. 2015. "Grasp the large, let go of the small: the transfor-
  mation of the state sector in China." Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Igami, Mitsuru and Kosuke Uetake. 2019. "Mergers, Innovation, and Entry-Exit Dynamics: Consolida-
  tion of the Hard Disk Drive Industry, 1996?2016." The Review of Economic Studies .



                                                  28
Javorcik, Beata. 2004. "Does foreign direct investment increase the productivity of domestic firms? In
  search of spillovers through backward linkages." American economic review 94 (3):605­627.

Javorcik, Beata Smarzynska and Mariana Spatareanu. 2008. "To share or not to share: Does local par-
  ticipation matter for spillovers from foreign direct investment?" Journal of Development Economics
  85 (1):194 ­ 217.

Jiang, Kun, Wolfgang Keller, Larry D Qiu, and William Ridley. 2018. "International joint ventures
  and internal vs. external technology transfer: Evidence from China." Tech. rep., National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Kalouptsidi, Myrto. 2017. "Detection and impact of industrial subsidies: The case of Chinese shipbuild-
 ing." The Review of Economic Studies 85 (2):1111­1158.

Karabay, Bilgehan. 2010. "Foreign direct investment and host country policies: A rationale for using
 ownership restrictions." Journal of Development Economics (93):218­225.

Kee, Hiau Looi. 2015. "Local intermediate inputs and the shared supplier spillovers of foreign direct
  investment." Journal of Development Economics 112 (C):56­71.

Kee, Hiau Looi and Heiwai Tang. 2016. "Domestic Value Added in Exports: Theory and Firm Evidence
  from China." American Economic Review 106 (6):1402­1436.

Keller, Wolfgang. 2004.    "International Technology Diffusion."     Journal of Economic Literature
  42 (3):752­782.

Keller, Wolfgang and Stephen R Yeaple. 2009. "Multinational Enterprises, International Trade, and
  Productivity Growth: Firm-Level Evidence from the United States." The Review of Economics and
  Statistics 91 (4):821­831. URL https://doi.org/10.1162/rest.91.4.821.

Khandelwal, Amit. 2010. "The long and short (of) quality ladders." The Review of Economic Studies
 77 (4):1450­1476.

Kosova, Renata. 2010. "Do foreign firms crowd out domestic firms? Evidence from the Czech Republic."
 The Review of Economics and Statistics 92 (4):861­881.

Lee, David S and Thomas Lemieux. 2010. "Regression discontinuity designs in economics." Journal of
  economic literature 48 (2):281­355.

Liu, Jianli. 2019. "History of China's Foreign Capital Utilization Since 1949: Stage Characteristics,
  Positive Effect and Main Experience." Management World (11).

Lu, Yi, Zhigang Tao, and Lianming Zhu. 2017. "Identifying FDI spillovers." Journal of International
  Economics 107:75­90.

Maliranta, Mika, Pierre Mohnen, and Petri Rouvinen. 2009. "Is inter-firm labor mobility a channel of
 knowledge spillovers? Evidence from a linked employer­employee panel." Industrial and Corporate
 Change 18 (6):1161­1191.

Medina, Pamela. 2017. "Import competition, quality upgrading and exporting: Evidence from the
 peruvian apparel industry." .

Møen, Jarle. 2005. "Is mobility of technical personnel a source of R&D spillovers?" Journal of labor
 economics 23 (1):81­114.

                                                  29
Newman, Carol, John Rand, Theodore Talbot, and Finn Tarp. 2015. "Technology transfers, foreign
  investment and productivity spillovers." European Economic Review 76:168­187.

Poole, Jennifer P. 2013. "Knowledge transfers from multinational to domestic firms: Evidence from
  worker mobility." Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (2):393­406.

Song, Zheng, Kjetil Storesletten, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2011. "Growing like china." American economic
  review 101 (1):196­233.

Stoyanov, Andrey and Nikolay Zubanov. 2012a. "Productivity spillovers across firms through worker
  mobility." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4 (2):168­98.

------. 2012b. "Productivity Spillovers across Firms through Worker Mobility." American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics 4 (2):168­98.

UNCTAD. 2018. World investment report 2018: Investment and new industrial policies. UN.

Verhoogen, Eric. 2020. "Firm-Level Upgrading in Developing Countries." .

World Bank, Bank. 2018. "Global investment competitiveness report 2017/2018: Foreign investor
 perspectives and policy implications."

Yu, Miaojie. 2015. "Processing trade, tariff reductions and firm productivity: evidence from Chinese
  firms." The Economic Journal 125 (585):943­988.




                                                  30
                                       Figure 1: Joint Venture Network of the Chinese Auto Industry
31




     Notes: This figure is adapted from Figure 1 of Chen, Lawell, and Wang (2020). It describes the joint venture network of the Chinese auto
     market as of 2014. Orange boxes represent affiliated SOEs; blue boxes represent foreign partners in JVs; purple boxes represent private domestic
     automakers; red boxes represent non-affiliated SOEs. The dashed lines indicate groups of JVs that share the same affiliated domestic SOE.
                                                                Figure 2: Correlation between Vehicle Price and IQS Scores

                                                                              Panel A. Vehicle Price vs. IQS

                     40




                                                                                                               19
                               30




                                                                                                                          18
         Price (thousand yuan)




                                                                                                    Price (thousand yuan)
                   20




                                                                                                              17
                     10




                                                                                                               16
                                                                                                               15
                     0




                                         50    100    150            200    250         300                                    50    100           150               200   250
                                                             Total IQS                                                                           Total IQS
32




                                                                            Panel B. Vehicle Price vs. APEAL
                        400




                                                                                                                  200
                                   300
              Price (thousand yuan)




                                                                                                      Price (thousand yuan)
                                                                                                                        180
                        200




                                                                                                        160
           100




                                                                                                                  140
                        0




                                         600    650    700            750         800         850                              650         700                 750         800
                                                             Total APEAL                                                                         Total APEAL


     Notes: The figures are binned scatter plots between price and IQS (Panel A) and between price and APEAL (Panel B) The left figures control for vehicle
     size and horsepower/weight and the right figures further control for year fixed effects, segment fixed effects, and ownership type fixed effects. A lower IQS
     indicates less defects and hence better quality while a higher APEAL indicates better quality.
                                                          Figure 3: Descriptive Patterns of Quality Upgrading




                                                                                                20
                         100




                                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                   IQS: Features/Controls/Display
                                                                 IQS: Engine and Transmission




                                                                                                                                                                    15
                         150
     IQS: All Problems




                                                                                                40




                                                                                                                                                                    20
                         200




                                                                                                60




                                                                                                                                                                    25
                         250
33




                                                                                                                                                                    30
                         300




                                                                                                80



                               2009        2012       2014                                           2009        2012       2014                                         2009        2012       2014
                                      Year                                                                  Year                                                                Year

                                      JV                                                                    JV                                                                  JV
                                      Aff. Domestic                                                         Aff. Domestic                                                       Aff. Domestic
                                      Non-Aff. Domestic                                                     Non-Aff. Domestic                                                   Non-Aff. Domestic


     Notes: The vertical axis reports IQS scores, which is the number of problems experienced per 100 vehicles during the first 90 days of ownership
     across nine performance dimensions. Note that smaller numbers indicate higher quality (the vertical axis points downward), so that the blue line
     representing JV products lies at the top of the graph. The aggregate score (left figure) is the sum of scores over the nine dimensions. The middle
     and right figures show the time dynamics of two dimensions, namely engine and transmission and features/control/display.
                                 Figure 4: Leader-Follower Pattern of Relative Quality Strength




         Notes: The bars show the quality scores for engine and fuel efficiency dimensions. The two models on the left
         are produced by JVs and those on the right are indigenous brands by affiliated domestic automakers.




                                Figure 5: Differential Relative Quality Strength Among Leaders


                          Driving Dynamics                                                   Engine                                            Fuel Efficiency
            VW-FAW                                                    VW-FAW                                                   VW-FAW


         Toyota-GAC                                                Toyota-GAC                                               Toyota-GAC


           Nissan-DF                                                 Nissan-DF                                                Nissan-DF
Firm




                                                          Firm




                                                                                                                   Firm




       Hyundai-BAIC                                              Hyundai-BAIC                                             Hyundai-BAIC


         Honda-GAC                                                 Honda-GAC                                                Honda-GAC


            GM-SAIC                                                   GM-SAIC                                                  GM-SAIC


       BMW-Brilliance                                            BMW-Brilliance                                           BMW-Brilliance

                        -2         0         2        4                           -2        -1        0       1                            -3    -2     -1    0    1     2
                         Relative Strength (weakness)                               Relative Strength (weakness)                            Relative Strength (weakness)




         Notes: This figure shows relative quality strength (after partialling out model-year and quality-dimension-
         segment fixed effects) across JVs along three vehicle performance dimensions measured in APEAL, namely
         driving dynamics, engine and fuel efficiency. Each circle represents a model produced by a given automaker.
         The sample includes vehicle models in all segments in 2014. The way of constructing the relative strength
         follows Equation 1 while using cross-sectional data.




                                                                                     34
                                                       Figure 6: Effects of Lifting Quid Pro Quo in 2009




                                         -100
               Average Total IQS Score
                                         -150
                                         -200
                                         -250




                                                2010               2011                    2012         2013                    2014
                                                                                       Year

                                                              JV                                  Aff Domestic, observed
                                                              Non-Aff Domestic, observed          Aff Domestic, remove policy
                                         -100
               Average Total IQS Score
                                         -150
                                         -200
                                         -250




                                                2010               2011                    2012         2013                    2014
                                                                                       Year

                                                              JV                                  Aff Domestic, observed
                                                              Non-Aff Domestic, observed          Aff Domestic, remove policy




Notes: The solid lines plot observed quality improvement in terms of the total IQS score for JV and domestic
models. The dashed line shows the counterfactual quality dynamics of the domestic models if quid pro quo
was lifted in 2009 (assuming the effect starts to takes place in 2010). The first panel assumes that knowledge
spillover and learning are proportional to the difference between current JV model quality and domestic
model's quality in 2009. The second panel assumes that learning occurs cumulatively each year. The benefit
affiliated domestic automakers receive in a particular year embodies all past learning with no depreciation,
where learning in a given year is proportional to the quality difference in that year. These two scenarios bound
the effect of quid pro quo.


                                                                                     35
                                                   Table 1: Summary Statistics: IQS and APEAL Scores

      Ownership                                                           JV                   Affiliated Domestic automakers    Non-affiliated Domestic automakers
      Year                                                     2009               2014               2009           2014             2009               2014
                                                            Mean    Std        Mean    Std     Mean       Std  Mean      Std     Mean      Std    Mean       Std
      Panel A: IQS scores
      IQS 1: Audio/entertainment/navigation                   5.44    3.67      5.17    2.80     7.93    6.99     4.20    3.27     6.62    3.17     4.31    2.84
      IQS 2: The driving experience                          29.39   14.35     20.31    6.98    40.78   16.99    25.82    7.73    51.64   14.44    27.42    6.04
      IQS 3: Engine                                          22.63   10.25     18.56    7.59    38.59   16.28    21.53    6.42    43.84   10.47    25.72    6.15
      IQS 4: Features/controls/displays                      13.53    7.87      9.68   3.32     28.93    8.01    12.29    6.33    29.51   11.11    12.78    4.30
      IQS 5: HVAC problems                                   16.39    7.23      8.91    4.37    25.82    8.82    11.46    6.12    27.73    9.33    11.89    5.24
      IQS 6: Interior problems                               13.39    6.52      7.73    3.55    21.47   10.93     9.69    3.40    19.74    5.54    10.48    4.81
      IQS 7: Seat problems                                    5.21    3.67      4.56    2.51     6.04    3.76     5.15    2.36     8.26    3.82    5.35     2.82
      IQS 8: Transmission                                    13.61    9.91      7.11    4.68    26.79   12.78    12.80    4.08    33.02   11.55    16.34    4.58
      IQS 9: Exterior problems                               23.19   13.72     12.82    5.84    39.24   15.26    20.51    8.15    50.91   19.26    19.37    6.56
      IQS total                                             142.79   55.65     94.85   23.02   235.60   72.56   123.45   24.28   271.28   49.85   133.66   19.77

      Panel B: APEAL scores
      APEAL 1: Audio, entertainment, and navigation          93.65   22.89   96.64     20.90    79.18   22.32    93.38   15.78    71.76   12.32    89.78   15.40
      APEAL 2: Engine and transmission                      40.68    1.92    40.21      1.32    37.58    2.73    38.60    0.79    36.57   1.16    38.34    0.83
      APEAL 3: Exterior                                      58.99   2.49    57.51      1.88    56.49    3.81    55.61    1.14    55.03    1.64    55.18   0.91
36




      APEAL 4: Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning    65.78   3.12     64.50    2.14    61.55    4.60     62.31    1.23    60.28   2.01     61.89   1.11
      APEAL 5: Visibility and driving safety                71.80    5.96    72.12      3.89    66.38    7.79   69.52     3.43   63.10    4.60    69.15    2.99
      APEAL 6: Driving dynamics                              65.79    2.94    64.43     2.16    61.58    4.60    62.16    1.46    59.67    1.92    61.75    1.27
      APEAL 7: Fuel economy                                  15.96    0.63    15.86     0.45    15.24    0.78    15.44    0.28    14.84    0.31    15.29    0.35
      APEAL 8: Interior                                     114.12    5.64   112.40     3.56   108.18    7.27   108.76    2.03   105.28    3.07   108.13    1.79
      APEAL 9: Seats                                        114.47   9.10    113.34     5.58   109.47   10.17   109.75    4.03   105.34   7.74    108.39   1.96
      APEAL 10: Storage and space                            89.39    5.94    87.59     4.71    84.23    8.08    82.84    4.65    80.72    6.20    82.62    4.59
      APEAL total                                           730.62   52.14   724.60    39.74   679.88   65.26   698.38   24.07   652.60   30.44   690.52   22.23
      Num of automakers                                       19                25                7               10                7                5
      Num of models                                           76               119               20               30               17               20

     Notes : The scores are at the model-by-year level, averaged over responses by around 100 car owners for each model-year. IQS scores measure the number
     of problem per 100 vehicle in the first three months of ownership in nine dimensions. APEAL scores are user satisfaction ratings in ten vehicle performance
     dimensions. Non-affiliated domestic automakers include all private Chinese automakers and non-affiliated SOEs that are not part of any JV.
                       Table 2: Relative Quality Strength among JVs

                                     (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)

 LeaderScore                     -0.008***     -0.006***      -0.008***     -0.007***      -0.008***
                                  (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)

 × SameFirm                      0.142***       0.109***      0.145***       0.122***      0.140***
                                  (0.020)        (0.016)       (0.021)        (0.017)       (0.020)

 Firm FE
 Firm-year FE
 Model FE
 Model-year FE
 Dimension-year FE
 Dimension-Segment FE
 Observations                     292,334       292,334        292,334       292,334        292,334
Notes : We randomly assign each JV model to be either a follower or a leader (with 50% chance each),
and match each leader and follower into pairs. The dependent variable is the quality score of a follower
model. The unit of observation is a pair-year-quality dimension. Both leader and follower scores are
residualized scores after taking out a set of fixed effects specified under each column. Standard errors
are clustered at FollowerFirm-Dimension and LeaderFirm-Dimension level. *** implies significance at
0.01 level, ** 0.05, * 0.1.




                                                  37
                      Table 3: Knowledge Spillover from JVs to Domestic Firms

                                       (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)

 JVScore                              -0.001       -0.002        -0.002       -0.002        -0.002        -0.002
                                     (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)

 × SameGroup                        0.026***       0.002         0.004        0.011         0.005         0.004
                                     (0.013)      (0.013)       (0.010)      (0.015)       (0.012)       (0.014)

 × SameSeg                                         0.002         0.004        0.003       0.005***        0.002
                                                  (0.003)       (0.002)      (0.004)       (0.002)       (0.002)

 × SameGroup × SameSeg                           0.131***      0.107***     0.137***      0.113***      0.138***
                                                  (0.018)       (0.019)      (0.020)       (0.017)       (0.021)

 Observations                        591,280      591,280       591,280      591,280       591,280      591,280

 Partialling out:
 Firm FE
 Firm-year FE
 Model FE
 Model-year FE
 Dimension-year FE
 Dimension-Segment FE
Notes : The dependent variable is the quality score of a domestic model. We consider all pairs of models produced
by JVs and domestic automakers. The unit of observation is a pair-year-quality dimension. Both leader (JV) and
follower (domestic) scores are residualized scores after taking out various fixed effects. SameGroup is an indicator
variable that equals to 1 if the two models belong to a pair of affiliated automakers. SameSeg is an indicator
variable that equals to 1 if the two models belong to the same vehicle segment. Standard errors are clustered at
FollowerFirm-Dimension and LeaderFirm-Dimension level. *** implies significance at 0.01 level, ** 0.05, * 0.1.




                                                        38
           Table 4: Results on Endogenous JV Formation

                                      (1)           (2)             (3)
 Founding Year                        All       Before 2000         All

 JVScore                            -0.002         -0.002       -0.004***
                                   (0.004)        (0.004)        (0.002)

 × SameGroup                        0.004          -0.003        0.027***
                                   (0.014)        (0.021)         (0.007)

 × SameSeg                          0.002          -0.004         0.007
                                   (0.002)        (0.006)        (0.004)

 × SameGroup × SameSeg             0.138***       0.210**        0.119***
                                    (0.021)       (0.030)         (0.017)

 Observations                      591,280        305,976        520,334

 Partialling out:
 Model-Year FE
 Dimension-Year FE
 Dimension-Segment FE
 Dimension-Model FE
Notes : The dependent variable is the quality score of a domestic model. We
consider pairs of models produced by JVs and domestic automakers. The unit of
observation is a pair-year-quality dimension. Column (1) replicates our main
result (Column (6) of Table 3). Column (2) restrict to models produced by
JVs that are formed prior to 2000. In Column (3), we construct residualized
leader (JV) and follower (domestic) scores by partialling out dimension-year
and dimension-model fixed effects. This specification only exploits temporal
variation in leader's quality. SameGroup and SameSeg are defined as in Table
3 Standard errors are clustered at FollowerFirm-Dimension and LeaderFirm-
Dimension level. *** implies significance at 0.01 level, ** 0.05, * 0.1.




                                     39
             Table 5: Alternative Explanation: Overlapping Customer Base

 Dep. variable: log(count of top two choices + 1)                  (1)          (2)           (3)

 SameGroup                                                     -0.034          -0.003      -0.009***
                                                                (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)

 SameSegment                                                                 0.082         0.056
                                                                             (0.007)       (0.007)

 SameGroup × SameSegment                                                     -0.021        -0.017
                                                                              (0.007)       (0.007)

 SameOwnershipType                                                           0.037         0.025
                                                                             (0.001)       (0.001)

 SameOwnershipType × SameSegment                                             0.132         0.130
                                                                             (0.003)       (0.003)

 SameFirm                                                                    0.051         0.041
                                                                             (0.003)       (0.003)

 Observations                                                   196,225       196,225       196,225
 R-squared                                                       0.015         0.075         0.087
 Attributes Controls
Note: The sample is constructed from the household car ownership survey. Each observation is a pair
of models in a year. The dependent variable is the log number of times a pair is listed as the top two
choices by some households in the survey data. Attributes controls include the difference in prices, car
sizes, and engine powers. SameGroup and SameSeg are defined as in Table 3. SameOwnerShipType
is takes value 1 if both are JV models or both are domestic models. In columns (2) and (3), the
omitted group includes pairs that are not in the same segment and not produced by firms of the same
ownership type, and not produced by affiliated automakers. *** implies significance at 0.01 level, **
0.05, * 0.1.




                                                  40
  Table 6: Knowledge Spillover by IQS and APEAL Studies

                                        (1)         (2)        (3)
                                        All        IQS       APEAL

 JVScore                             -0.002       -0.001       -0.003
                                    (0.002)      (0.001)      (0.004)

 × SameGroup                         0.004        0.001        0.007
                                    (0.013)      (0.009)      (0.024)

 × SameSeg                           0.003        -0.000       0.006
                                    (0.002)      (0.003)      (0.004)

 × SameGroup × SameSeg             0.138***     0.131***     0.144***
                                    (0.021)      (0.028)      (0.031)

 Observations                      591,280       280,080      311,200

 Partialling out:
 Model-year FE
 Dimension-Year FE
 Dimension-Segment FE
Notes : The dependent variable is the quality score of a domestic model.
We consider all pairs of models produced by JVs and domestic automak-
ers. The unit of observation is a pair-year-quality dimension. Column
(1) replicates Column (2) of Table 3. Columns (2) and (3) split IQS and
APEAL scores into different regression samples. Standard errors are clus-
tered at FollowerFirm-Dimension and LeaderFirm-Dimension level. ***
implies significance at 0.01 level, ** 0.05, * 0.1.




                                   41
                      Table 7: Mechanism of Knowledge Spillover: Worker Flow

 JVScore interacted with                                          (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)

 × SameGroup                                                  0.143***      0.063***     0.046***      0.055***
                                                               (0.020)       (0.019)      (0.020)       (0.025)

 × SameGroup × JVDomFlow                                                    0.030***      0.026**      0.037***
                                                                             (0.008)      (0.010)       (0.011)

 × SameGroup × DomJVFlow                                                                   0.012
                                                                                          (0.011)

 × SameGroup × JVDomFlow × HighTechShare                                                                 0.044
                                                                                                        (0.041)

 Observations                                                  115,159      115,159       115,159       69,331

 Partialling out:
 Model-year FE
 Dimension-Year FE
 Dimension-Segment FE
Notes : The dependent variable is the quality score of a domestic model.The sample consists of domestic-JV pairs in
the same vehicle segment where spillover is concentrated. The unit of observation is a pair-year-quality dimension.
Both JV and domestic scores are residualized scores after taking out dimension-year, model-year and dimension-
segment fixed effects. SameGroup is defined as in Table 3. JVDomFlow measures the number of workers who moved
from the JV to the domestic automaker. Vice versa for DomJVFlow. We identify six "HighTech" occupations
that are directly related to the IQS quality measures. Those are feature designers, mechanical engineers, software
engineers, procurement manager, quality control, and R&D. HighTechShare is the fraction of worker flows that
is in one of the six occupations. All pairs with 0 worker flow (and hence undefined HighTechShare) are dropped
in column (4). Standard errors are clustered at FollowerFirm-Dimension and LeaderFirm-Dimension level. ***
implies significance at 0.01 level, ** 0.05, * 0.1.




                                                        42
Table 8: Mechanism of Knowledge Spillover: Supplier Network

 JVScore interacted with                               (1)          (2)

 × SameGroup                                       0.138***      0.094***
                                                    (0.020)       (0.022)

 × SameGroup × SupplierOverlapRatio                              0.039***
                                                                  (0.015)

 Observations                                       111,796      111,796

 Partialling out:
 Model-year FE
 Dimension-Year FE
 Dimension-Segment FE
Notes : The dependent variable is the quality score of a domestic model.
The sample consists of domestic-JV pairs in the same vehicle segment where
spillover is concentrated. The unit of observation is a pair-year-quality di-
mension. Both JV and domestic scores are residualized scores after tak-
ing out dimension-year, model-year and dimension-segment fixed effects.
SameGroup is defined as in Table 3. SupplierOverlapRatio is defined as
the number of common suppliers divided by the number of distinct suppliers
reported by the pair (the smaller number of the two). Standard errors are
clustered at FollowerFirm-Dimension and LeaderFirm-Dimension level. ***
implies significance at 0.01 level, ** 0.05, * 0.1.




                                     43
Table 9: Knowledge Spillover: is Quid Pro Quo a prerequisite?

      JVScore interacted with                 (1)           (2)

      × SameGroup                          0.143***
                                            (0.020)

      × DiffGroup                            0.001
                                            (0.005)

      × SameGroup × SameCity                            0.188***
                                                         (0.036)

      × SameGroup × DiffCity                            0.103***
                                                         (0.023)

      × DiffGroup × SameCity                             0.144*
                                                         (0.084)

      × DiffGroup × DiffCity                              -0.000
                                                         (0.005)

      Observations                         115,159       115,159

      Partialling out:
      Model-Year FE
      Dimension-Year FE
      Dimension-Segment FE
     Notes : The dependent variable is the quality score of a do-
     mestic model. The sample consists of domestic-JV pairs in
     the same vehicle segment, which explains the smaller number
     of observations than Table 3. The unit of observation is a pair-
     year-quality dimension. Both leader (JV) and follower (domes-
     tic) scores are residualized scores after taking out dimension-
     year, model-year and dimension-segment fixed effects. In-
     teraction terms are dummy variables indicating whether the
     two models belong to the same affiliated group of automak-
     ers or locate in the same city. Standard errors are clustered
     at FollowerFirm-Dimension and LeaderFirm-Dimension level.
     *** implies significance at 0.01 level, ** 0.05, * 0.1.




                                   44
   Table 10: Policy Counterfactual: Does Having Affiliated SOEs in a City Matter?

 Sample: Pairs of models of non-affiliated domestic automakers and JVs                        (1)

 JVScore                                                                                  -0.002***
                                                                                           (0.000)

 × SameCity × CityWithAffiliatedFirm                                                       0.087**
                                                                                           (0.044)

 × SameCity × CityWithoutAffiliatedFirm                                                   0.214***
                                                                                           (0.040)

 Observations                                                                              552,235

 Partialling out:
 Model-Year FE
 Dimension-Year FE
 Dimension-Segment FE
Notes : The dependent variable is the quality score of a domestic model. The sample in this exercise
consists of all pairs of models produced by JVs and non-affiliated domestic automakers given that
there are no pairs of JV-domestic models in the same segment and same city in cities where there is
no affiliated automakers. The unit of observation is a pair-year-quality dimension. Both leader (JV)
and follower (domestic) scores are residualized scores after taking out model-year, dimension-year and
dimension-segment fixed effects. SameCity is an indicator variable that equals to 1 if the two models
are produced in the same city. CityWithAffiliatedFirm and CityWithoutAffiliatedFirm are dummy
variables indicating whether the city hosts an auto assembly plant by an affiliated domestic automaker.
Standard errors are clustered at FollowerFirm-Dimension and LeaderFirm-Dimension level. *** implies
significance at 0.01 level, ** 0.05, * 0.1.




                                                  45
      Table 11: Knowledge Spillover: Evidence from the Upstream Auto Parts Industry

                                                                    (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)

 ScoreLeader                                                     -0.006*     -0.006*      -0.008    -0.007***
                                                                 (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.006)     (0.002)
 ScoreLeader × SameCity                                          0.087*       0.111*     0.135*      0.135**
                                                                 (0.045)     (0.058)     (0.074)     (0.059)
 ScoreLeader × WhollyForeignOwned                                              0.001                  -0.001
                                                                             (0.004)                 (0.009)
 ScoreLeader × SameCity × WhollyForeignOwned                                  -0.032                  0.000
                                                                             (0.081)                 (0.124)
 Observations                                                     78,097      78,097     77,788       77,788

 Partialling out:
 Firm FE
 Category-Year FE
 Firm-Category FE
Notes : The dependent variable is the quality of a domestic part suppliers. We consider all pairs of domestic
and foreign/JV firms. The unit of observation is a pair-part category-year. Both the leader and follower scores
are residualized after taking out fixed effects that are indicated at the bottom of the table. SameCity is an
indicator variable that equals to 1 if the two firms are located in the same city. WhollyForeignOwned is an
indicator variable that equals to 1 if the leader is a wholly foreign-owned firm and 0 if it is a joint venture.
Standard errors are clustered at the follower-category and leader-category level. *** implies significance at 0.01
level, ** 0.05, * 0.1.




                                                       46
Appendices. For Online Publication Only

A     A Simple Model of Knowledge Spillover
We write a simple learning model to guide the quantification exercise in Section 6. We make a couple of
mild assumptions. First, we take the linear specification in Equation (2) literally and assume that the
size of spillover among the affiliated pairs is proportional to the quality gap between the two. Second, for
followers with multiple leaders, we use the average predicted quality. Finally, for illustration purpose,
we also assume that domestic models (followers) benefits from knowledge spillover from affiliated JVs
(leaders) every year. This is not crucial to the quantification exercise, and we present results without
this assumption.
                   k denote the observed quality of the follower in quality dimension k in year t. Let
    Formally, let qt
tk =   ¯t + k denote the baseline quality of the follower in dimension k in the absence of knowledge
            t
spillover. It consists of a component  ¯t common to all quality dimensions, and a dimension-specific
component k           k
             t . Let Qt denote the observed quality of a leader in quality dimension k and year t. It can
be similarly decomposed into Q¯ t and µk          k
                                       t , where µt measures quality-specific comparative (dis)advantage.
Let  denote the intensity of spillover. We write:

                               k   k
                              qt = t + (Qk   k
                                         t - t )                                                      (A.1)
                                   =     (1 - )¯t + Q
                                                    ¯t          +µk   + (1 -   )k                     (A.2)
                                                                  t             t
                                       follower model-year FE


Let  k denote the follower's residualized quality scores in dimension k . It follows that:

                                        k
                                        t = µk         k
                                             t + (1 - )t                                              (A.3)

    This expression maps to our pairwise empirical framework. Intuitively, knowledge spillover translates
into similar quality strength between the leader and the follower. k
                                                                   t , or the intrinsic quality strength of
follower in the absence of spillover, shows up as a noise in the estimation. The identification assumption
is that the follower's intrinsic quality strength k
                                                  t is independent from the leader's quality strength
µk
 t . We examine and rule out potential threats to this assumption, such as endogenous JV formation,
overlapping consumer base, and direct technology transfer in Section 4.2.
    We impute the value of  using our reduced-form estimates, and use Equation (A.1) to back out
knowledge spillover between each leader-follower pair in each year. For domestic models with multiple
leaders, with calculate average spillover from the set of leaders. The reduction in quality of a follower
when quid pro quo was lifted in 2009 s the sum of spillover between 2009 and year t.




                                                     A-1
B   Figures and Tables

                                    Figure B.1: Entry of Models by Ownership Over Time

                 150
          Number of models
           50    0    100




                             2004    2005    2006   2007   2008    2009     2010   2011   2012   2013   2014
                                                                   Year

                                        JV            Affiliated Domestic            Non-affiliated Domestic



        Notes: Affiliated domestic firms are the domestic automakers that have joint ventures with
        foreign automakers. They are all SOEs. The number of models from these automakers
        indicates the indigenous brands, i.e., brands produced solely by the domestic automakers.
        Non-affiliated domestic automakers are those automakers that do not have joint ventures.




                                                                  B-2
                                                  Figure B.2: Entry of International Joint Ventures
                   30
Number of JVs in the Chinese Auto Market
          10       0       20




                                           1984         1991     1995        2000     2004            2010   2014
                                                                           Year

       Notes: The figure plots the number of JVs in the Chinese auto market over time. Significant
       entries include: (1) 1984-1994: VW-Shanghai, VW-FAW, PSA-Dongfeng, Suzuki-Changan;
       (2) 1994-2000: GM-Shanghai, Honda-Guangzhou, Toyota-FAW, Suzuki-Changhe; (3) post
       2000: Ford-Changan, Nissan-Dongfeng, Hyundai-Beijing, BMW-Brilliance.




                                                                        B-3
                              Figure B.3: Growth of the Chinese Auto Industry by Ownership Type

                                                             Panel A. Performance of JVs and Domestic automakers

     Value of new vehicle sales (in billion RMB)




                                                                                                                                                 Quantity of new vehnicle sales (in millions)
                                                   2000




                                                                                                                                                                               10      12
                                                   1500




                                                                                                                                                                         8
                                                   1000




                                                                                                                                                                  6
                                                   500




                                                                                                                                                    2       4
                                                   0




                                                          2009         2010             2011               2012          2013            2014
                                                                                                    Year

                                                                             JV sales value                   Domestic sales value
                                                                             JV sales quantity                Domestic sales quantity




                                                                 Panel B. Performance among Domestic automakers
     Value of new vehicle sales (in billion RMB)




                                                                                                                                                    Quantity of new vehnicle sales (in millions)
                                                                                                                                                                                        1.8
                                          140




                                                                                                                                                                                1.6
                                120




                                                                                                                                                                        1.4
                       100




                                                                                                                                                                 1.2
                80




                                                                                                                                                         1
         60




                                                          2009         2010             2011               2012          2013             2014
                                                                                                    Year

                                                                     Aff. Domestic sales value                Non-Aff. Domestic sales value
                                                                     Aff. Domestic sales quantity             Non-Aff. Domestic sales quantity




Notes: Sales value and quantity are calculated using the license registration database. The sample
contains all models that cumulatively account for 95% of total passenger vehicle sales in China in
each year, and does not include imported models, which account for around 3% of total sales.



                                                                                                    B-4
         Figure B.4: Geographical Distribution of Vehicle Production Plants in China




Notes: This figures shows a map of vehicle production cities in China. Each circle represents a city. Colors of
the circle indicate the ownership composition of the production plants located in a given city.




                                                     B-5
                                     Figure B.5: The Upstream Auto Parts Industry: Firm and Sales Distribution by Ownership Type




                                                                                                           4.00e+08
                   100
                   80




                                                                                                                     3.00e+08
                                                                                            Sales revenue of upstream firms
      Number of upstream firms
                       60




                                                                                                      2.00e+08
         40
B-6




                                                                                       1.00e+08
                   20
                   0




                                                                                                           0
                                 0     5               10            15       20                                                0   5               10            15       20
                                                      Cities                                                                                       Cities

                                           Domestic            JV   Foreign                                                             Domestic            JV   Foreign




      Notes: This figure shows the distribution of ownership types by the number of firms and sales revenue for the top 20 cities, defined in terms of total sales
      revenue from 2009 to 2014, using the NBS annual survey of manufacturing firms. Each bar shows the breakdown of ownership type in a given city.
                       Table B.1: Joint Ventures in the Chinese Passenger Vehicle Market

      Joint Venture              Foreign Partner          Chinese Partner        2014 Sales    2014 Market share
      VW-FAW                     Volkswagen               First Auto Works          1668             .113
      VW-Shanghai                Volkswagen               Shanghai Auto             1633             .111
      GM-Shanghai                General Motors           Shanghai Auto             1510             .102
      Hyundai-Beijing            Hyundai                  Beijing Auto              1067             .072
      Nissan-Dongfeng            Nissan                   Dongfeng Motors            920             .062

      Ford-Changan               Ford                     Changan Auto               853               .058
      Citroen-Dongfeng           PSA                      Dongfeng Motors            658               .045
      Toyota-FAW                 Toyota                   First Auto Works           568               .039
      Kia-Yueda-Dongfeng         Kia Motors               Dongfeng Motors            562               .038
      Honda-Guangzhou            Honda                    Guangzhou Auto             424               .029

      Toyota-Guangzhou           Toyota                   Guangzhou Auto             333               .023
      Honda-Dongfeng             Honda                    Dongfeng Motors            297               .020
      BMW-Brilliance             BMW                      Brilliance Auto            259               .018
B-7




      GM-Shanghai-Wuling         General Motors           Shanghai Auto              154               .010
      Mercedes-Beijing           Daimler                  Beijing Auto               147               .010

      Suzuki-Changan             Suzuki                   Changan Auto               143               .010
      Mazda-FAW                  Mazda                    First Auto Works            94               .006
      Suzuki-Changhe             Suzuki                   Changhe Auto                87               .006
      Mitsubishi-Southeast       Mitsubishi               Southeast Auto             69                .005
      Fiat-Guangzhou             Fiat                     Guangzhou Auto             60                .004
      Mitsubishi-Guangzhou       Mitsubishi               Guangzhou Auto             49                .003
      JMC                        Ford, Isuzu              Jiangling Motors           43                .003

      Landrover-Chery            Jaguar Land Rover        Chery
      Infinity-Dongfeng          Nissan                   Dongfeng Motors
      Qoros                      Israel Corporation       Chery
      Citroen-Changan            Citroen                  Changan Auto

      Total                                                                        11598               0.79
        Notes : This table shows the sales quantity and market shares of JVs in 2014. Sales are denoted in thousand.
        Landrover-Chery, Infinity-Dongfeng, Qoros, Ciroen-Changan had released models by 2014, but their sales was not
        captured by the License registrations data until 2015.
                               Table B.2: Location of Auto Assembly Plants in China

City        Province       JV                                                                    SOE                         Private
Panel A. Northeastern Region
Changchun Jilin            Toyota-FAW, VW-FAW, Mazda-FAW                                         FAW
Jilin       Jilin          Daihatsu-FAW
Shanyang    Liaoning       GM-Shanghai, BMW-Brilliance                                           Brilliance
Haerbin     Heilongjiang                                                                         Hafei

Panel B. Northern Region
Beijing      Beijing       Mercedes-Beijing, Hyundai-Beijing                                     BAIC, BAIC-Foton, Changan
Tianjin      Tianjin       Toyota-FAW                                                            FAW-Xiali                   Great Wall
Boading      Hebei                                                                                                           Great Wall
Erdos        Neimenggu                                                                                                       Huatai

Panel C. Eastern Region
Shanghai     Shanghai      VW-Shanghai, GM-Shanghai                                              SAIC, Chery                 Geely
Hangzhou     Zhejiang      Ford-Changan                                                          DF-Yulong, GAC-Gonow        Zotye
Ningbo       Zhejiang      VW-FAW                                                                                            Geely
Taizhou      Zhejiang                                                                                                        Geely
Jinhua       Zhejiang                                                                                                        Zotye
Hefei        Anhui                                                                               JAC
Wuhu         Anhui                                                                               Chery
Dongying     Shandong                                                                            GAC-Gonow
Weihai       Shandong                                                                                                        Huatai
Jinan        Shandong                                                                                                        Geely
Yantai       Shandong      GM-Shanghai
Nanjing      Jiangsu       Ford-Changan, VW-SAIC                                                 SAIC, Changan
Changzhou Jiangsu                                                                                                            Zotye
Yangzhou     Jiangsu       VW-Shanghai
Yancheng     Jiangsu       Kia-Yueda-Dongfeng
Suzhou       Jiangsu       Landrover-Chery
Nanchang     Jiangxi       JMC
Jiujiang     Jiangxi       Suzuki-Changhe
Jingdezhen Jiangxi         Suzuki-Changhe

Panel D. Southern Region
Guangzhou Guangdong        Nissan-Dongfeng, Toyota-Guangzhou, Honda-Guangzhou, Citroen-Changan   GAC
Foshan       Guangdong     VW-FAW
Shenzhen     Guangdong                                                                                                       BYD
Liuzhou      Guangxi       GM-Shanghai-Wuling                                                    Dongfeng-Liuzhou
Haikou       Hainan                                                                              Haima

Panel E. Central Region
Zhengzhou Henan            Nissan-Dongfeng                                                       Haima
Wuhan       Hubei          Honda-Dongfeng, Citroen-Dongfeng                                      Dongfeng
Xiangfan    Hubei          Nissan-Dongfeng
Xiangyang Hubei            Infiniti-Dongfeng
Changsha    Hunan          Fiat-Guangzhou, Mitsubishi-Guangzhou                                                              BYD, Zotye
Xiangtan    Hunan                                                                                                            Geely, Zotye

Panel F. Southwestern Region
Chongqing Chongqing        Ford-Changan, Suzuki-Changan                                          Changan                     Lifan
Chengdu      Sichuan       Toyota-FAW, VW-FAW                                                                                Geely

Panel G. Northwestern Region
Xian        Shannxi                                                                                                          BYD




                                                                  B-8
                                            Table B.3: Summary Statistics: Standardized IQS and APEAL Scores

       Ownership                                                                    JV                                               Domestic Firms
       Year                                                        2009            2014           2009-2014           2009               2014        2009-2014
                                                               Mean     Std     Mean    Std      Mean    Std      Mean     Std        Mean     Std  Mean    Std
       Panel A: IQS scores
       IQS 1: Audio/entertainment/navigation                   -.749   4.972     .687    2.367   -.345   5.403     -.587    5.128     1.285    1.924     .686   3.425
       IQS 2: The driving experience                           -.008    .898     .309     .461    .118    .681     -.289    1.446     .429      .235    -.235    1.41
       IQS 3: Engine                                            .205   1.611      .34    1.513   .351    1.571    -1.094    1.512     .074     1.173    -.698   1.709
       IQS 4: Features/controls/displays                       -.226   3.507     .851    2.011    .111   3.893     .206     2.673     .461      2.86     -.22   3.854
       IQS 5: HVAC problems                                       0     .835     .133     .452   .046     .819     -.418    2.024     .115      .528    -.092   1.282
       IQS 6: Interior problems                                 .331   5.954    2.199    3.825    .984   5.607    -5.137     7.57      1.21    3.937   -1.955   7.074
       IQS 7: Seat problems                                    -.099   3.072     .593    2.384   -.031   3.393     -.257     2.84     .512     2.047     .062   2.877
       IQS 8: Transmission                                     -.147   3.278    2.416    1.658   1.101   2.827    -4.511    4.414     .988     2.105   -2.188   4.162
       IQS 9: Exterior problems                                -.288   4.434    1.486    2.685    .761    3.71    -4.504    6.581     .791     3.917   -1.513   6.098
       IQS average                                             -.109   1.444    1.002     .767   .344    1.446    -1.843    1.393     .652     .821     -.684   1.747

       Panel B: APEAL scores
       APEAL 1: Audio, entertainment, and navigation           1.168   9.048      .023   5.689   3.096    7.807   -10.845   10.333    -6.321   3.627   -6.151   7.278
       APEAL 2: Engine and transmission                        1.432    4.415     .357   3.028   2.105    4.021    -6.774    5.035    -3.609   1.867   -4.183   3.609
B-9




       APEAL 3: Exterior                                       2.255     6.33   -1.557    4.82   2.228      6      -5.708    7.832    -6.825   2.717   -4.426    5.478
       APEAL 4: Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning     2.363    7.484    -.756   5.142   2.881    6.953    -9.177    8.753    -6.411   2.851   -5.725   6.109
       APEAL 5: Visibility and driving safety                  2.135    7.219    -.945    5.15   2.928    6.923    -9.849    8.212     -6.58   2.953   -5.818    5.873
       APEAL 6: Driving dynamics                                2.61    6.962    -.637   5.125   3.007    6.673    -9.432    8.762    -6.415   3.281   -5.975    6.105
       APEAL 7: Fuel economy                                    .189    1.675    -.094   1.191    .635    1.645    -2.213    1.701    -1.377    .832   -1.262     1.39
       APEAL 8: Interior                                       3.118   14.183   -1.389   9.003   4.754   12.106    -15.22   14.729    -11.23   4.914   -9.446    10.29
       APEAL 9: Seats                                          1.267   14.283    -.259   8.941   4.759   12.181   -16.513   16.003    -9.386   5.124   -9.455   11.025
       APEAL 10: Storage and space                             2.054    9.518   -1.395   6.437   3.027    8.629     -9.6    11.508    -7.985   3.881   -6.014    8.229
       APEAL average                                           1.859   7.822     -.665   5.327   2.942    7.064    -9.533   8.889     -6.614   3.021   -5.845   6.193

       Average across all quality scores                        .927   4.426     .124    2.882   1.711   3.785    -5.891     4.59     -3.172   1.701    -3.4     3.45
       Num of firms                                              19               25               26               14                  15               19
       Num of models                                             76              119              146               37                  50              102

      Notes : This table summarizes the standardized IQS and APEAL scores. IQS scores are multiplied by negative one so that a higher score indicates better quality,
      as do APEAL scores. We first standardize all the survey responses under a given dimension by stacking all model-year observations together and compute the
      z-score for each question. The standardized z-scores are then aggregated to the dimension level.
            Table B.4: Dynamic Spillover Effects with a Balanced Panel

                                             (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)
                                            Lag 0          Lag 1         Lag 2          Lag 3

 JVScore                                     0.005         0.001        0.002**       0.008***
                                            (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.001)        (0.001)

 × SameGroup                                 -0.043        -0.024      -0.031***      -0.112***
                                            (0.033)       (0.020)       (0.005)        (0.020)

 × SameSegment                            -0.033***      -0.013***     -0.012***      -0.020***
                                           (0.002)        (0.004)       (0.003)        (0.002)

 × SameSegment × SameGroup                 0.258***      0.230***       0.164***      0.178***
                                            (0.092)       (0.066)        (0.054)       (0.036)

 Observations                               71,478        59,565         47,652        35,739

 Partialling out:
 Model-Year FE
 Dimension-Year FE
 Dimension-Segment FE
Notes : This table replicates the specification in Column (2) of Table 3 using leaders' quality
measures in the past. We restrict the sample to the set of models that are on the market for all
six years during our sample period. Column (1) repeats the baseline regression and Column (2)
uses leaders' quality measures in the previous year as the explanatory variable. Columns (3) and
(4) are based on leaders' quality measures two or three years ago. Standard errors are clustered at
FollowerFirm-Dimension and LeaderFirm-Dimension level. *** implies significance at 0.01 level,
** 0.05, * 0.1.




                                              B-10
                        Table B.5: Knowledge Spillover: Fixed Effect Models

                                      (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)           (5)          (6)
 JVScore                            -0.002       -0.003       -0.003      -0.004*       -0.003       -0.004*
                                   (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)

 × SameGroup                       0.045*        0.022        0.025        0.029        0.025         0.024
                                   (0.025)      (0.024)      (0.022)      (0.027)      (0.025)       (0.027)

 × SameSeg                                       0.005        0.003        0.004        0.001         0.005
                                                (0.005)      (0.004)      (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.004)

 × SameGroup × SameSeg                         0.140***     0.112***     0.159***     0.140***      0.169***
                                                (0.022)      (0.019)      (0.026)      (0.022)       (0.026)

 Observations                      591280       591280       591280       591280        591280       591280

 Fixed Effects:
 Firm FE
 Firm-year FE
 Model FE
 Model-year FE
 Dimension-year FE
 Dimension-Segment FE
Notes : This table replicates the specifications in Table 3 using one-step estimation with fixed effects. The JV
and domestic scores are standardized IQS and APEAL scores without partialling out fixed effects. All firm,
model, and segment fixed effects are defined at the follower-leader pair level. Standard errors are clustered at
FollowerFirm-Dimension and LeaderFirm-Dimension level. *** implies significance at 0.01 level, ** 0.05, * 0.1.




                                                     B-11
                                  Table B.6: Knowledge Spillover: Alternative Clustering of Standard Errors

                                    (1)          (2)           (3)             (4)                 (5)                       (6)
        Clustering:                DomesticFirm-Dimension     Domestic-JVFirmPair-Dimension               Domestic-JVFirmPair-Dimension
                                     JVFirm-Dimension                                           DomesticFirm-Dimension-Year, JVFirm-Dimension-Year

        JVScore                     -0.002        -0.002       -0.002           -0.002           -0.002*                     -0.002*
                                   (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.003)          (0.003)           (0.001)                     (0.001)
        × SameGroup                0.028**         0.004      0.028*             0.004          0.028***                      0.004
                                   (0.014)       (0.013)      (0.015)          (0.014)           (0.011)                     (0.011)
        × SameSeg                                  0.003                         0.003                                        0.003
                                                 (0.002)                       (0.006)                                       (0.003)
        × SameGroup × SameSeg                   0.138***                      0.138***                                      0.138***
                                                 (0.021)                       (0.025)                                       (0.020)

        Clustering:                      DomesticFirm              Domestic-JVFirmPair                         Domestic-JVFirmPair
                                           JVFirm                                                          DomesticFirm-Year, JVFirm-Year
B-12




        JVScore                     -0.002        -0.002       -0.002           -0.002            -0.002                      -0.002
                                   (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.010)          (0.009)           (0.003)                     (0.003)
        × SameGroup                  0.028         0.004        0.028            0.004             0.028                       0.004
                                   (0.033)       (0.033)      (0.064)          (0.058)           (0.059)                     (0.054)
        × SameSeg                                  0.003                         0.003                                         0.003
                                                 (0.003)                       (0.017)                                       (0.008)
        × SameGroup × SameSeg                   0.138***                       0.138**                                      0.138***
                                                 (0.048)                       (0.067)                                       (0.052)
        Partialling out:
        Model-Year FE
        Dimension-Year FE
        Dimension-Segment FE

       Note: Number of observation is 591,280 for all columns. This table replicates Column (6) in Table 3 under six alternative clustering of the
       standard errors. Columns (1) and (2) in the top panel cluster the standard error two-way at domestic firm-quality dimension and JV firm - quality
       dimension levels. Columns (3) and (4) in the top panel cluster the standard error at domestic-JV firm pair-quality dimension level. Columns (5)
       and (6) in the top panel cluster the standard error three-way at domestic-JV firm pair-quality dimension, domestic firm-quality dimension-year,
       and JV firm-quality dimension-year levels. Columns (1) and (2) in the bottom panel cluster the standard error two-way at domestic firm and JV
       firm levels. Columns (3) and (4) in the bottom panel cluster the standard error at domestic-JV firm pair level. Finally, Columns (5) and (6) in
       the top panel cluster the standard error three-way at domestic-JV firm pair, domestic firm-year and JV firm-year levels.
