                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    ASSET SPECIFICITY OF NON-FINANCIAL FIRMS

                                        Amir Kermani
                                         Yueran Ma

                                     Working Paper 27642
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27642


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2020




We thank Douglas Baird, Effi Benmelech, Ricardo Caballero, Larry Christiano, Emanuele
Colonnelli, Nicolas Crouzet, Marty Eichenbaum, Emmanuel Farhi, Murray Frank, Steve Kaplan,
Anya Kleymenova, Christian vom Lehn, Jacob Leshno, Lisa Yao Liu, Max Maksimovic, Akhil
Mathew, Michael Minnis, Justin Murfin, Gordon Phillips, Jose Scheinkman, Alp Simsek, James
Traina, Rob Vishny, Wei Wang, Michael Weber, Tom Winberry, Chunhui Yuan, seminar
participants at Bocconi, Chicago Booth, and the Chicago Fed, and conference participants at the
NBER Summer Institute for valuable comments and suggestions. We are grateful to finance
professionals John Coons and Doug Jung for sharing their valuable knowledge and insights. We
are indebted to Fatin Alia Ali, Leonel Drukker, Bianca He, and Julien Weber for outstanding
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.¸

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Amir Kermani and Yueran Ma. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Asset Specificity of Non-Financial Firms
Amir Kermani and Yueran Ma
NBER Working Paper No. 27642
August 2020
JEL No. E22,E32,G31,G33

                                           ABSTRACT

The specificity of firms' assets affects a wide range of economic issues. We study asset specificity
of U.S. non-financial firms using a new dataset on the liquidation recovery rates of all major asset
categories across industries. First, we find that non-financial firms' assets are generally highly
specific. The average recovery rate (liquidation value over cost net of depreciation) is 35% for
plant, property, and equipment (PPE). Second, across industries, physical attributes such as
mobility, durability, and standardization account for around 40% of variations in PPE recovery
rates. Over time, macroeconomic and industry conditions have the most impact on recovery rates
when PPE is not firm-specific. Third, higher asset specificity is associated with less asset sales,
greater investment response to uncertainty, and more Q dispersion, consistent with theories of
investment irreversibility. Finally, the data suggests that rising intangibles have had a limited
impact on firms' liquidation values.


Amir Kermani
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
545 Student Services Building #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
kermani@berkeley.edu

Yueran Ma
The University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Ave.
Chicago, IL 60637
United States
Yueran.Ma@chicagobooth.edu
1     Introduction
    Asset specificity is a key feature of production activities in practice. As Bertola and
Caballero (1994) articulate, once installed, capital often has "little or no value unless used
in production." Asset specificity also plays a prominent role in a wide range of economics
research. It can lead to investment irreversibility (Pindyck, 1991; Bertola and Caballero,
1994; Abel and Eberly, 1996), and influence price setting (Woodford, 2005; Altig, Christiano,
Eichenbaum, and Linde, 2011). It may also affect the form of organizations (Williamson,
1981), as well as debt contracting (Shleifer and Vishny, 1992; Kiyotaki and Moore, 1997).
    The central challenge for studying assets specificity and its implications is measurement.
What is the value of different assets if they were displaced, separated from current use and
moved to alternative use? Such data has been sparse so far, and secondary market trading
information is only readily available for a limited and selected subset of assets. An important
prior work is Ramey and Shapiro (2001), which collects comprehensive data from auctions of
aerospace manufacturing equipment, and estimates that the transaction value of equipment
is on average 28% of replacement cost. Other studies generally rely on imputations or
indirect proxies such as the prevalence of asset usage across industries (Berger, Ofek, and
Swary, 1996; Almeida and Campello, 2007; Gulen and Ion, 2016; Kim and Kung, 2017).
With the lack of systematic data on the degree of asset specificity, models have also used a
wide range of parameter values.
    In this paper, we tackle the challenge by constructing a new dataset that directly mea-
sures asset specificity for all major asset types (e.g., fixed assets, inventory, receivables)
and major industries. We document that assets are highly specific in most industries. We
then investigate the key determinants of variations in asset specificity, including physical
attributes of assets used in different industries (such as mobility, durability, standardiza-
tion/customization), as well as macroeconomic and industry conditions. We finally show
that the data has a wide range of applications. It sheds further light on several aspects of
investment theories; it also informs our understanding of the impact of rising intangibles.
    To fix ideas, for each type of asset, we quantify the degree of asset specificity using the
liquidation value relative to the replacement cost, henceforth referred to as the liquidation
recovery rate. This ratio corresponds to the degree of investment irreversibility in a number
of models (Abel and Eberly, 1996; Bloom, 2009). Alternatively, one might also think of
asset specificity defined as the ratio of the value in alternative use relative to the value in
current use. The value in current use is unfortunately difficult to assess for each individual
asset category (since a firm has multiple types of assets and one can only observe the market
value of the firm as a whole). To the extent that the value in current use is typically higher


                                               1
than the replacement cost, this alternative ratio would generally lead to an even higher
degree of asset specificity. The nature of the data also implies that it captures the value
from reallocating standalone and separable assets by themselves, not combined with human
capital or organizational capital.1
   The first step of our work is to collect data on the liquidation recovery rates of major
types of assets across industries. The most systematic reporting of this information comes
from the liquidation analysis in Chapter 11 bankruptcy filings, and we hand collect this data
from 2000 to 2016. Specifically, firms in Chapter 11 continue to operate, but are also required
to document the estimated value of their assets if they were to be liquidated in Chapter
7--in which case the firm would cease operations and liquidate its assets. These estimates
commonly derive from specialist appraisers who perform on-site field exams and simulate
live liquidations. The large cases typically report in detail the estimated liquidation recovery
rate for each category of asset, such as plant, property, and equipment (PPE), inventory,
receivables, cash, and book intangibles. We take the average recovery rate for each type of
asset in a two-digit SIC industry in the baseline analysis to reduce noise, which currently
covers nearly 50 non-financial two-digit SIC industries.
   We find that firms' assets are highly specific on average, but there are meaningful vari-
ations across industries. The industry-level liquidation recovery rate for PPE is 35% on
average, and it ranges from close to 70% for transportation to less than 10% for certain
services. The industry-level liquidation recovery rate for inventory is 44% on average, and
it ranges from about 80% for auto dealers and retailers to less than 20% for restaurants. If
we take the industry-level liquidation recovery rate and estimate the total liquidation value
of firms in Compustat based on their industries and the book value of each type of asset,
we find that the total liquidation value of PPE and working capital combined is 23% of
total book assets for the average firm (and 46% when other assets and all cash are also
included). In addition to the comparison with book values, at the firm level, the estimated
total liquidation value (including all assets and cash) is about 50% of the enterprise value for
the median firm in the Chapter 11 sample, and 33% in Compustat. Overall, non-financial
firms' assets are specialized and the piecemeal value to alternative users tends to be low,
relative to both replacement costs and firm values from current use.
   We perform extensive checks to further understand the data. The checks verify that
the liquidation value estimates in our data are consistent with market-based transactions
(in settings where such data is available). They also verify that although the liquidation
recovery rate data is most comprehensive for Chapter 11 firms, it is relevant for firms in the
same industry more generally. First, for aerospace manufacturing equipment that Ramey
   1
     If human capital and organizational capital remain, then the value would be akin to the value under
current use, rather than the liquidation value (Kiyotaki and Moore, 1997), and the former is much higher.


                                                   2
and Shapiro (2001) study using auctions data, the recovery rate is 28% in their analysis
and 32% in our sample. Second, the total liquidation value in our data is comparable
to the total liquidation proceeds in actual Chapter 7 liquidations (unfortunately Chapter
7 cases offer much less information beyond the total proceeds realized by the trustee).2
Third, the liquidation recovery rates in our data are also in line with lenders' benchmarks
for non-financial firms, which are 20% to 30% for industrial PPE for instance according
to a large bank. Fourth, we compute the industry-average recovery rates implied by PPE
sales among all Compustat firms, and find them to be similar to PPE liquidation recovery
rates in our data, with a significant positive correlation between the two measures across
industries. Finally, the informativeness of the data is further reflected by its consistency
with the physical attributes of assets used in different industries (measured for all firms in
each industry from separate data sources), and importantly with the investment behavior
of firms overall, which we analyze in the rest of the paper.
    The second step of our work is to examine the key determinants of variations in asset
specificity, using PPE liquidation recovery rates as the main example. We begin by studying
the impact of three physical attributes: 1) mobility, measured using the transportation costs
of PPE; 2) durability, measured using the depreciation rate of PPE, since asset reallocation
takes time; and 3) degree of standardization/customization, measured using the average
share of design costs in the production costs of PPE. To construct these measures, we collect
detailed information on the composition of each industry's asset stock using the fixed asset
tables from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), as well as transportation costs and
design costs using the BEA's input-output tables. We show that asset specificity is higher
and liquidation recovery rates are lower when the asset is less mobile, less durable, and more
customized. Indeed, these three attributes can account for around 40% of the variations
in the average PPE recovery rate across industries, despite potential measurement noise.
Moreover, the estimates also imply that if PPE has no transportation cost, no depreciation,
and no customization, the recovery rate would be 100%. Overall, the findings indicate strong
physical foundations for variations in asset specificity.
    We also study the impact of time-varying macroeconomic conditions and industry con-
ditions. We find that their impact on PPE recovery rates is in the direction of theoretical
predictions for the average industry, but could be somewhat weak. However, the impact
tends to be much stronger for industries where a larger share of PPE is not customized to
the firm. In other words, when natural buyers are economy-wide (i.e., vehicles) or industry-
wide (e.g., aircraft, ships, railroad equipment, oil and gas equipment), macro and industry
   2
    In Chapter 7 cases, it is difficult to calculate the liquidation recovery rate for each type of asset.
Assets foreclosed by lenders or abandoned by the trustee are also generally excluded from the reported total
proceeds, which requires additional imputation (Bris, Welch, and Zhu, 2006).



                                                     3
conditions are particularly relevant. When assets are firm-specific and not very useful to
others in any case, macro and industry conditions appear less relevant. We also find that
the cross-industry differences in PPE recovery rates (driven by physical attributes) are not
easily offset by cyclical variations. In addition, the magnitudes shown by the data suggest
that while better macroeconomic conditions and industry condition could increase liquida-
tion recovery rates (e.g., by five or ten percentage points), they do not seem to change the
overall picture of fairly high asset specificity in many non-financial industries.
   After analyzing the determinants of asset specificity, the third step of our work is to
investigate the implications of asset specificity for firms' behavior. We start with traditional
investment theories. As observed by a large literature, when asset specificity is higher, it
is more difficult to disinvest and downsize the capital stock: investment is more irreversible
(Pindyck, 1991; Bertola and Caballero, 1994; Abel and Eberly, 1996; Bloom, 2009, 2014).
We first verify that in industries with lower PPE recovery rates, firms have less PPE sales,
in terms of both frequency and dollar amount. We then show that, as predicted by theory,
capital expenditures (i.e., spending on PPE) are more sensitive to uncertainty shocks when
PPE recovery rates are lower. Indeed, the sensitivity is estimated to be around zero if the
PPE recovery rate is 100%. We also find that inventory investment is more sensitive to
uncertainty shocks when inventory recovery rates are lower, and the estimated sensitivity is
again around zero if the inventory recovery rate is 100%. Furthermore, the sensitivity of PPE
investment to uncertainty is affected by PPE recovery rates but not by inventory recovery
rates, and vice versa. Our results hold based on direct measurement of recovery rates, as well
as recovery rates "instrumented" (or "fitted") using the assets' physical attributes. Overall,
we find a high level of alignment, both qualitatively and quantitatively, between theoretical
predictions and the data.
   We also find evidence in line with several other implications of costly capital adjustment
and irreversibility. First, for pricing behavior, we find that industries with higher asset speci-
ficity display more price rigidity, based on price change data from Nakamura and Steinsson
(2008). The results appear consistent with the literature on firm-specific capital and price
stickiness (Woodford, 2005; Altig et al., 2011). Second, for productivity dispersion, we find
that industries with higher asset specificity display more dispersion in Q, in line with the
observations of Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006) and Lanteri (2018). This phenomenon holds
for large firms as well, where liquidation values are not a primary driver of financial frictions
like borrowing constraints (Lian and Ma, 2020), which suggests that asset specificity likely
has its impact through costly adjustment.
   In addition to implications for traditional investment theories, our data also has implica-
tions for understanding the impact of rising intangible assets (Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel,


                                                4
2009; Peters and Taylor, 2017; Crouzet and Eberly, 2019b), broadly defined as production
assets without physical presence. They include identifiable intangibles such as software,
patents, usage rights, as well as organizational capital that is not necessarily independently
identifiable. A key concern is that rising intangibles could decrease firms' liquidation values,
and then tighten borrowing constraints (Giglio and Severo, 2012; Caggese and Perez-Orive,
2018; Li, 2019; Falato, Kadyrzhanova, Sim, and Steri, 2020). We find that the change in
firms' liquidation values in recent years may not be substantial, for three reasons. First,
as discussed above, physical assets are highly specific to begin with. Second, in many in-
dustries, the average liquidation recovery rates of identifiable intangibles do not appear to
be much lower than those of PPE, in part because reallocating intangibles does not face
transportation costs given their lack of physical presence. Third, industries with a greater
increase in intangibles have been the ones with more specific physical assets in the first
place. Taken together, the aggregate liquidation value among Compustat firms in 2016 is
similar to that in 1996.
   It would be natural to ask how asset specificity affects firms' debt contracts and borrowing
capacity, which we study in detail in a companion paper (Kermani and Ma, 2020). We find
that liquidation values do not affect the total amount of borrowing for large firms and
firms with positive earnings. They do have a significant positive impact on total borrowing
for small firms and firms with negative earnings. Meanwhile, asset specificity does affect
the composition of debt: firms with higher liquidation values have more asset-based debt
(lending on the basis of the liquidation value of discrete assets like PPE), while firms with
lower liquidation values have more cash-flow based debt (lending on the basis of cash flows
from firms' operations) and debt with strong control rights. The results are consistent
with observations in Lian and Ma (2020) about the importance of cash-flow based lending
among non-financial firms. When firms have positive earnings (e.g., most large firms), total
debt capacity is typically driven by earnings-based borrowing constraints, instead of the
liquidation value of discrete assets.
   Finally, we connect our data with parameters in models, which have used or estimated
a variety of values for the degree of investment irreversibility or the amount of liquidation
value from physical capital. We hope that our micro data helps inform modeling analyses.
   Our work has three main contributions. First, we provide comprehensive data on the de-
gree of asset specificity across different types of assets and industries. Second, we investigate
the impact of physical attributes, as well as macro and industry conditions, on variations in
asset specificity. Third, the granular and quantitative nature of our data allows us to per-
form a rich set of analyses about the implications of asset specificity. Our findings shed light
on the impact of investment irreversibility and rising intangibles. The physical attributes of


                                               5
assets we measure also allow us to establish these links based on physical foundations.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 explains the data collection and presents
basic statistics. Section 3 studies the determinants of asset specificity, including physical at-
tributes as well as macro and industry conditions. Section 4 investigates several implications.
Section 5 summarizes the comparison with parameters in models. Section 6 concludes.


2     Data and Basic Statistics
    In this section, we discuss the data and measurement of asset specificity. We collect data
on liquidation recovery rates--i.e., liquidation value as a fraction of net book value (historical
cost net of depreciation)--of major asset categories (e.g., PPE, inventory, receivable, book
intangibles) across major industries. The liquidation value estimates represent proceeds
from a typical orderly liquidation process, and provide information about the value of each
type of asset in alternative use. By definition, high asset specificity means limited value
in alternative use, and correspondingly a low liquidation recovery rate. Importantly, the
liquidation value captures the value from reallocating standalone and separable assets by
themselves, not combined with human capital or organizational capital.
    We normalize the liquidation value using replacement costs, similar to Ramey and
Shapiro (2001). An alternative approach is to normalize the liquidation value using the
value of the asset in current use. Our approach is driven by three main reasons. First,
data on the net book value is available for each type of asset, while the value in current
use is difficult to assess for a particular category of assets. Second, the liquidation value
relative to costs is commonly used in models, which we discuss in more detail in Section 5.
Third, the ratio of the liquidation value relative to costs is, to a large extent, determined
by the inherent attributes of assets used in a given industry (as we further verify in Section
3), and can be more reliably generalized to firms in the same industry. The ratio of the
liquidation value relative to the value in current use, on the other hand, could depend on
managerial quality that affects the denominator. Nonetheless, for the firm as a whole, we
can still provide some information of the ratio of the total liquidation value relative to the
firm's enterprise value, which we discuss in Section 2.4.


2.1    Data Collection
    To systematically measure the degree of asset specificity of non-financial firms, secondary
market transactions data faces a number of challenges. First, such data is available for cer-
tain types of relatively standardized assets (e.g., vehicles, aircraft, construction equipment),
but difficult to obtain for many types of real assets. Second, it is also difficult to know


                                                6
the pool of assets firms own, in which case one cannot aggregate individual items to an
estimate at the firm level. To overcome these obstacles, a setting with comprehensive re-
porting covering all assets firms own is the liquidation analysis performed in Chapter 11
corporate reorganization. When firms complete Chapter 11, they are required to document
the estimated liquidation value that their assets can obtain if they were to be liquidated in
Chapter 7, where the firm ceases operations and a trustee liquidates its assets (largely piece-
meal with a roughly one year time frame). The estimates generally derive from appraisal
specialist firms, who usually serve as liquidators of real assets as well.3 They perform field
exams and simulate live liquidations to appraise the liquidation value of different types of
assets. They are also commonly responsible for assessing liquidation values for lenders who
lend against particular assets and set borrowing limits accordingly, which follows a similar
appraisal process.
    We hand collect liquidation recovery rate data from disclosure statements of Chapter
11 filings, for US non-financial firms from 2000 to 2016. Specifically, we begin with a
list of bankruptcy filings by public US non-financial firms from New Generation Research
BankruptcyData.Com. We then retrieve the disclosure statements of Chapter 11 cases from
Public Access to Court Electronic Records (PACER) and BankruptcyData.Com.4 The
liquidation analysis typically includes a summary table with the net book value, liquidation
value, and liquidation recovery rate (liquidation value as a fraction of net book value) for
each main category of asset (e.g., PPE, inventory, receivable) and for the entity as a whole,
together with notes that explain in more detail the sources and assumptions of the estimates.
Internet Appendix Figure IA1 shows two examples of the summary tables, from Lyondell
Chemical and Sorenson Communications. Internet Appendix Section IA2 shows the detailed
information behind the summary table for Lyondell Chemical, which includes the procedure
for the estimates and facility-level appraisals for Lyondell's PPE. We use the midpoint
estimate in the summary table, and the average of low and high scenarios when the midpoint
is not available. We have been able to retrieve liquidation analysis summary tables for 360
cases so far, covering 48 two-digit SICs.
    This data has several advantages. First, as mentioned above, it covers all assets owned
by a firm, instead of only assets with secondary market trading data (which tend to exclude
specialized assets) or are chosen to be sold off, which may entail selection (Ramey and
Shapiro, 2001; Maksimovic and Phillips, 2001). Second, it shows not just the liquidation
value in dollar amounts, but also the recovery rate, i.e., liquidation value as a fraction of
   3
      The appraisal firms have extensive knowledge, experience, and historical data about what would be a
feasible way to conduct a liquidation: how much can be sold to buyers from primary, secondary, and tertiary
markets, and at what price, etc.
    4
      When a case has multiple disclosure statements, we use the earliest version. If the information we need
is not available in the first version, we then use the latest version.


                                                     7
book value. Having recovery rates is important for comparing specificity across different
types of assets, and for constructing specificity measures more broadly for each industry as
we discuss below. Third, the data includes firms from all major industries in a reasonably
standardized format. Finally, relative to indirect proxies of asset specificity, our data allows
for the assessment of the dollar magnitude (important in many applications such as issues
analyzed in Section 4), provides a uniform metric across different types of assets (e.g., PPE
and inventory), and connects directly to model parameters (discussed in Section 5).
    Our data covers assets owned by firms. Some assets that firms use may be under op-
erating lease, instead of being owned. The owned assets within the boundary of the firm
are our primary focus for several reasons. First, real decisions like investment expenditures
capture spending on owned assets. Second, owned assets appear to dominate in quantity in
most industries. Specifically, starting in 2019, a new accounting rule (Accounting Standards
Update 842) requires firms to report the capitalized value of leased (right-of-use) assets and
corresponding operating lease liabilities. Based on the new disclosure, the median ratio of
leased assets to owned assets is about 2% among Compustat firms (the inter-quartile range
is 0% to 5.3%).5 The prevalence of operating leases also appears to be largely an industry
attribute, and industry fixed effects (e.g., two-digit SIC) account for about 30% of R2 in the
variation of the ratio of leased assets to owned assets. The ratio of leased to owned assets
is particularly high for certain retail industries (median above 20% for restaurants, depart-
ment stores, apparel, furniture, hardware, and food stores), modest for airlines and cinemas
(median around 10%),6 and very low (median well below 10%) for most other industries.


2.2     Checks of Data Informativeness
    We perform extensive checks to examine the reliability of the data. One might be
concerned that the liquidation values are based on estimates, which may introduce inac-
curacies.7 One might also be concerned that firms in Chapter 11 are special and different
   5
      Another way to estimate the prevalence of operating leases is to calculate assets owned by the two
lessor sectors in BEA data, which are 5320 (Rental and Leasing Services and Lessors of Intangible Assets)
and 5310 (Real Estate, which includes REITs that lease real estate properties to others). The total (non-
residential) assets owned by these two sectors are also less than 5% of total assets owned by non-financial
corporate businesses in the Flow of Funds. Since the lessor sectors also include some lessors to households
(e.g., car rentals), this estimate would be upward biased.
    6
      For instance, the 2019 Annual Report of Southwest Airlines shows that it has a total of 747 aircraft,
among which 625 is owned and 122 is leased.
    7
      Because the liquidation recovery rates are normalized by the net book value of assets, in addition to the
checks below, we also check that the depreciation rates firms use for book assets are reasonable. For each
firm in Compustat, we calculate its PPE depreciation rate, as well as the fixed asset depreciation rate in its
industry according to BEA's fixed asset tables. We find that depreciation rates used by firms are very similar
to those used by the BEA (the correlation is over 0.5 and the average difference is about one percentage
point). Nonetheless, firms generally apply linear depreciation while the BEA uses geometric depreciation.
Given the depreciation rate is similar, this implies that the net book value using firms' depreciation methods
tend to be smaller (which if anything would bias the liquidation recovery rate upward).


                                                      8
from the typical non-financial firm, because the Chapter 11 restructuring may occur when
the firm, its industry, or the economy experiences unfavorable conditions. This may lead
to lower liquidation values, or distortions in the differences across industries. We examine
these concerns in detail. Our checks verify that the liquidation value estimates in our data
are consistent with market-based outcomes (in settings where such data is available), such
as liquidation proceeds in Chapter 7 and auction proceeds. They also show that although
detailed liquidation recovery rate data is mainly available for Chapter 11 firms, it is con-
sistent with information about non-financial firms more generally. As we further analyze in
Section 3, the degree of asset specificity is substantially driven by the physical attributes of
assets used in an industry, which apply to firms in the industry in general. We also show in
Section 3 that while macroeconomic and industry conditions can affect liquidation recovery
rates, they do not seem to offset the impact of physical attributes: they do not easily erase
differences across industries or lead to drastically different overall recovery rates.
    First, in Kermani and Ma (2020), we perform a detailed comparison between total liq-
uidation value estimates from Chapter 11 filings and actual liquidation values in Chapter 7
cases. Chapter 7 cases only produce a Trustee's Final Report with total liquidation proceeds,
but not liquidation recovery rates for each asset type, so the information is more limited.8
For firms in the same industry, we find the estimated total liquidation values (normalized
by total assets at filing) in Chapter 11 liquidation analyses are similar to total proceeds in
Chapter 7 liquidations.
    Second, we cross check with other studies that use data from liquidation auctions. Specif-
ically, Ramey and Shapiro (2001) analyze equipment liquidations of three large aerospace
manufacturing plants. They estimate that the equipment liquidation recovery rate is around
28%. In our data, based on the same 3-digit SIC (SIC 372), the liquidation recovery rate
on machinery and equipment is 32%, which is very close.
    Third, as explained in detail in Kermani and Ma (2020), the average liquidation recovery
rates in our data also line up with benchmarks and debt limits lenders use when they lend
against the liquidation value of particular assets such as PPE, inventory, and receivable.
For instance, lenders typically lend 20% to 30% against the book value of PPE, according
to a large bank, which is similar to the average PPE recovery rate of 35% in our data. The
ratios lenders use are based on their assessment of the liquidation value of PPE, and derive
from their experiences with non-financial firms in general.
    8
      In addition, in Chapter 7 cases the trustee may also abandon assets that have little value, or return
assets that have negative equity (i.e., assets with liquidation value less than the amount of liabilities against
them) to lenders to foreclose. The value of these assets is not recorded in the total liquidation proceeds
realized by the trustee, which can create complications. We follow Bris, Welch, and Zhu (2006) to compute
lower bound and upper bound estimates of total liquidation values, by assuming either none or all assets
pledged to creditors are abandoned and foreclosed.



                                                       9
    Fourth, we also estimate the recovery rates implied by PPE sales among Compustat
firms. Specifically, firms' financial statements report proceeds from sales of PPE (Compustat
variable SPPE). For each firm-year with positive PPE sales, we can construct the net book
value of PPE sold (i.e., lagged net PPE + capital expenditures - depreciation - current
net PPE). We exclude firm-years with positive acquisition spending as it is difficult to tease
out PPE changes due to acquisitions. We construct the PPE sale recovery rate as PPE sale
proceeds normalized by the net book value of PPE sold. We calculate the average PPE sale
recovery rate in each two-digit SIC industry over our sample period (2000 to 2016), and
compare it to the industry-average PPE liquidation recovery rate in our data. We find the
difference is small: the average (median) difference is 0.036 (0.027), and the inter-quartile
range is -0.07 to 0.11. In addition, Internet Appendix Figure IA2 shows that the liquidation
recovery rates and the sale recovery rates are fairly correlated. The raw correlation is 0.35,
significant at the 1% level. The limitation of PPE sale recovery rates is that they only
capture a subset of PPE, and only one type of asset, so we focus on the liquidation recovery
rate data for our main analyses.
    Fifth, we also investigate whether the liquidation recovery rates or sale recovery rates of
PPE are affected by firm characteristics within an industry, which we analyze in Internet
Appendix Table IA1. We find that PPE recovery rates have a positive association with
firms' operating earnings (EBITDA). In terms of the economic magnitude, if profitability
(EBITDA normalized by book assets) changes by ten percentage points, PPE recovery rates
would change by around one percentage point. This sensitivity is relatively small, given
that the inter-quartile range of profitability among Compustat firms is around 25 percentage
points (from -0.08 to 0.16). We do not find a significant relationship between PPE recovery
rates and book leverage.9
    Finally, in Section 3 below, we demonstrate that variations of liquidation recovery rates
across industries are closely tied to the physical attributes of assets different industries use,
measured among all firms in each industry using separate data sources. In Section 4, we show
that the liquidation recovery rates in our data explain an important set of firm outcomes,
among Compustat firms in general.
    Taken together, we do not find evidence of systematic biases in the data. While we have
the most comprehensive data from the Chapter 11 sample, it reflects general features of
assets used by firms in the same industry and contains valuable information. As we analyze
in Section 3.2, macroeconomic or industry conditions can affect liquidation recovery rates,
   9
     There may not be a very strong link between firm-specific conditions and the liquidation value of its
physical assets because the liquidation value derives from the value in alternative use, rather than the quality
or the performance of the current business (e.g., the real estate of a book store making losses may have high
liquidation value, while the customized equipment of a pharmaceutical company with higher cash flows may
have little liquidation value).


                                                      10
but do not seem to easily offset the fundamental features of assets used by many firms
(which are customized or immobile--not necessarily valuable to alternative users on their
own, or need to be substantially modified to be useful as articulated by Ramey and Shapiro
(2001)). Inevitably the data may still contain noise which could attenuate the analyses on
firm outcomes, and we also present results "instrumenting" the raw recovery rates using the
physical attributes of assets discussed below. We find consistent results in both cases.


2.3    Asset-Level Recovery Rates
   We construct the measure of asset specificity, for each type of asset in an industry, by
calculating the average liquidation recovery rates among all Chapter 11 cases. The main
asset categories include PPE, inventory, receivables, and book intangibles, among others,
which correspond to the standard asset categories in financial statements. Each industry
is a two-digit SIC code. Averaging by industry has two functions. First, it can reduce
idiosyncratic noise at the individual case level. Second, as mentioned above, asset specificity
is to a large extent an industry attribute, driven by the nature of production activities in
different industries (e.g., physical attributes of assets used by different industries). These
industry-level measures can be extended to firms in an industry more broadly.
   Table 1 provides a summary of the industry-level liquidation recovery rates of PPE,
inventory, and receivable. For PPE, the average industry-level liquidation recovery rate is
35%, i.e., the liquidation value of PPE is on average 35% of net book value (cost net of
depreciation). This number is reasonably low, indicating that PPE is often specialized and
the value in alternative use can be limited. Some industries, however, have more generic
PPE, such as transportation (average liquidation recovery rate for PPE around 70%). For
inventory, the average industry-level liquidation recovery rate is 44%. It is very high for
industries such as auto dealers (close to 90%), as well as retailers like apparel stores and
supermarkets (around 75%), given the generic nature of their inventory. It is very low for
restaurants (around 15%), since their inventory primarily consists of fresh food which is
highly perishable. For receivables, the average industry-level liquidation recovery rate is
63%. Receivables may not have full liquidation recovery rates because of foreign receivables,
government receivables, and receivables from concentrated large customers, which are diffi-
cult to enforce. Some receivables may also be offset by payables to the same counterparties.


2.4    Firm-Level Liquidation Values
   We can also combine the liquidation value of different types of assets, and construct
the estimated firm-level liquidation value Liqi,t =      j   i,j Ki,j,t , where Liqi,t is the total
liquidation value of firm i at time t from different types of assets, j denotes the asset type

                                              11
(e.g., PPE, inventory), i,j is the liquidation recovery rate of this type of asset based on the
firm's industry (as explained above in Section 2.3), and Ki,j,t is the book value of asset j for
firm i at time t. The baseline sample period for Compustat firms is 1996 to 2016.
   The firm-level liquidation value estimate relies on the assumption that the attributes
of assets within an industry are broadly similar (e.g., steel mills use similar equipment).
While there can be variations across firms in an industry based on their location, equipment
vintage, etc. (as is well-acknowledged by appraisal specialists), we need some industry-
level aggregation of recovery rates to make the data more widely applicable. As discussed
above, there is substantial consistency within an industry and substantial information in the
industry-average recovery rate. In Section 3, we show that variations in industry-average
recovery rates are closely linked to the physical attributes of assets used in each industry. In
Section 4, we show that these variations also have significant explanatory power for firms'
investment behavior in each industry.
   Table 2, Panel A, shows summary statistics of firm-level liquidation values (normalized
by total book assets) estimated for Compustat firms. We include PPE and working capital
(inventory and receivable) in the baseline variable. The mean and median are about 23%;
the inter-quartile range is 12% to 33%. We can additionally include cash holdings. In this
case, the mean and median are around 43%; the inter-quartile range is 30% to 54%. Table
2, Panel B, shows other basic statistics of firms in the sample. Internet Appendix Figure
IA3, Panel A, shows the distribution of firm-level liquidation values. Figure IA3, Panel B,
shows the liquidation value composition for the average Compustat firm.
   As explained at the beginning of this section, our main analysis compares liquidation
values to replacement costs (book values) of each type of asset. Nevertheless, for the firm
as a whole, we can also compare the total liquidation value (from all types of assets) with
the enterprise value of the firm. This comparison sheds light on the piecemeal liquidation
value of a firm (the "intrinsic" value of standalone assets if the firm is "dead") relative to its
going-concern value (the present value of cash flows from the firm's continuing operations if
it is "alive"). For firms in the Chapter 11 sample, we can directly observe the assessment
of their total liquidation value and going-concern value (we use post-emergence firm market
value data for those firms that emerged as public firms, and estimated going-concern value
in the Chapter 11 confirmation plan otherwise). The median ratio is 50% (inter-quartile
range 32% to 74%). For Compustat firms, we compare the estimated liquidation value
Liqi,t including all major types of assets (PPE, working capital, as well as cash and book
intangibles), with their market values. The median ratio is 34% (inter-quartile range 20%
to 52%). The data suggests that in most cases, if a living firm were to be dismantled into
only its standalone separable assets, a substantial amount of value could dissipate.


                                               12
    Overall, we find that liquidation values are fairly limited for many firms. Their assets,
if redeployed for alternative use on a standalone basis, have limited value. This applies not
only to the traditional stereotypes of technology or health care industries, but represents a
more general phenomenon for many firms in manufacturing and services.


3     Determinants of Asset Specificity
    In this section, we analyze the determinants of asset specificity. In particular, we inves-
tigate what explains the variations in liquidation recovery rates across industries and over
time. In Section 3.1, we analyze the role of physical attributes of the assets used in different
industries. In Section 3.2, we study the impact of time-varying macroeconomic conditions
and industry conditions. Below we focus on PPE. We examine the determinants of the
specificity of inventory and other assets in the Internet Appendix Sections IA4 and IA5.


3.1     Physical Attributes
    We analyze three key physical attributes that affect the specificity of PPE. The first
attribute is mobility: some assets are very mobile (e.g., aircraft, ships, vehicles), which
helps them reach alternative users more easily, while other assets are location-specific (e.g.,
buildings) or difficult to transport (e.g., nuclear fuel). The second attribute is durability:
reallocation takes time and assets that depreciate faster can be less valuable by the time
they are delivered to alternative users (fresh food being an extreme example). The third
attribute is the degree of standardization or customization: some assets are standardized or
can be relatively readily used by any firm that needs such assets (e.g., railroad cars, trucks),
while other assets are customized for a particular user (e.g., eyeglasses for individuals or
optical lenses for industrial production). These three attributes all affect the distribution
of the productivity of the asset for alternative users, which can be illustrated using the
modeling framework in Gavazza (2011) and Bernstein, Colonnelli, and Iverson (2019). If an
asset is less mobile, less durable, or more customized, the number of alternative users with
high valuation of the asset decreases, and the equilibrium liquidation value would be lower.


3.1.1     Measurement of Physical Attributes
    To study the physical attributes of PPE in each industry, a helpful starting point is the
BEA's fixed asset table, which records the stock of 71 types of equipment and structures
(39 types of equipment and 32 types of buildings and structures) across 58 BEA industries.
We denote the fixed asset stock as Kij , where i is a BEA industry and j is one type of


                                              13
fixed asset. The 71 types of equipment and structures are listed in Internet Appendix Table
IA4. With this granular information, we can analyze the physical attributes of each type
of fixed asset (j ), and assess the overall characteristics of PPE in an industry (i) using the
fixed asset composition (the share of Kij in Ki =             j   Kij ).10 We explain the details of the
measurement below.

Mobility
    We measure the mobility mj for each type of PPE using the ratio of transportation costs
(from its producers to its users) relative to production costs. For each of the 71 fixed assets,
we obtain this ratio using BEA's input-output table (we link assets in the fixed asset table
with output in the input-output table using BEA's PEQ bridge). For equipment, this data
is generally available. For fixed structures like buildings, this data may not be available, in
which case we estimate the ratio to be one (i.e., buildings are completely immobile). Among
non-structures, assets with the lowest transportation costs (highest mobility) include storage
devices and computer terminals, ships, and aircraft. Assets with the highest transportation
costs include nuclear fuel and furniture.
    We calculate the industry-level PPE mobility Mi by taking the weighted average across
the 71 types of assets, where the weight is the share of the asset in the industry's total
fixed asset stock based on the BEA fixed asset table: Mi =               j   mj × (Kij /Ki ). Accordingly,
the industry-level mobility measure is the ratio of total transportation costs of all PPE
to the total production costs of all PPE. We match BEA industries with two-digit SICs
(which are the industry codes in our Chapter 11 liquidation analysis data). Table IA5 in
the Internet Appendix lists the 58 industries in the BEA fixed asset table, and the corre-
sponding two-digit SIC industries. Industries with the highest overall PPE mobility (lowest
transportation costs for overall PPE) include water transportation and air transportation.
Industries with the lowest overall PPE mobility (highest transportation costs for overall
PPE) include educational services, hotels, and pipelines.

Durability
    We measure the durability using depreciation rates. The simplest approach is to cal-
culate the average depreciation rate of PPE (depreciation divided by lagged net PPE) in
each two-digit SIC industry using Compustat data, which avoids translating BEA industries
to SIC. Alternatively, we can also calculate the depreciation rate for each industry in the
BEA fixed asset table, and match it to two-digit SIC industries. This approach produces
  10
     The stock of fixed assets in each industry in the BEA data is based on ownership, i.e., the asset stock
of each industry includes owned assets and assets under capital lease (which implies ultimate ownership),
and does not include assets under operating leases (where ownership belongs to the lessor not the lessee).
This is the same convention as our data on liquidation recovery rates, which includes all assets that firms
own and does not include assets under operating lease as discussed in Section 2.1.



                                                    14
qualitatively similar results, but can be noisier due to industry matching. Fixed assets with
the highest durability (lowest depreciation rate) include electricity structures and sewage
systems. Fixed assets with the lowest durability (highest depreciation rate) include com-
puters and office equipment. Industries with the highest overall PPE durability (lowest
overall PPE depreciation rate) include railroad transportation, fishing, and utilities. Indus-
tries with the lowest overall PPE durability (highest overall PPE depreciation rate) include
business services, motion pictures, and construction.

Customization
    We construct a proxy for the degree of customization cj for each type of PPE using
the share of design costs in its total production costs. The idea is that customized assets
tend to require more design and related input in the production of such assets, while stan-
dardized assets can be directly produced. For each of the 71 fixed assets, we calculate this
share using BEA's input-output table (i.e., we look at what it takes to produce each type
of PPE).11 Nonetheless, an imperfection in this measure is that some standardized assets
may also be somewhat design-intensive, such as aircraft, which can make the measure noisy
and may work against us. A related proxy for the degree of standardization/customization
is the share of cost of goods sold (it includes the cost of raw materials but not the cost of
design, R&D, etc.) in total operating cost in the production of an asset. This alternative
measure produces similar results. Input assets with the lowest degree of customization in-
clude mobile structures, trucks/cars, mining equipment, and nuclear fuel. Input assets with
the highest degree of customization include communication equipment, fabricated metals,
medical equipment, and special industrial machinery.
    We calculate the industry-level PPE customization Ci by taking the weighted average
across the 71 types of assets: Ci =          j   cj × (Kij /Ki ). Correspondingly, the industry-level
customization measure is the share of design costs in total production costs of all PPE in
each industry. We match BEA industries with two-digit SICs. Industries with the lowest
overall degree of PPE customization include transportation industries. Industries with the
highest overall degree of PPE customization include communications industries.

Other Attributes
    Kim and Kung (2017) use another attribute to proxy for asset redeployability, which
measures the number of industries that use a certain type of asset. So far we do not find that
measures following Kim and Kung (2017) explain variation in PPE liquidation recovery rates
in our data. Some of the most mobile, durable, and standardized assets are used primarily
  11
     In the BEA input-output table, we calculate design and related costs as input costs from the following
categories: design, information services, data processing services, custom computer programming services,
software, database, other computer related services, architectural and engineering services, research, man-
agement consulting, advertising.


                                                     15
in a few industries (e.g., ships and railroad equipment). Meanwhile, many assets used in a
large number of industries are relatively costly to move, not durable, or customized (e.g.,
furniture, computers and office equipment, and optical lenses). These issues can weaken the
relationship between asset redeployability and how widely an asset is used across industries.
   Relatedly, within the airline industry, Gavazza (2011) finds that aircraft types with larger
outstanding stock, and therefore "thicker" markets, have higher sale prices. Using 19th cen-
tury railroads, Benmelech (2008) proxies for asset redeployability using the size of railroads
with a particular gauge. In our data, we do not find that the amount of fixed asset stock is
linked to PPE liquidation recovery rates. There are several possibly important differences
between our setting and the settings of Gavazza (2011) and Benmelech (2008). First, for
aircraft of different types or railroads of different gauges, the other attributes (mobility,
durability, and customization) are fairly homogeneous. In comparison, for different types of
PPE across industries, these other attributes have substantial variations, which can be first-
order. Second, a given type of aircraft is reasonably well defined (Boeing 737-700/800/900
etc.), and railroads with a given gauge are also well defined. On the other hand, the catego-
rization of assets in the BEA fixed asset table is looser. For instance, in the BEA fixed asset
table, the asset type with the largest stock is manufacturing structures. If BEA alternatively
breaks down manufacturing structures by industry (e.g., chemical plants vs. steel plants),
then the stock for each type of manufacturing structure would be smaller. Overall, in our
data, the size of the stock of a particular type of asset may not be an ideal measure, given
the asset categorization in the BEA fixed asset table (there can be further subdivisions or
customization within a BEA category).
   Finally, Rauch (1999) classifies internationally traded commodities based on whether
they are traded on organized exchanges. Our work in this section focuses on PPE, rather
than commodities or intermediate goods. Since inventory is more closely connected with
these commodities, we provide more discussion about Rauch (1999) when we investigate
determinants of inventory recovery rates in Internet Appendix Section IA4. In principle,
the physical attributes of commodities could also be an important foundation of market
structures documented by Rauch (1999), such as whether they are traded on exchanges. In
Internet Appendix Section IA4, we find that when commodities are customized, they are
less likely to be traded on organized exchanges.

   In summary, we use mobility, durability, and customization as the primary measures of
physical attributes. Our baseline analysis relies on the 1997 BEA fixed asset table and input-
output table. The BEA only produces input-output accounts every five years, and 1997 has
the most comprehensive information. 1997 is also around the beginning of our liquidation
recovery rate data. Internet Appendix Table IA6 shows the industry-level summary statistics


                                              16
for two-digit SIC industries.


3.1.2    Explanatory Power of Physical Attributes
   In Table 3, Panel A, we study the relationship between industry-level PPE liquidation
recovery rates and the physical attributes of PPE in each industry. Columns (1) and (2)
use two-digit SIC industries. Columns (3) and (4) use BEA sectors. We find that physical
attributes have substantial explanatory power for the variation in PPE liquidation recovery
rates across industries. Industries where PPE has high transportation cost, high depreciation
rate, and high customization have low PPE liquidation recovery rates. The effect is both
statistically and economically significant. A one standard deviation change in mobility
(transportation cost), durability (depreciation rate), and standardization (design cost) is
associated with changes in PPE recovery rate of 0.60, 0.36, and 0.24 standard deviations
respectively, based on column (1). In addition, the constant in the regression is about
one, indicating that when transportation costs, depreciation, and design costs are all zero
(PPE is costless to transport, non-depreciating, and fully standardized), the recovery rate is
estimated to be 100%. Finally, the R2 is close to 40%: at least 40% of the variation in PPE
liquidation recovery rates can be explained by proxies of the physical attributes. Given that
the proxies of physical attributes may be imperfect, and the matching between BEA sectors
and SICs can also be imperfect (e.g., the BEA groups all retail industries into one industry,
while there are eight two-digit SIC retail industries), the true explanatory power of physical
attributes could be even higher.
   In Table 3, Panel A, columns (2) and (4), we also include measures of industry size (sales
share of industry in Compustat and value-added share of industry in BEA data), following
the observations of Gavazza (2011) that larger and thicker markets may face fewer frictions
for asset resales. We find a positive but relatively weak impact of industry size in our data.
   Taken together, a central part of the variations in the specificity of fixed assets is linked
to their physical attributes, given by the nature of the industry. The physical attributes of
PPE in an industry, measured using independent data sources, have a strong explanatory
power for PPE recovery rates in the liquidation analysis data.


3.2     Macroeconomic and Industry Conditions
   Next we examine how macroeconomic and industry conditions affect PPE liquidation
recovery rates on top of their physical attributes. A long literature analyzes the impact of
time-varying capacity of alternative users of assets, driven by business cycles (Kiyotaki and
Moore, 1997; Lanteri, 2018) or industry conditions (Shleifer and Vishny, 1992; Benmelech
and Bergman, 2011). For macroeconomic conditions, we use real GDP growth in the past

                                              17
twelve months. For industry conditions, we study industry leverage following the spirit of
Shleifer and Vishny (1992): if the alternative users of certain assets are primarily from the
same industry, then liquidation values are likely to fall when firms in the industry have
constrained capacity to purchase due to high indebtedness. We also find similar results
using alternative proxies of industry conditions, such as sales growth in the industry.
   For this analysis, it is useful to understand the scope of alternative users for a given type
of assets: are they economy-wide or industry wide, or conversely difficult to find in any case?
Accordingly, we identify assets that are firm-specific (if the customization measure is in the
top tercile) versus not. Examples of assets that are not firm-specific include vehicle, aircraft,
ship, and commercial real estate. Examples of assets that are firm-specific include electronic
transmission devices, communication equipment, medical instruments, and special industry
machinery. After assigning each of the 71 assets in the BEA fixed asset table into a category,
we calculate the (value-weighted) share of an industry's assets that belong to each category.
   In Table 3, Panel B, we use the PPE liquidation recovery rate of each case to study the
impact of time-varying macro conditions and industry conditions. We control for industry
fixed effects, and merge in GDP growth rate and industry leverage at the time of the
liquidation analysis. For macroeconomic conditions, column (1) shows that, on average
there is a weak positive correlation between GDP growth and PPE liquidation recovery
rates. Nonetheless, column (2) shows that a stronger positive relationship exists when a
high fraction of PPE is not firm-specific--if no PPE is firm-specific, then a one percentage
point increase in GDP growth would be associated with a roughly 5.3 percentage point
increase in PPE recovery rates. For industry conditions, columns (3) and (4) show that,
on average PPE liquidation recovery rates are lower when industry leverage is higher and
firms in the industry have more limited capacity. This relationship is also especially strong
when most PPE is not firm-specific. In other words, when assets are widely used across the
economy, or widely used in a given industry, the liquidation recovery rate is most sensitive
to macro and industry conditions. When assets are customized to the firm and there are
few alternative users to begin with, macro and industry conditions matter less.
   Based on these estimates, we can also evaluate how much industry conditions need
to change to bring PPE liquidation recovery rate from the highest industries (e.g., trans-
portation services at around 69%) to the median (e.g., a typical manufacturing indus-
try at around 35%). Even if all of an industry's PPE is not firm-specific, to induce a
34 percentage point change, real GDP growth needs to change by 6.5 percentage points
(0.34/(12.13 - 6.86) = 0.065), and industry leverage would need to change by about 11 per-
centage points (0.34/(3.07 - 0.05) = 0.11). Both are roughly 1.5 times or more the standard
deviation of these variables. Internet Appendix Figure IA4 visualizes the impact of industry


                                               18
conditions, using binscatters of PPE recovery rates against industry leverage. The red solid
dots represent industries with more general PPE (industry-average PPE recovery rate in the
top tercile) and the blue hollow dots represent industries with more specific PPE (industry-
average PPE recovery rate in the bottom tercile). The plot shows that PPE recovery rates
are more sensitive to industry conditions when PPE is more general, as discussed above.
Meanwhile, there is substantial cross-industry variation in asset specificity, not easily offset
by time-varying industry conditions.
    To further verify our findings, we also utilize auctions of heavy equipment (mostly for
construction, farm, and transportation) studied by Murfin and Pratt (2019). In this data, we
cannot easily construct recovery rates since book values are difficult to obtain, but we can use
hedonic regressions to analyze the impact of macro conditions on auction values (controlling
for equipment type, manufacturer, age, etc.). We find that a one percentage increase in real
GDP growth is associated with a roughly 0.03 log point increase in auction values among
this set of relatively generic equipment, as shown in Internet Appendix Table IA2. This
sensitivity is comparable to what we find in column (2) of Table 3, Panel B. Because we
do not know exactly the industry that uses the equipment in this data, we cannot perform
the corresponding tests about the impact of industry conditions. Overall, this analysis also
shows that economic conditions can affect liquidation values, but the magnitude of this effect
would not lead to drastic changes in the level of liquidation recovery rates.


4     Basic Implications
    After analyzing the determinants of asset specificity, we study the basic implications of
asset specificity in this section, with a focus on investment activities. These tests shed light
on several research topics, and further demonstrate the informativeness of our data. In Sec-
tion 4.1, we examine implications related to classic investment theories with irreversibility:
when asset specificity is high, firms have less flexibility in downsizing and investments are
more irreversible, which can induce a higher sensitivity of investment activities to uncer-
tainty. Frictions in capital adjustment may also affect pricing behavior. In Section 4.2, we
analyze implications related to the growing literature on the impact of rising intangibles.
    It is also natural to ask how asset specificity affects debt contracts and borrowing capac-
ity. We study these issues in a companion paper (Kermani and Ma, 2020). We show that
asset specificity and liquidation values do not affect the total amount of borrowing (e.g.,
total book leverage) for large firms and firms with positive earnings. Asset specificity and
liquidation values do have a significant positive relationship with the total amount of bor-
rowing for small firms and firms with negative earnings. Meanwhile, asset specificity does


                                              19
affect the composition of debt: firms with higher liquidation values have more asset-based
debt (lending on the basis of the liquidation value of discrete assets like PPE, inventory,
etc.), while firms with lower liquidation values have more cash flow-based debt (lending on
the basis of firms' going-concern value and operating earnings) and debt with strong control
rights. The results are consistent with the observations in Lian and Ma (2020) about the
importance of cash-flow based lending among non-financial firms in most industries. When
firms have positive earnings (most large firms), total debt capacity is typically driven by
earnings-based borrowing constraints, instead of liquidation values of discrete assets.


4.1     Traditional Investment Theories
   Below we investigate the implications of asset specificity in investment theories. We
first show how asset specificity affects investment activities, including the prevalence of
disinvestment and the response of investment to uncertainty. We then study the link between
asset specificity and pricing behavior, as well as the relationship with productivity dispersion.


4.1.1     Investment Behavior
   When asset specificity is higher, disinvestment is more costly. Classic models of invest-
ment irreversibility predicts that investments would also be more sensitive to uncertainty,
which we test using investments in both fixed assets and inventory.

Prevalence of Disinvestment
   We first verify that disinvestment is less common when asset specificity is higher. For
instance, when PPE has low liquidation value, firms lose more from directly selling it, which
should lead to a lower prevalence of selling PPE on a standalone basis.
   For firms in Compustat, we can measure the prevalence of PPE sales using information
from the variable "Sale of Property, Plant, and Equipment" (SPPE), which documents
proceeds from PPE sales. We can measure both the frequency of PPE sales (the fraction of
firm­years with SPPE>0) and the amount of sales (SPPE normalized by lagged net PPE).
Figure 1 plots the average frequency (Panel A) and amount (Panel B) of PPE sales per
year in each two-digit SIC industry on the y -axis, and the industry-average PPE liquidation
recovery rate on the x-axis. We see that it is more common to observe PPE sales in industries
with lower PPE specificity (higher recovery rates). Internet Appendix Figure IA5 shows the
corresponding plots using predicted PPE recovery rates based on physical attributes (using
Table 3, Panel A, column (1)), and the patterns are similar. Table 4 shows the relationship
in regressions, using both the raw industry-average PPE recovery rates and PPE recovery
rates predicted by the physical attributes of PPE in each industry (mobility, durability, and


                                               20
standardization/customization). A one standard deviation increase in industry-average PPE
recovery rate is associated with a roughly 0.32 standard deviation increase in the average
frequency of PPE sales (based on column (1)), and a roughly 0.55 standard deviation increase
in the average amount of PPE sold (based on column (4)).
   For industries with high asset specificity, we find that capital reallocation primarily takes
the form of mergers and acquisitions: purchases of firms or segments as a whole (installed
assets together with teams and organizational structures), instead of capital on a standalone
basis. In other words, when assets are specialized, it is important to combine them with
human capital and organizational capital, and assembling human capital and organizational
capital is not frictionless. While such firms can potentially downsize through selling an entire
division or segment, these changes are inevitably lumpier and more drastic. Consequently,
overall firms with more specialized assets would have less flexibility for disinvestment and
face higher investment irreversibility.

Impact of Uncertainty
   A key implication of investment irreversibility is that investments are sensitive to uncer-
tainty shocks (see Bloom (2014) for a summary). We test this prediction in Table 5. We
use firm-level uncertainty shocks based on high-frequency stock returns data, similar to the
measure in Gilchrist, Sim, and Zakrajsek (2014). In particular, we study annual regressions:

                      Yi,t+1 = i + j,t + i,t + i × i,t + Xi,t +        i,t ,                (1)

where i,t denotes the return volatility of firm i in year t, and i denotes the liquidation
recovery of firm i's assets based on its industry. The outcome Yi,t+1 is the investment rate in
year t +1 to allow for lags in investment implementation: investment decisions may translate
into actual investment spending with a delay (Lamont, 2000). The control variables Xi,t
include Q, book leverage cash holdings, EBITDA, and size (log book assets) at the end of
year t. We include firm fixed effects (i ) and industry-year fixed effects (j,t ), and double-
cluster standard errors by firm and time. To allow for more variation in uncertainty, we use
a longer sample of 1980 to 2016.
   Table 5, Panel A, columns (1) to (4) study capital expenditures (CAPX investment) on
the left hand side, which represent spending on PPE (normalized by lagged net PPE). We
interact PPE liquidation recovery rate () with firm-level return volatility ( ). In columns
(1) and (2), we find that higher uncertainty is associated with significant decreases in capital
expenditures when PPE recovery rates are low, but not when PPE recovery rates are high.
Indeed, when the PPE recovery rate is zero, the coefficient on volatility ( ) is significantly
negative; when the PPE recovery rate is one, the coefficient on volatility ( + ) becomes
roughly zero. In columns (3) and (4), we instrument PPE recovery rates using predicted

                                              21
values based on physical attributes measured in Section 3.1, and the results are similar.
    Table 5, Panel A, columns (5) to (8) study inventory investment, which a large literature
finds to be important for economic fluctuations as well (see Ramey and West (1999) for a
summary). We interact inventory liquidation recovery rate () with firm-level return volatil-
ity ( ). Similarly, we find that higher uncertainty is associated with significant decreases
in inventory investment when inventory recovery rates are low, but not when inventory re-
covery rates are high. The response to uncertainty is again roughly zero if the inventory
recovery rate is one. We can also instrument inventory recovery rate using predicted values
based on the physical attributes of inventory discussed in Internet Appendix Section IA4,
and the results are similar.12
    Furthermore, in Table 5, Panel B, we find that the sensitivity of CAPX investment to un-
certainty is affected by PPE recovery rates, but not by inventory recovery rates. Conversely,
the sensitivity of inventory investment to uncertainty is affected by inventory recovery rates,
but not by PPE recovery rates. This clear mapping is supportive of the mechanisms of in-
vestment irreversibility. It shows that the liquidation recovery rates of different types of
assets capture their disinvestment costs (instead of proxying for the severity of financial
frictions the firm faces).
    Overall, the empirical findings display a fairly precise correspondence with predictions of
theories on investment irreversibility. They also suggest that the liquidation recovery rates
data performs well both qualitatively and quantitatively.


4.1.2      Pricing Behavior
    Woodford (2005) and Altig et al. (2011) point out that when capital is firm-specific
(instead of generic and available from an economy-wide rental market), firms can display
higher price stickiness. As Altig et al. (2011) explain, when a firm considers raising prices,
it understands that a higher price implies less demand and less output; if the capital stock is
costly to adjust, the firm would be left with excess capital, which can decrease its incentive
to increase prices in the first place.
    In Table 6, we collect information on industry-level price rigidity using the frequency of
price change data from Nakamura and Steinsson (2008).13 We match and aggregate this
data to two-digit SICs, and study the relationship with industry-level asset specificity. Given
that in practice both PPE and inventory can be relevant for production, we investigate the
   12
     Specifically, we use the predicted value from Internet Appendix Table IA7, Panel B, column (1).
   13
     In the model of Altig et al. (2011) with Calvo pricing, having firm-specific capital affects the magnitude
of price change. In the data, what is typically measured is instead the frequency of price change. Small
changes in desired prices in practice may translate to no price change if there are fixed costs of price change
as in menu cost models.



                                                      22
connection with the specificity of PPE and inventory. Columns (1) and (2) show that in
industries where asset specificity is lower (i.e., recovery rate is higher, or fraction of firm-
specific PPE as defined in Section 3 is lower), prices appear more flexible. In column
(3) we combine the specificity of different types of assets and compute the firm-level total
liquidation value from PPE and working capital (normalized by book assets) as in Section
2.4. The independent variable is then the industry average of firm-level liquidation value.
Again, we see that in industries where overall firm-level liquidation values are higher (i.e.,
assets more generic), prices are more flexible. Conversely, in industries where overall firm-
level liquidation values are lower (i.e., assets more specific), prices appear stickier. Figure
2 visualizes this relationship by plotting the industry-level frequency of price change on the
y -axis and the industry-average firm liquidation value on the x-axis. Finally, in column (4)
we also "instrument" firm-level total liquidation value using the physical attributes of PPE
(described in Section 3.1) and inventory (described in Internet Appendix Section IA4), and
the results are similar.
   In Internet Appendix Tables IA11 and IA12, we also find that firms with a higher degree
of asset specificity have more countercyclical markups, conditional on output gap (log real
GDP minus log potential GDP) and conditional on demand shocks from defense spending
using data from Nekarda and Ramey (2011). While the measurement of markups can be
non-trivial and the mechanisms that affect markup cyclicality can be complicated, this
stylized fact seems fairly strong.


4.1.3     Productivity Dispersion
   Greater irreversibility of investments may also imply greater productivity dispersion
(Eisfeldt and Rampini, 2006; Lanteri, 2018), and we show the model prediction in Lanteri
(2018) in Internet Appendix Figure IA6. We present the empirical relationship in our data
in Figure 3. The y -axis shows the average annual dispersion in Q within each two-digit
SIC industry (y -axis). The x-axis shows the average firm-level liquidation value of PPE
and working capital (normalized by total book assets) in the industry. We use both regular
Q (market value of assets over book value of assets) in Panel A, and Q accounting for
potential impact of intangibles from Peters and Taylor (2017) in Panel B. We see that
industries with lower liquidation values tend to have higher Q dispersion. Furthermore, this
holds for both large firms (total assets greater than median in Compustat each year) and
small firms (total assets smaller than median). This pattern suggests that the impact of
liquidation values is not necessarily through borrowing constraints, since large firms' debt
capacity is not primarily driven by liquidation value (Lian and Ma, 2020; Kermani and
Ma, 2020). Instead, low liquidation values can work through higher irreversibility of capital


                                              23
investments. Table IA3 presents the corresponding results in regressions, where we also
instrument the liquidation value using the physical attributes of PPE and inventory and
find similar results.


4.2    The "New Economy" and Rising Intangibles
   In the above, we investigate traditional investment theories, with a focus on fixed assets.
A vibrant recent literature documents that an important trend in the past few decades is
the growing prevalence of intangible assets (Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel, 2009; Peters and
Taylor, 2017; Haskel and Westlake, 2018; Crouzet and Eberly, 2019b,a), broadly defined
as production assets without physical presence. They include identifiable intangibles such
as computerized information (software, data, recordings, films), usage rights (license, ex-
ploration, route rights, domain names, etc.), patents and technologies, and brands, which
could be separable and transferable to alternative users on a standalone basis. Intangible
assets also include organizational capital, firm-specific human capital, and other forms of
"economic competencies" (Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel, 2005), which are not necessarily
independently identifiable or separable from the firm.
   How does rising intangibles affect firms' asset specificity? A major theme in the literature
is the concern that rising intangibles could substantially decrease firms' liquidation values
(Giglio and Severo, 2012; Caggese and Perez-Orive, 2018; Haskel and Westlake, 2018; Li,
2019; Falato et al., 2020). We analyze this issue in the following. For identifiable intangibles,
many are transferable on a standalone basis (e.g., software, excavation rights, airlines' gate
rights, patents), and our data provides some information about their liquidation recovery
rates. For other intangibles that are integral to the firm (e.g., organizational capital), they
cannot be separated from the firm and obtain liquidation value.
   We provide several findings relevant for understanding the impact of rising intangibles.
First, building on the discussions above, we further flesh out that physical assets of non-
financial firms are already highly specific and liquidation values are low to begin with.
Second, in many industries, the liquidation recovery rate of identifiable intangibles is not
necessarily much lower than that of PPE, in part because intangibles do not necessarily
face transportation costs given the absence of physical presence. Third, based on existing
measures of intangible assets, the rise in intangibles is more pronounced in industries where
physical assets are more specific (PPE liquidation recovery rate is lower) in the first place.
Taken together, we find that the impact of rising intangibles on firms' asset specificity and
liquidation values has been relatively limited so far.
   We discuss each of these findings in detail below. First, as shown in Section 2, physical
assets are already quite specific in many industries. For instance, the mean industry-level


                                               24
liquidation recovery rate for PPE is about 35%. In this case, even if PPE is increasingly
replaced by intangible assets with minimal liquidation recovery rates, the change in the total
liquidation value may not be substantial.
    Second, we investigate the liquidation recovery rate of identifiable intangibles. In partic-
ular, our data includes the estimated liquidation recovery rate of book intangibles, which are
intangible assets acquired from external parties and therefore capitalized on balance sheet
based on the current accounting rules in the US. Intangible assets developed internally, on
the other hand, are expensed rather than capitalized under US accounting rules, and do not
show up among book assets. Book intangibles have two components. The first component
mainly represents identifiable intangibles (such as software, customer data, usage rights,
patents, among others), which can be acquired independently from external parties. This
part generally has positive liquidation recovery rates. The second component is goodwill
(i.e., the premium between the total purchase price in an acquisition and the net book value
of all identifiable assets, which may come from the value of human capital, organizational
capital, or from over-pricing), and has zero liquidation value almost by definition.
    Figure 4 plots the average liquidation recovery rate of PPE versus book intangibles for
Fama-French 12 industries. For each industry, the first bar represents the average PPE
recovery rate; the second bar represents the average book intangible recovery rate; the third
bar represents the implied recovery rate of non-goodwill book intangibles, calculated as the
average book intangible recovery rate divided by one minus the industry-average share of
goodwill in total book intangibles. We see that the second bar, and especially the third bar,
are not much lower than the first bar. For two-digit SIC industries, the mean industry-level
recovery rate of book intangibles is about 18%, with an inter-quartile range from 2% to 25%;
the mean industry-level recovery rate of non-goodwill book intangibles is about 37%, with
an inter-quartile range from 2% to 50%. The level of non-goodwill book intangible recovery
rates is comparable to that of PPE recovery rates, although with more variance.14 In sum,
identifiable intangibles can obtain liquidation values on their own, and may not necessarily
be more specific than tangible assets like PPE.
    Third, we find that rising intangibles seem especially pronounced in industries where
physical assets are more specific in the first place. We measure the stock of intangibles in
several ways. One is the BEA's estimate of the stock of intellectual property for each BEA
industry (relative to BEA's estimate of the stock of fixed assets in the industry). Another is
   14
     To put the level of intangible recovery rate in perspective, we may need to bear in mind several factors.
One is that given the eligibility criteria for book intangibles (i.e., acquired from external parties), they may
select for intangible assets that are easier to trade and purchase, and select for those with higher liquidation
recovery rates. Another is that the market for trading intellectual properties and other identifiable intangi-
bles (various types of rights) is developing over time (Mann, 2018), so intangible recovery rates in the future
may be enhanced as more markets develop and mature.



                                                      25
Peters and Taylor (2017)'s estimate of the stock of intangibles for Compustat firms (relative
to their net PPE), which includes both book intangibles and the estimated stock of off-
balance sheet intangibles. Peters and Taylor (2017) capitalize R& D spending to estimate
knowledge capital, and capitalize 30% of Selling, General, and Administration expenses
to estimate organizational capital. They then combine these values with book intangibles
to form an estimate of the total stock of intangibles. Although these measures could be
imperfect, the pattern we document is fairly robust to the measurement of intangibles.
   Figure 5 plots the change in the industry-level share of intangible assets relative to
the sum of PPE and intangibles from 1996 and 2016 (y -axis) against industry-level PPE
recovery rates (x-axis). We use the BEA's measurement of intangibles in Panel A, and
Peters and Taylor (2017)'s estimate in Panel B. Table 7 shows the results in regressions,
using both direct measurement of PPE recovery rates and PPE recovery rates instrumented
by physical attributes of PPE. In all cases, industries with low PPE recovery rates have
seen the most substantial increase in the relative prevalence of intangibles. In other words,
even if intangibles have lower liquidation values, the shift from physical assets like PPE to
intangibles has been greater where PPE's recovery rates are already small, and there is not
much to "lose" further.
   Finally, putting these observations together, Figure 6 shows the estimated liquidation
value of all Compustat firms, as a share of total book value (Panel A) and as a share of
total enterprise value (Panel B), from 1996 to 2016. Liquidation values include those from
book intangibles, PPE, working capital, and cash. We see that the estimated liquidation
value from PPE declines slightly over this period (by about 2% of book assets), which is
offset by an increase in the liquidation value of book intangibles. Meanwhile, firms have less
receivables and more cash. Overall, total liquidation values do not seem to change drastically,
although by many measures the prevalence of intangibles has increased substantially over
this period (Crouzet and Eberly, 2019b). Indeed, the sum of liquidation value from PPE
and book intangibles (the bottom two bars) has stayed roughly constant (and always below
20% of both book value of assets and firm enterprise value).
   Accordingly, based on our data, it does not appear that rising intangibles has led to a
significant drop in firms' liquidation values. Correspondingly, it is not necessarily the case
that rising intangibles substantially tighten firms' borrowing constraints as many papers have
feared. Furthermore, in the US, firms' debt capacity is not necessarily tied to the liquidation
value of particular assets (Kermani and Ma, 2020; Lian and Ma, 2020), especially when
firms have positive earnings. Similarly, the results also suggest that it is not clear whether
irreversibility increases significantly with rising intangibles. A set of identifiable intangibles
such as usage rights, customer lists, certain patents, etc. could be reasonably sold off and


                                               26
such investments could be partially reversible.
    What then is different about intangibles? An interesting hypothesis is that intangibles
can be more "scalable" (Haskel and Westlake, 2018; Crouzet and Eberly, 2019b). Given
that intangibles are not bound by physical presence and physical locations, some intangibles
could be used simultaneously at multiple places (e.g., enterprise planning systems, brands,
data). This effect may lead to higher concentration and the prominence of "superstar" firms.
In addition, rising intangibles may also lead to an apparent decline in investment activities
measured using traditional capital expenditures, which is relevant for national accounting
and understanding economic dynamism (Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel, 2005; Crouzet and
Eberly, 2019a). These implications of rising intangibles are likely to be more central than
changes in liquidation values.


5     Connections to Model Parameters
    Finally, we summarize the connection between our findings and the parameters used in
two common classes of models.


5.1    Models of Investment Irreversibility
    Models of investment irreversibility often need to calibrate or estimate the loss from
disinvestment of the capital stock. In particular, this class of models postulate that firms
spend I + when they invest, and receive I - when they disinvest, where  denotes the
fraction of the purchase price of capital that firms can recover from disinvestment (Bloom,
2009; Abel and Eberly, 1996). Bloom (2009) estimates the loss from disinvestment to be
43%, which translates into a liquidation recovery rate  of 57%. Lanteri (2018) estimates
the equilibrium loss from disinvesting used capital to be around 7% (i.e.,  as high as 93%).
Our data, like Ramey and Shapiro (2001), implies larger losses from disinvesting fixed assets
on a standalone basis. Our data also suggests that this loss can vary substantially across
industries, which may lead to different patterns in industry dynamics.
    Overall, our measurement suggests that if capital reallocation takes the form of directly
selling used fixed assets on a standalone basis, the loss can be significant. However, if
reallocation takes the form of mergers and acquisitions, which transfer not just fixed assets
but also human capital and organizational capital, the loss may not be as substantial, but
such adjustments are inevitably much lumpier and are difficult to implement if the firm
simply wants to downsize its capital stock. Accordingly, high asset specificity inevitably
limits firms' flexibility to disinvest and downsize.



                                               27
5.2     Models of "Collateral Constraints"
    A number of papers impose financial frictions in the form of "collateral constraints" for
borrowing: firms need to pledge physical capital to borrow, and debt capacity is limited by
the liquidation value of the assets pledged.15 In other words, firms' borrowing b is restricted
by the liquidation value of the capital stock K , b  K , where  is the liquidation recovery
rate. Although this form of borrowing constraint may not be first-order for major US non-
financial firms (Lian and Ma, 2020), it could be relevant for small firms or firms with negative
earnings. Thus modeling applications may still find the liquidation value estimates to be
relevant in these settings.
    Models of "collateral constraints" seem to have used a variety of calibrated or estimated
parameters for . The parameters in Moll (2014) and Midrigan and Xu (2014) indicate that
firms can borrow around 80% of the book value of fixed assets. The estimates in Catherine,
Chaney, Huang, Sraer, and Thesmar (2019) imply that firms can only borrow around 15% to
20%, which are close to the PPE liquidation recovery rate in our data. The main reason for
the different parameters seems to be that the former set of papers match the total leverage
of firms, while Catherine et al. (2019) obtain the estimate from the sensitivity of borrowing
to real estate value. Based on the findings from Lian and Ma (2020), when models target
total debt, a sizable portion of the debt can be cash flow-based lending (i.e., lending on the
basis of firms' going-concern cash flow value) instead of asset-based lending (i.e., lending on
the basis of the liquidation value of separable assets like PPE). Correspondingly, total debt
capacity may not necessarily reflect the tightness of the traditional collateral constraints.
On the other hand, when models target the sensitivity of borrowing to real estate value as
in Catherine et al. (2019), they are more likely to infer how much firms can borrow from
pledging fixed assets for asset-based lending.
    Overall, the data suggests that if firms only borrow against the piecemeal liquidation
value of assets such as PPE, then debt capacity is rather limited. It is typically bounded
by the liquidation recovery rate, which is 35% for PPE in the average industry based on
our data. According to lenders, they also generally lend 20% to 30% of the book value
of industrial PPE for asset-based debt. Correspondingly, for models where firms can only
borrow against the liquidation value of their fixed assets, the low level of debt capacity
would apply for most industries.
   15
      We use "collateral constraints" in quotes as a reference to the common academic use of the term, where
"collateral" implies separable and often tangible assets (like real estate) that creditors may want to seize
and liquidate. Under US law, collateral in practice can take many forms, including the firm as a whole (e.g.,
blanket liens), where the function is to provide creditors with priority rather than tangible assets they want
to seize.




                                                     28
6     Conclusion
    Asset specificity is a central issue in many lines of research. Obtaining systematic mea-
sures of the level of asset specificity across industries has been a long-standing challenge. We
tackle this challenge by constructing a new dataset that measures the liquidation recovery
rates of all major asset categories across industries.
    We find that non-financial firms' assets are generally highly specific. For instance, in
the average industry, the liquidation recovery rate of a firm's plant, property, and equip-
ment (PPE) is about 35%. We also investigate the key determinants of variations in asset
specificity. We find that physical attributes of assets used in different industries have a
strong link with cross-industry variations in asset specificity. We collect a rich set of data
to measure physical attributes such as mobility, durability, and standardization, and show
that they can account for at least around 40% of the variation in industry-average PPE
liquidation recovery rates. We also find that macro and industry conditions affect recovery
rates the most when PPE is not firm-specific. When PPE is customized and firm-specific,
there are few alternative users who want to directly purchase such PPE in any case, and
recovery rates are less responsive to macro or industry conditions.
    We then show that the data on asset specificity has broad applications for macro-finance
questions. It aligns closely with firms' investment behavior, such as the prevalence of dis-
investment and the investment sensitivity to uncertainty shocks, as predicted by classic
theories of investment irreversibility. It also helps understand patterns in price setting and
productivity dispersion, generally in line with model predictions as well. Furthermore, the
data suggests that the first-order impact of rising intangibles may not be to compress firms'
liquidation values. Other implications of rising intangibles, such as the impact on scalabil-
ity, could be more interesting and they may interact with the attributes of physical assets.
Finally, the physical attributes of assets we measure also allow us to establish the links
between asset specificity and macro-finance outcomes based on physical foundations.
    Overall, we hope the data is useful for informing key parameters in models, and for
testing and uncovering economic mechanisms.




                                              29
References
Abel, Andrew B, and Janice C Eberly, 1996, Optimal investment with costly reversibility,
 Review of Economic Studies 63, 581­593.
Almeida, Heitor, and Murillo Campello, 2007, Financial constraints, asset tangibility, and
  corporate investment, Review of Financial Studies 20, 1429­1460.
Altig, David, Lawrence J Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum, and Jesper Linde, 2011, Firm-
  specific capital, nominal rigidities and the business cycle, Review of Economic Dynamics
  14, 225­247.
Benmelech, Efraim, 2008, Asset salability and debt maturity: Evidence from nineteenth-
  century american railroads, Review of Financial Studies 22, 1545­1584.
Benmelech, Efraim, and Nittai K Bergman, 2011, Bankruptcy and the collateral channel,
  Journal of Finance 66, 337­378.
Berger, Philip G, Eli Ofek, and Itzhak Swary, 1996, Investor valuation of the abandonment
  option, Journal of Financial Economics 42, 259­287.
Bernstein, Shai, Emanuele Colonnelli, and Benjamin Iverson, 2019, Asset allocation in
  bankruptcy, Journal of Finance 74, 5­53.
Bertola, Guiseppe, and Ricardo J Caballero, 1994, Irreversibility and aggregate investment,
  Review of Economic Studies 61, 223­246.
Bloom, Nicholas, 2009, The impact of uncertainty shocks, Econometrica 77, 623­685.
Bloom, Nicholas, 2014, Fluctuations in uncertainty, Journal of Economic Perspectives 28,
  153­76.
Bris, Arturo, Ivo Welch, and Ning Zhu, 2006, The costs of bankruptcy: Chapter 7 liquidation
  versus Chapter 11 reorganization, Journal of Finance 61, 1253­1303.
Caggese, Andrea, and Ander Perez-Orive, 2018, Capital misallocation and secular stagna-
  tion, Working paper.
Catherine, Sylvain, Thomas Chaney, Zongbo Huang, David Sraer, and David Thesmar,
  2019, Aggregate effects of collateral constraints, Working paper.
Corrado, Carol, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel, 2005, Measuring capital and technology:
  An expanded framework, in Measuring capital in the new economy , 11­46 (University of
  Chicago Press).
Corrado, Carol, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel, 2009, Intangible capital and US economic
  growth, Review of Income and Wealth 55, 661­685.
Crouzet, Nicolas, and Janice Eberly, 2019a, Rents and intangible capital: A q+ framework,
  Working paper.
Crouzet, Nicolas, and Janice C Eberly, 2019b, Understanding weak capital investment: The
  role of market concentration and intangibles, Jackson Hole Symposium.
De Loecker, Jan, Jan Eeckhout, and Gabriel Unger, 2020, The rise of market power and the
  macroeconomic implications, Quarterly Journal of Economics .
Eisfeldt, Andrea L, and Adriano A Rampini, 2006, Capital reallocation and liquidity, Journal
  of Monetary Economics 53, 369­399.
Falato, Antonio, Dalida Kadyrzhanova, Jae Sim, and Roberto Steri, 2020, Rising intangible
  capital, shrinking debt capacity, and the US corporate savings glut, Working paper.

                                            30
Flynn, Zach, Amit Gandhi, and James Traina, 2019, Identifying market power in production
  data, Working paper.
Gavazza, Alessandro, 2011, The role of trading frictions in real asset markets, American
 Economic Review 101, 1106­43.
Giglio, Stefano, and Tiago Severo, 2012, Intangible capital, relative asset shortages and
  bubbles, Journal of Monetary Economics 59, 303­317.
Gilchrist, Simon, Raphael Schoenle, Jae Sim, and Egon Zakrajsek, 2017, Inflation dynamics
  during the financial crisis, American Economic Review 107, 785­823.
Gilchrist, Simon, Jae W Sim, and Egon Zakrajsek, 2014, Uncertainty, financial frictions,
  and investment dynamics, Working paper.
Gulen, Huseyin, and Mihai Ion, 2016, Policy uncertainty and corporate investment, Review
 of Financial Studies 29, 523­564.
Haskel, Jonathan, and Stian Westlake, 2018, Capitalism without capital: The rise of the
  intangible economy (Princeton University Press).
Kermani, Amir, and Yueran Ma, 2020, Two tales of debt, Working paper.
Kim, Hyunseob, and Howard Kung, 2017, The asset redeployability channel: How uncer-
  tainty affects corporate investment, Review of Financial Studies 30, 245­280.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore, 1997, Credit cycles, Journal of Political Economy
  105.
Lamont, Owen A, 2000, Investment plans and stock returns, Journal of Finance 55, 2719­
  2745.
Lanteri, Andrea, 2018, The market for used capital: Endogenous irreversibility and reallo-
  cation over the business cycle, American Economic Review 108, 2383­2419.
Li, Ye, 2019, Fragile new economy: The rise of intangible capital and financial instability,
  Working paper.
Lian, Chen, and Yueran Ma, 2020, Anatomy of corporate borrowing constraints, Working
  paper.
Maksimovic, Vojislav, and Gordon Phillips, 2001, The market for corporate assets: Who
 engages in mergers and asset sales and are there efficiency gains?, Journal of Finance 56,
 2019­2065.
Mann, William, 2018, Creditor rights and innovation: Evidence from patent collateral,
 Journal of Financial Economics 130, 25­47.
Midrigan, Virgiliu, and Daniel Yi Xu, 2014, Finance and misallocation: Evidence from
 plant-level data, American Economic Review 104, 422­58.
Moll, Benjamin, 2014, Productivity losses from financial frictions: Can self-financing undo
 capital misallocation?, American Economic Review 104, 3186­3221.
Murfin, Justin, and Ryan Pratt, 2019, Who finances durable goods and why it matters:
 Captive finance and the coase conjecture, Journal of Finance 74, 755­793.
Nakamura, Emi, and J´ on Steinsson, 2008, Five facts about prices: A reevaluation of menu
  cost models, Quarterly Journal of Economics 123, 1415­1464.
Nekarda, Christopher J, and Valerie A Ramey, 2011, Industry evidence on the effects of
  government spending, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 3, 36­59.

                                            31
Nunn, Nathan, 2007, Relationship-specificity, incomplete contracts, and the pattern of trade,
 Quarterly Journal of Economics 122, 569­600.
Peters, Ryan H, and Lucian A Taylor, 2017, Intangible capital and the investment-q relation,
  Journal of Financial Economics 123, 251­272.
Pindyck, Robert S, 1991, Irreversibility, uncertainty, and investment, Journal of Economic
  Literature 29, 1110.
Ramey, Valerie A, and Matthew D Shapiro, 2001, Displaced capital: A study of aerospace
  plant closings, Journal of Political Economy 109, 958­992.
Ramey, Valerie A, and Kenneth D West, 1999, Inventories, Handbook of Macroeconomics 1,
  863­923.
Rauch, James E, 1999, Networks versus markets in international trade, Journal of Interna-
  tional Economics 48, 7­35.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W Vishny, 1992, Liquidation values and debt capacity: A
  market equilibrium approach, Journal of Finance 47, 1343­1366.
Traina, James, 2018, Is aggregate market power increasing? Production trends using finan-
  cial statements, Working paper.
Williamson, Oliver E, 1981, The economics of organization: The transaction cost approach,
 American Journal of Sociology 87, 548­577.
Woodford, Michael, 2005, Firm-specific capital and the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,
 International Journal of Central Banking .




                                             32
Main Figures and Tables

          Figure 1: PPE Liquidation Recovery Rates and Prevalence of PPE Sales
The x-axis is the industry-average PPE liquidation recovery rate. The y -axis is the industry-average fre-
quency of having non-zero PPE sales in Panel A, and the industry-average PPE sale value (normalized by
lagged net PPE) in Panel B. Sample period is 1996 to 2016. Each industry is a two-digit SIC.

                                                        Panel A. Frequency of PPE Sales
                                  1            .8
                    Annual % Firms Selling PPE
                           .4     .2
                                  0 .6




                                                    0     20         40            60          80   100
                                                               PPE Liquidation Recovery Rate




                                                        Panel B. PPE Sold/Net Book PPE
                                  .15
                    Sale of PPE/Total PPE
                     .05          0   .1




                                                    0     20         40            60          80   100
                                                               PPE Liquidation Recovery Rate




                                                                        33
                  Figure 2: Asset Specificity and Frequency of Price Change
The x-axis is the industry-average firm liquidation value (including PPE and working capital, normalized
by total book assets) as constructed in Section 2.4. The y -axis is the industry-level frequency of price
change, based on data from Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) (% price change per month). Each industry is
a two-digit SIC.


                                    80
                    Price Change Frequency in Industry
                        20         40
                                    0          60




                                                         .1              .2                     .3         .4
                                                              Average Firm Liquidation Value in Industry




                                                                              34
                                                Figure 3: Asset Specificity and Dispersion of Q
This figure shows binscatter plots of industry-level dispersion in Q. We calculate cross-sectional standard
deviation of Q for each two-digit SIC industry and each year. The x-axis is the industry-average firm
liquidation value (including PPE and working capital, normalized by total book assets) constructed in
Section 2.4. The y -axis is the average annual standard deviation in Q. In Panel A, Q is market value of
assets (book assets minus book equity plus market value of equity) divided by book value of assets. In Panel
B, Q is the estimate adjusted for intangibles from Peters and Taylor (2017). We calculate Q dispersion for
large firms (assets above Compustat median in each year) and small firms (assets below Compustat median),
and show binscatter plots for each group. Sample period is 1996 to 2016.

                                                         Panel A. Standard Average Q
                                 2
                      Standard Deviation of Q
                          1      .5    1.5




                                                    .1              .2                    .3            .4
                                                           Average Firm Liquidation Value in Industry

                                                                  Large Firms       Small Firms




                   Panel B. Q Adjusted for Intangibles (Peters and Taylor, 2017)
                               2.5
                    Standard Deviation of Q
                    1        1.5
                               .5        2




                                                   .1               .2                    .3            .4
                                                           Average Firm Liquidation Value in Industry

                                                                  Large Firms       Small Firms




                                                                           35
            Figure 4: Industry-Average Recovery Rate: PPE vs. Book Intangibles
This figure shows the average recovery rate of PPE versus book intangibles in each Fama-French 12 industry
(except financials). For each industry, the first bar shows the mean PPE recovery rate. The second bar
shows the mean book intangible recovery rate. The third bar shows the estimated book intangible recovery
rate excluding goodwill, which is calculated as the mean book intangible recovery rate divided by one minus
the share of goodwill in book intangibles in the industry. In other words, we assume (as is generally the
case) that the liquidation recovery rate of goodwill is zero. Then all the liquidation value of book intangibles
come from non-goodwill assets.


                                                      100
                                                      80
                                                      60
                     Mean Liquidation Recovery Rate




                                                      40
                                                      20
                                                       0
                                                            Consumer NonDurables   Consumer Durables       Manufacturing      Energy

                                                      100
                                                      80
                                                      60
                                                      40
                                                      20
                                                       0
                                                                  Chemicals        Business Equipment    Telecommunications   Utilities

                                                      100
                                                      80
                                                      60
                                                      40
                                                      20
                                                       0
                                                               Wholesale/Retail        Healthcare              Others


                                                                                     PPE
                                                                                     Book Intangible
                                                                                     Book Intangibles (ex. Goodwill)




                                                                                                    36
                                                      Figure 5: PPE Specificity and Rising Intangibles
Binscatter plots of rising intangibles for different levels of PPE recovery rate. Panel A uses BEA's estimates
of intellectual property assets in each BEA sector, and the y -axis is the change in intellectual property as a
share of intellectual property plus fixed assets from 1996 to 2016. The x-axis is the estimated average PPE
recovery rate in each BEA sector. Panel B uses Peters and Taylor (2017)'s estimate of total capitalized
intangibles (including book intangibles, capitalized R&D, and capitalized value of 30% of Selling, General,
and Administrative Expenses for each Compustat firm. The y -axis is the firm-level change in the capitalized
intangibles as a share of capitalized intangibles plus net PPE from 1996 to 2016. The x-axis is the PPE
recovery rate of the firm based on its industry.

                             Panel A. Sector-Level Intellectual Property Assets (BEA)
                                    .2
                      IP Share: 2006 minus 1996
                     -.1          0 -.2      .1




                                                           0    .2         .4           .6         .8        1
                                                                          PPE Recovery Rate




              Panel B. Firm-Level Intangibles (Compustat, Peters and Taylor (2017))
                                       .2
                       Intangible Share: 2016 minus 1996
                           .05         .1
                                       0          .15




                                                           .1        .2        .3             .4        .5
                                                                          PPE Recovery Rate




                                                                              37
      Figure 6: Estimated Firm-Level Liquidation Value and Composition Over Time
                                (Compustat Aggregate)
This figure shows the estimated total liquidation value from PPE, working capital, book intangibles, and
cash of all Compustat firms from 1996 to 2016. Panel A shows total liquidation value as a share of total
book assets. Panel B shows total liquidation value as a share of total enterprise value.

                     Panel A. Total Liquidation Value over Total Book Assets

                      1


                     .8


                     .6


                     .4


                     .2


                      0
                                1996                  2006                2016

                                          Book Intangible    PPE
                                          Inventory          Receivable
                                          Cash


                   Panel B. Total Liquidation Value over Total Enterprise Value

                     1


                     .8


                     .6


                     .4


                     .2


                     0
                                1996                  2006                2016

                                         Book Intangible     PPE
                                         Inventory           Receivable
                                         Cash




                                                    38
                    Table 1: Summary of Industry-Average Recovery Rates
This table presents summaries of industry-average recovery rates. Each industry is a two-digit SIC code.

              Panel A. Plant, Property, and Equipment (PPE)
              Mean: 0.35; 75th: 0.44; 25th: 0.24
              High: Transportation (0.69), Lumber (0.58), Wholesale (0.57)
              Low: Personal services (0.08), Educational services (0.15)
              Panel B. Inventory
              Mean: 0.44; 75th: 0.56; 25th: 0.34
              High: Auto dealers (0.88), Apparel stores (0.75), Supermarkets (0.75)
              Low: Restaurants (0.15), Special construction (0.2), Communications (0.26)
              Panel C. Receivable
              Mean: 0.63; 75th: 0.71; 25th: 0.55
              High: Utilities (0.90), Medical/optical devices (0.89), Coal (0.79)
              Low: Airlines (0.37), Educational services (0.37)




                                                    39
                          Table 2: Summary Statistics of Compustat Firms
Panel A shows the statistics of firm-level liquidation value estimates, which combine book value of assets with
liquidation recovery rates based on the firm's industry (two-digit SIC). Liquidation values are normalized
by total book assets. Panel B shows other basic statistics. The sample covers annual data from 1996 to
2016.

                                  Panel A. Liquidation Value Statistics

     Variable                                                      mean     p25     p50    p75    s.d.     N
     Liquidation value:   PPE, inventory, receivable               0.23     0.12    0.23   0.33   0.13   107,378
     Liquidation value:   PPE, inventory, receivable, cash         0.44     0.30    0.41   0.54   0.20   106,482
     Liquidation value:   PPE                                      0.09     0.02    0.05   0.12   0.09   110,222
     Liquidation value:   inventory                                0.05     0.00    0.02   0.07   0.07   110,523
     Liquidation value:   receivable                               0.09     0.03    0.07   0.13   0.09   112,031
     Cash/assets                                                   0.21     0.02    0.10   0.31   0.25   117,588


                                         Panel B. Other Statistics

                  Variable              mean     p25         p50      p75          s.d.      N
                  Log assets            4.80     3.08    4.94        6.76        2.83      118,594
                  Log market cap         5.58    4.02    5.54        7.03       2.14        81,687
                  EBITDA               278.91   -1.12    9.39       102.53     1592.02     118,305
                  EBITDA/l.assets       -0.19   -0.06    0.09        0.17       1.49       108,705
                  Debt/assets            0.35    0.02    0.21        0.41       0.77       116,929
                  Q                     2.05     1.10    1.49        2.32       1.67        79,937
                  MTB                    2.92    1.12    1.96        3.53       3.88        79,824
                  PPE/assets             0.25    0.06    0.17        0.39       0.24       115,734
                  Inventory/assets       0.10    0.00    0.04        0.17        0.13      116,212
                  Receivable/assets      0.15    0.04    0.11        0.21       0.14       117,754




                                                        40
                          Table 3: Determinants of PPE Recovery Rates
This table examines the determinants of PPE recovery rates. Panel A studies the relationship between the
physical attributes of assets in each industry and industry-average PPE recovery rate. Transportation cost
(in total production cost of PPE) measures mobility. Depreciation rate measures durability. Design cost
share (in total production cost of PPE) measures standardization/customization. Sales share of an industry
in Compustat and value added share of an industry in BEA data capture industry size. All attributes are
measured using BEA input-output table or Compustat data in 1997. Columns (1) and (2) use two-digit
SICs; columns (3) and (4) use BEA sectors. Panel B studies the relationship between macroeconomic and
industry conditions and firm-level recovery rate within each industry. Past 12-month GDP growth and
industry leverage are measured as of the quarter of the liquidation analysis. In columns (2) and (4), we
interact GDP growth and industry leverage with the fraction of fixed assets in the industry that are not
firm-specific (the top tercile of the 71 types of fixed assets in BEA fixed asset table by design costs are
designated as firm-specific). Controls include interactions of transportation cost and depreciation rate with
GDP growth (column (2)) and industry leverage (column (4)). two-digit SIC industry fixed effects are
included. R2 does not include industry fixed effects.

                Panel A. Physical Attributes and Industry-Average Recovery Rates

                                     Industry-level PPE Recovery Rate
                                                            Industry Classification
                                                      Two-digit SIC          BEA sectors
               Transportation cost                 -0.49***    -0.50***    -0.48***     -0.56***
                                                    (0.12)       (0.12)      (0.12)       (0.13)
               Depreciation rate                   -0.57***    -0.58***     -1.62**      -1.83**
                                                    (0.19)       (0.19)      (0.73)       (0.76)
               Design cost share                    -1.56*      -1.71**     -2.47**      -2.49**
                                                    (0.81)       (0.84)      (0.95)       (0.94)
               Industry size (sales share)                        0.39
                                                                 (0.58)
               Industry size (value-added share)                                          1.48
                                                                                         (1.12)
               Constant                             1.00***    1.02***      1.13***     1.16***
                                                     (0.21)     (0.21)       (0.19)      (0.19)
               Obs                                    48          48          45              45
               R2                                    0.40        0.40        0.29            0.33
                                   Robust standard errors in parentheses

            Panel B. Impact of Time-Varying Macroeconomic and Industry Conditions

                                      Case-level PPE Recovery Rate
                                                              (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)
         GDP growth                                             0.37       -6.86
                                                               (0.69)     (4.28)
         GDP growth × fraction PPE not firm-specific                      12.13*
                                                                          (5.98)
         Industry leverage                                                          -0.46***         0.05
                                                                                     (0.14)         (1.65)
         Industry leverage × fraction PPE not firm-specific                                         -3.07*
                                                                                                    (1.59)
         Fixed effect                                                           Industry
         Controls                                                N          Y          N              Y
         Obs                                                    349        349         349           349
         R2                                                    0.001      0.018       0.011         0.020
                  Standard errors in parentheses, double-clustered by industry and time




                                                     41
           Table 4: PPE Liquidation Recovery Rate and Prevalence of PPE Sales
The left-hand-side variable is the average fraction of firms with non-zero PPE sales every year in columns
(1) and (2), and average PPE sale proceeds (Compustat SPPE) normalized by lagged net PPE (Compustat
PPENT) in columns (3) and (4). The right-hand-side is raw industry-average PPE liquidation recovery rates
when "IV" is labeled "N," and PPE recovery rates predicted by physical attributes (mobility, durability,
standardization/customization shown in Table 3, Panel A, column (1)) when "IV" is labeled "Y."


                                     Frequency of PPE Sales    PPE Sold/Net Book PPE
                                        (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)
                PPE recovery rate     0.330**     0.887***     0.061*       0.079***
                                      (0.133)      (0.289)     (0.033)       (0.028)
                Constant             0.362***      0.165*       -0.001        -0.008
                                      (0.060)      (0.099)     (0.011)       (0.009)
                IV                      N            Y            N             Y
                Obs                     48           48          48             48
                R2                     0.10                     0.30
                                 Robust standard errors in parentheses




                                                   42
                 Table 5: Asset Specificity and Investment Response to Uncertainty
Firm-level annual regressions: Yi,t+1 = i + j,t + i,t + i × i,t + Xi,t + i,t . In Panel A columns (1) to (4), Yi,t+1
is capital expenditures (normalized by lagged net PPE), and i is the PPE recovery rate based on firm i's industry.
In columns (5) to (8), Yi,t+1 is inventory investment (changes in total inventory, normalized by lagged inventory),
and i is the inventory recovery rate based on firm i's industry. In columns (3) and (4), the PPE recovery rate
is instrumented by the predicted recovery rate based on PPE physical attributes discussed in Section 3.1 ("IV"
labeled "Y"). In columns (7) and (8), the inventory recovery rate is instrumented by the predicted recovery rate
based on inventory physical attributes discussed in Internet Appendix Section IA4 ("IV" labeled "Y"). i,t is
firm-level annual stock return volatility in columns (1), (3), (5) and (7), and annual abnormal volatility (based on
the Fama-French three-factor model) in columns (2), (4), (6), and (8). In Panel B, the variables are the same as
those in Panel A columns (1), (2), (5), and (6). The controls Xi,t include Q (market value of assets/book value
of assets), book leverage, cash holdings, EBITDA (normalized by lagged book assets), and size (log book assets)
at the end of year t. Firm, industry-year, and ratings fixed effects are included. R2 does not include fixed effects.
Standard errors are double-clustered by firm and time. The sample period is 1980 to 2016.

                                            Panel A. Baseline Results

                                                     CAPX Invest Rate                           Inventory Invest Rate
                                               (1)     (2)     (3)    (4)                 (5)        (6)     (7)      (8)
Vol                                         -3.00***              -5.03***              -4.24***              -4.40***
                                             (0.40)                 (0.80)               (0.56)                (0.94)
Vol × PPE recovery rate                      2.88**                9.04***
                                             (1.06)                 (2.26)
Vol × Invt recovery rate                                                                3.96***                4.38*
                                                                                         (1.24)                (2.20)
Abnormal vol (3-fac)                                   -3.17***              -5.60***              -4.47***              -5.51***
                                                        (0.40)                (0.86)                (0.55)                (1.14)
Abnormal vol (3-fac) × PPE recovery rate                2.83**               10.17***
                                                        (1.09)                (2.43)
Abnormal vol (3-fac) × Invt recovery rate                                                          4.07***               6.57**
                                                                                                    (1.27)               (2.80)
IV                                              N         N         Y        Y       N        N                  Y          Y
Fixed effect                                                        Firm. Industry-Year. Rating.
Obs                                          113,319 113,319 113,319 113,319 95,764                 95,764    94,722     94,722
R2                                            0.09    0.09                    0.06                   0.06
                            Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by firm and time

                                          Panel B. Additional Results

                                                              CAPX Invest Rate           Inventory Invest Rate
                                                               (1)       (2)                (3)         (4)
           Vol                                             -3.64***                      -3.86***
                                                            (0.46)                         (0.82)
           Vol × PPE recovery rate                          2.65**                          -1.26
                                                            (1.08)                         (1.66)
           Vol × Invt recovery rate                          1.76*                        4.06***
                                                            (0.89)                         (1.22)
           Abnormal vol (3-fac)                                          -3.80***                      -4.10***
                                                                          (0.46)                         (0.82)
           Abnormal vol (3-fac) × PPE recovery rate                       2.59**                          -1.23
                                                                          (1.11)                         (1.69)
           Abnormal vol (3-fac) × Invt recovery rate                       1.73*                        4.16***
                                                                          (0.87)                         (1.24)
           Fixed effect                                              Firm. Industry-Year. Rating.
           Obs                                                113,319    113,319          95,764        95,764
           R2                                                  0.09       0.09             0.06          0.06
                           Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by firm and time

                                                          43
                           Table 6: Asset Specificity and Price Rigidity
The left-hand-side variable is the industry-level frequency of price change, based on data from Nakamura
and Steinsson (2008) (% price change per month). The right-hand-side variables include PPE recovery
rates, inventory recovery rates, the fraction of PPE firm-specific following the categorization in Section
3.2, and industry-average firm liquidation values (including PPE and working capital, normalized by total
book assets) as constructed in Section 2.4. In column (4), the industry-average firm liquidation value is
instrumented using the predicted PPE recovery rate based on physical attributes of PPE (see Section 3.1)
and the predicted inventory recovery rate based on physical attributes of inventory (see Internet Appendix
Section IA4). Each industry is a two-digit SIC.


                                               Frequency of Price Change in Industry
                                                (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)
                  PPE recovery rate             8.43
                                              (18.21)
                  Frac of PPE firm-specific                -19.51*
                                                           (10.49)
                  Inventory recovery rate     38.52***    39.57***
                                               (10.71)      (9.27)
                  Ind avg firm liq val                               85.68***   57.29**
                                                                      (22.83)   (26.98)
                  Constant                      1.53       9.76*        -1.22     6.38
                                               (5.24)      (5.92)      (4.86)    (7.39)
                  IV                             N           N            N       Y
                  Obs                            44          44         44        42
                  R2                            0.16        0.19       0.22
                                  Robust standard errors in parentheses




                                                     44
                          Table 7: PPE Specificity and Rising Intangibles
This table shows the relationship between PPE specificity and rising intangibles. Panel A measures intan-
gibles using BEA's estimates of intellectual property assets in each BEA sector. The left-hand-side variable
is IP asset stock as a share of fixed asset plus IP asset. Panel B uses Peters and Taylor (2017)'s estimate
of total capitalized intangibles (including book intangibles, capitalized R&D, and capitalized value of 30%
of Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses for each Compustat firm. The left-hand-side variable is
intangible stock as a share of intangibles and net PPE. Columns (1) and (2) show the relationship between
intangibles in 1996 and PPE specificity. Columns (3) and (4) show the relationship between intangible share
change between 1996 and 2016 and PPE specificity. Columns (2) and (4) instrument PPE recovery rates
using predicted values based on PPE physical attributes ("IV" labeled "Y").

                      Panel A. Sector-Level Intellectual Property Assets (BEA)

                                                    IP/(IP+Fixed Asset)
                                                 1996          2016 minus 1996
                                             (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)
                     PPE recovery rate     -0.163**    -0.523**    -0.081**    -0.177**
                                            (0.079)     (0.221)     (0.033)     (0.076)
                     Constant              0.178***    0.303***    0.055***    0.088***
                                            (0.045)     (0.093)     (0.016)     (0.030)
                     IV                       N              Y         N           Y
                     Obs                      45             45       45          45
                     R2                      0.03                    0.08
                                      Standard errors in parentheses

              Panel B. Firm-Level Intangibles (Compustat, Peters and Taylor (2017))

                                                 Intangibles/(Intangibles+PPE)
                                                  1996            2016 minus 1996
                                             (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)
                    PPE recovery rate       -0.442      -0.675     -0.249***   -0.501***
                                           (0.383)     (0.541)      (0.095)     (0.159)
                    Constant              0.762***    0.839***     0.197***    0.280***
                                           (0.117)     (0.189)      (0.034)     (0.056)
                    IV                       N              Y         N            Y
                    Obs                     6,964          6,964     1,509       1,509
                    R2                      0.02                     0.01
                           Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by industry




                                                      45
Internet Appendix

IA1        Additional Figures and Tables

                    Figure IA1: Liquidation Analysis Reporting Examples
This figure shows examples of summary tables in liquidation analysis in Chapter 11. Panel A comes from
Lyondell Chemical (case number 09-10023). Panel B comes from Sorensen Communications (case number
14-10454).

                                    Panel A. Lyondell Chemical




                                Panel B. Sorenson Communications




                                                 46
Figure IA2: PPE Liquidation Recovery Rates and PPE Sale Recovery Rates (Compustat)
The x-axis is the industry-average liquidation recovery rate of PPE from liquidation analysis in Chapter 11
filings. The y -axis is the industry-average sale recovery rate of PPE computed among Compustat firms. We
begin with firm-years with positive PPE sale proceeds (Compustat variable SPPE). We compute the net
book value of PPE sold based on lagged net book value of PPE plus capital expenditures minus depreciation
minus current net book value of PPE. We exclude firm-years with positive acquisition spending, where it is
difficult to tease out the change in PPE book value due to acquisitions. We compute the PPE sale recovery
rate as PPE sale proceeds divided by the net book value of PPE sold. We winsorize this variable at one
percent and take average in each two-digit SIC industry (from 2000 to 2016, same as the time period for
the liquidation recovery rate data), which produces the industry-level PPE sale recovery rate.
                             .8         .6
                   PPE Sale Recovery Rate
                  .2         .4
                             0




                                             0   .2         .4            .6          .8   1
                                                      PPE Liquidation Recovery Rate




                                                                47
   Figure IA3: Firm-Level Liquidation Value Estimates: Distribution and Composition
Panel A shows the distribution of estimated firm-level liquidation value, including PPE, inventory, and
receivable, normalized by total book assets. Panel B shows the composition for the average firm. The
sample period covers 1996 to 2016.

               Panel A. Firm-Level Liquidation Value (PPE, Inventory, Receivable)
                      2.5
                      2 1.5
                  Density
                      1
                      .5
                      0




                              0          .2                  .4                  .6           .8
                                              Liquidation Value/Book Assets




                    Panel B. Composition of Liquidation Value for Average Firm




                                                                          9.3%



                                                                      4.7%


                                                                   8.5%




                                  Cash               Receivables                  Inventory
                                  PPE                Unaccounted




                                                       48
                   Figure IA4: PPE Recovery Rates and Industry Conditions
This figure shows binscatter plots of PPE recovery rates for each case (y -axis) and industry conditions
measured based on the average book leverage in the industry of Compustat firms. The solid red dots
represent observations from industries where the average PPE recovery rate is in the top tercile (industries
with the most general PPE). The hollow blue dots represent observations from industries where the average
PPE recovery rate is in the bottom tercile (industries with the most specific PPE).
                           .6       .5
                  PPE Recovery Rate
                  .2   .3  .1
                           0 .4




                                         .2   .25        .3         .35       .4    .45   .5
                                                         Industry Leverage

                                                    Top Tercile    Bottom Tercile




                                                              49
         Figure IA5: PPE Liquidation Recovery Rate and Prevalence of PPE Sales
The x-axis is the industry-average PPE liquidation recovery rate, predicted based on physical attributes (as
in Table 3, Panel A, column (1)). The y -axis is industry-average frequency of having non-zero PPE sales
in Panel A, and industry-average PPE sale value (normalized by lagged net PPE) in Panel B. The sample
period is 1996 to 2016.

                                                         Panel A. Frequency of PPE Sales
                                   1            .8
                     Annual % Firms Selling PPE
                            .4     .2
                                   0 .6




                                                     0            20                     40            60
                                                             Predicted PPE Liquidation Recovery Rate




                                                         Panel B. PPE Sold/Net Book PPE
                                   .15
                     Sale of PPE/Total PPE
                      .05          0   .1




                                                     0            20                     40            60
                                                             Predicted PPE Liquidation Recovery Rate




                                                                           50
    Figure IA6: Investment Irreversibility and Productivity Dispersion: Lanteri (2018)
This figure shows the relationship between MRK dispersion (y -axis) and the parameter of investment irre-
versibility in the model of Lanteri (2018) (x-axis). Lower means higher investment irreversibility. z is
the productivity parameter, and we use two values of z as in Figure 5 of Lanteri (2018).




                                                   51
                     Table IA1: PPE Recovery Rates and Firm Characteristics
This table shows the relationship between PPE recovery rates and firm characteristics. In columns (1) to (3),
the dependent variable is the case-level PPE liquidation recovery rate, using Chapter 11 liquidation recovery
rate data. The independent variables include total liabilities over assets and size (log book assets) measured
at filing, and EBITDA and Q from merging the cases with Compustat (we use latest annual results up to
two years prior to filing). In columns (4) to (6), the dependent variable is the firm-level PPE sale recovery
rate, using Compustat data. Specifically, we compute the net book value of PPE sold based on lagged net
book value of PPE plus capital expenditures minus depreciation minus current net book value of PPE. We
exclude firm-years with positive acquisition spending, where it is difficult to tease out the change in PPE
book value due to acquisitions. We compute the PPE sale recovery rate as PPE sale proceeds divided by
the net book value of PPE sold. The independent variables include book leverage (total debt over total
assets), size (log book assets), EBITDA, and Q. Industry fixed effects are included. R2 does not include
fixed effects.

                                   Liquidation Recovery Rate                   Sale Recovery Rate
                                    (1)       (2)       (3)             (4)           (5)         (6)
        Total liabilities/assets    -0.002    0.018    0.066**
                                   (0.014)   (0.024)   (0.026)
        Book leverage                                                  -0.006        -0.008      0.009
                                                                      (0.010)       (0.011)     (0.028)
        Log assets                  -0.008    0.002      0.013       -0.016***     -0.016***   -0.015***
                                   (0.008)   (0.013)    (0.015)       (0.002)       (0.003)     (0.003)
        EBITDA/l.assets                      0.108**     0.052                       0.003     0.081***
                                             (0.051)    (0.063)                     (0.010)     (0.024)
        Q                                              -0.024**                                0.010***
                                                        (0.012)                                 (0.004)
        Fixed effect                                               Industry
        Obs                         341       204           148        7,197         7,155       5,374
        R2                          0.00      0.02          0.05       0.01          0.01        0.01
                       Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by industry and time




                                                       52
            Table IA2: Equipment Auction Values and Macroeconomic Conditions
This table uses equipment auction values analyzed by Murfin and Pratt (2019), and studies the impact of
macroeconomic conditions (past 12-month GDP growth). In columns (1) and (2), we control for fixed effects
of manufacturer-type, age-type, quarter (seasonality)-type, and condition. In columns (3) and (4), we use
very restrict fixed effects of manufacturer-type-age-condition and quarter-type. We use nominal equipment
auction values in columns (1) and (3), and control for inflation of general purpose machinery and equipment.
We use real equipment values in columns (2) and (4), which deflate the nominal auction values by the price
index for general purpose machinery and equipment. We also control for a linear annual time trend. Sample
period is 1994 and 2013, with nearly one million equipment auctions. R2 does not include the fixed effects.
Standard errors are clustered by manufacturer-type and year. We are grateful to Justin Murfin for sharing
the data.

                                                        Log Auction Value
                        Nominal               Real               Nominal                 Real
                          (1)                 (2)                   (3)                  (4)
    GDP growth          3.14***              2.95***             3.20***                2.99***
                        (0.350)              (0.523)             (0.347)                (0.507)
    Inflation           3.75***                                  3.79***
                        (0.634)                                  (0.635)
    Time trend          0.02***               -0.00              0.02***                 -0.00
                        (0.003)              (0.003)             (0.003)                (0.003)
    Fixed effect        Manufacturer×Type, Age×Type,             Manufacturer×Type×Age×Condition,
                           Quarter×Type, Condition                         Quarter×Type
    Observations        778,545          778,545                 758,415            758,415
    R2                   0.034             0.012                  0.038              0.012
           Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by manufacturer-equipment type and year




                                                       53
                                       Table IA3: Q Dispersion
Industry-level annual regression, where the left-hand-side variable is annual cross-sectional dispersion in Q
for each two-digit SIC industry. Q is market value of assets (book value of assets minus book equity plus
market value of equity) over book value of assets in columns (1) and (2), and Q adjusted for intangibles from
Peters and Taylor (2017) in columns (3) and (4). Industry-average liquidation value is the annual average
firm-level liquidation value (including PPE and working capital) constructed in Section 2.4. In columns (2)
and (4), industry-average liquidation value is instrumented by PPE and inventory recovery rates predicted
based on their physical attributes (see Section 3.1 and Internet Appendix Section IA4 respectively). Sample
period is 1996 to 2016. Year fixed effects are included. R2 does not include fixed effects.

                                                Standard Q                  Adjusted Q
                                               (1)       (2)              (3)        (4)
                      Ind avg firm liq val   -2.05***    -1.99**     -3.50***      -2.91*
                                              (0.55)      (0.77)      (1.21)       (1.51)
                      IV                        N            Y             N         Y
                      Fixed effect                                 Year
                      Obs                      979           945          981       945
                      R2                       0.12                       0.10
                      Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by industry and time




                                                        54
IA2       Liquidation Analysis Examples
   In the following, we include excerpts of the detailed discussion for the summary liqui-
dation value estimates shown in the example of Lyondell Chemical in Figure IA1. They
explain the procedures for the estimates for PPE, inventory, account receivable, and cash.

     Figure IA7: Lyondell Chemical Example: Facility-Level Information for All PPE
 This figure shows an excerpt of the discussion about PPE liquidation value estimates in the liquidation
 analysis of Lyondell (Panel A) and excerpt of the facility-level estimate in the accompanying appendix.

                   Panel A. Excerpt of PPE Discussion in Liquidation Analysis




         Panel B. Excerpt of Facility-Level Estimate in Liquidation Analysis Appendix




                                                   55
Lyondell Chemical Example: Facility-Level Information for All PPE (Cont.)




                                   56
                     Figure IA8: Lyondell Chemical Example: Other Assets
This figure shows an excerpt of the discussion about inventory, receivable, and cash liquidation value esti-
mates in the liquidation analysis of Lyondell.

                 Panel A. Excerpt of Inventory Discussion in Liquidation Analysis




           Panel B. Excerpt of Cash and Receivable Discussion in Liquidation Analysis




                                                    57
IA3           Measuring Physical Attributes of PPE
      Below we further explain the measurement of the physical attributes of plant, property,
and equipment (PPE). As described in Section 3.1, we utilize information from BEA's fixed
asset table and input-output table. First, we study which types of assets each industry uses.
We collect information from BEA's fixed asset table, which shows the stock amount of 71
types of fixed assets in 58 sectors each year. Second, we measure the attributes of each of
the 71 types of assets, which rely on information from BEA's input-output table. Finally,
we construct the overall industry-level attributes based on the share of each asset in an
industry's fixed asset stock. The 71 types of fixed assets are listed in Table IA4 below.

                        Table IA4: List of Assets in BEA Fixed Asset Table
This table shows the 71 types of assets in the BEA Fixed Asset Table. BEA provides the stock amount (net
of depreciation) for each of 58 sectors in each year.
       Code              NIPA Asset Types                        Code              NIPA Asset Types
                        EQUIPMENT                                                 STRUCTURES
 1     EP1A    Mainframes                                   40   SOO1   Office
 2     EP1B    PCs                                          41   SB31   Hospitals
 3     EP1C    DASDs                                        42   SB32   Special care
 4     EP1D    Printers                                     43   SOO2   Medical buildings
 5     EP1E    Terminals                                    44   SC03   Multimerchandise shopping
 6     EP1F    Tape drives                                  45   SC04   Food and beverage establishments
 7     EP1G    Storage devices                              46   SC01   Warehouses
 8     EP1H    System integrators                           47   SOMO   Mobile structures
 9     EP20    Communications                               48   SC02   Other commercial
 10    EP34    Nonelectro medical instruments               49   SI00   Manufacturing
 11    EP35    Electro medical instruments                  50   SU30   Electric
 12    EP36    Nonmedical instruments                       51   SU60   Wind and solar
 13    EP31    Photocopy and related equipment              52   SU40   Gas
 14    EP12    Office and accounting equipment              53   SU50   Petroleum pipelines
 15    EI11    Nuclear fuel                                 54   SU20   Communication
 16    EI12    Other fabricated metals                      55   SM01   Petroleum and natural gas
 17    EI21    Steam engines                                56   SM02   Mining
 18    EI22    Internal combustion engines                  57   SB10   Religious
 19    EI30    Metalworking machinery                       58   SB20   Educational and vocational
 20    EI40    Special industrial machinery                 59   SB41   Lodging
 21    EI50    General industrial equipment                 60   SB42   Amusement and recreation
 22    EI60    Electric transmission and distribution       61   SB43   Air transportation
 23    ET11    Light trucks (including utility vehicles)    62   SB45   Other transportation
 24    ET12    Other trucks, buses and truck trailers       63   SU11   Other railroad
 25    ET20    Autos                                        64   SU12   Track replacement
 26    ET30    Aircraft                                     65   SB44   Local transit structures
 27    ET40    Ships and boats                              66   SB46   Other land transportation
 28    ET50    Railroad equipment                           67   SN00   Farm
 29    EO11    Household furniture                          68   SO01   Water supply
 30    EO12    Other furniture                              69   SO02   Sewage and waste disposal
 31    EO30    Other agricultural machinery                 70   SO03   Public safety
 32    EO21    Farm tractors                                71   SO04   Highway and conservation and development
 33    EO40    Other construction machinery
 34    EO22    Construction tractors
 35    EO50    Mining and oilfield machinery
 36    EO60    Service industry machinery
 37    EO71    Household appliances
 38    EO72    Other electrical
 39    EO80    Other



      To measure the mobility and standardization/customization of each of the 71 types of
assets, we draw on transportation cost and design cost information from BEA's input-output
table. We find counterparts of the 71 types of fixed assets in the input-output table using the

                                                       58
PEQ bridge for equipment and hand matching for structures. We use the 1997 input-output
table.

    For transportation costs, we start with the input-output "use" table. For each asset,
         we find all the instances where it is used as an input (recorded as "commodity"), and
         accordingly transported to users. We calculate the total transportation costs in all
         uses, and divide by the total value of the asset used (in producer prices). In other
         words, we calculate the share of transportation costs in total asset value.

    For design costs, we also start with the input-output "use" table. For each asset, we
         calculate the share of design costs in the total costs of producing it, so we find all the
         instances where the asset is an output. We categorize inputs with the following key
         words as related to design and customization: "design," "custom computer program-
         ming," "information services," "data processing services," "software," "database,"
         "other computer related services," "architectural and engineering services," "research,"
         "advertising," "management consulting."
         Alternatively, we can also measure the cost of design as the share of production cost not
         accounted for by purchasing materials (which can be measured using the accounting
         variable cost of goods sold). For each of the 71 types of assets, we can measure this
         share in its production. Results are similar with this alternative measure.

   We then compute the overall transportation costs and design costs for each industry in
the BEA fixed asset table, by summing up the asset-level attributes, based on the share
of each asset in the industry. Accordingly, the industry-level measures capture the total
transportation costs as a share of asset value for all of the industry's fixed assets, and the
share of design costs in producing all of the industry's fixed assets.
   Finally, we match the industries in the BEA fixed asset table with two-digit SIC in-
dustries in our liquidation recovery rate data. The matching is listed below. For each SIC
industry, we take the average of the BEA industries matched to it.
   For durability, we can calculate depreciation for each BEA industry using BEA fixed
asset table and match to two-digit SICs, or directly calculate average depreciation rate in
each two-digit SIC industry using Compustat. In the baseline results, we use the latter
approach, which avoids industry conversion.
   Table IA6 presents industry-level (two-digit SIC industries) summary statistics of the
physical attributes: mobility (transportation cost as a share of PPE production cost), dura-
bility (depreciation rate), standardization/customization (design cost share in PPE produc-
tion cost). It also shows statistics for the share of PPE in an industry that is designated
firm-specific. Each of the 71 types of assets in the BEA fixed asset table is designated
firm-specific if the customization measure (i.e., design costs in total production costs of the
asset) is in the top tercile.

                                                 59
                      Table IA5: List of Industries in BEA Fixed Asset Table
This table shows the industries in the BEA fixed asset table, and the closest corresponding two-digit SICs.
                              INDUSTRY TITLE                                  BEA CODE   Two-Digit SIC
          Agriculture, forestry, fishing, and hunting                         ----­
         Farms                                                                110C       1, 2, 7
         Forestry, fishing, and related activities                            113F       8, 9, 24
          Mining                                                              ----­
         Oil and gas extraction                                               2110       13
         Mining, except oil and gas                                           2120       10, 12, 14
         Support activities for mining                                        2130       10, 12­14
          Utilities                                                           2200       19
          Construction                                                        2300       15­17
          Manufacturing                                                       ----­
         Durable goods                                                        ----­
         Wood products                                                        3210       24
         Nonmetallic mineral products                                         3270       32
         Primary metals                                                       3310       33
         Fabricated metal products                                            3320       34
         Machinery                                                            3330       35,   38
         Computer and electronic products                                     3340       35,   36, 38
         Electrical equipment, appliances, and components                     3350       36
         Motor vehicles, bodies and trailers, and parts                       336M       37
         Other transportation equipment                                       336O       37
         Furniture and related products                                       3370       24,   25
         Miscellaneous manufacturing                                          338A       38,   39
          Nondurable goods                                                    ----­
         Food, beverage, and tobacco products                                 311A       20, 21
         Textile mills and textile product mills                              313T       22, 23
         Apparel and leather and allied products                              315A       23, 31
         Paper products                                                       3220       26
         Printing and related support activities                              3230       27
         Petroleum and coal products                                          3240       29
         Chemical products                                                    3250       28
         Plastics and rubber products                                         3260       30
          Wholesale trade                                                     4200       50, 51
          Retail trade                                                        44RT       52­59
          Transportation and warehousing                                      ----­
         Air transportation                                                   4810       45
         Railroad transportation                                              4820       40
         Water transportation                                                 4830       44
         Truck transportation                                                 4840       42
         Transit and ground passenger transportation                          4850       41
         Pipeline transportation                                              4860       46
         Other transportation and support activities                          487S       47
         Warehousing and storage                                              4930       42
          Information                                                         ----­
         Publishing industries (including software)                           5110       27, 87
         Motion picture and sound recording industries                        5120       78
         Broadcasting and telecommunications                                  5130       48
         Information and data processing services                             5140       73
          Real estate and rental and leasing                                  ----­
         Real estate                                                          5310       65
         Rental and leasing services and lessors of intangible assets         5320       65, 67, 73, 75, 78
          Professional, scientific, and technical services                    ----­
         Legal services                                                       5411       81
         Computer systems design and related services                         5415       73
         Miscellaneous professional, scientific, and technical services       5412       72, 73, 87
          Management of companies and enterprises                             5500
          Administrative and waste management services                        ----­
         Administrative and support services                                  5610       73
         Waste management and remediation services                            5620       49
          Educational services                                                6100       82
          Health care and social assistance                                   ----­
         Ambulatory health care services                                      6210       80
         Hospitals                                                            622H       80
         Nursing and residential care facilities                              6230       80
          Social assistance                                                   6240       83
          Arts, entertainment, and recreation                                 ----­
         Performing arts, spectator sports, museums, and related activities   711A       84
         Amusements, gambling, and recreation industries                      7130       79
          Accommodation and food services                                     ----­
         Accommodation                                                        7210       70
         Food services and drinking places                                    7220       58
          Other services, except government                                   8100       72, 75, 76, 86

                                                           60
                  Table IA6: Summary Statistics of PPE Physical Attributes
This table shows the mean, standard deviation, and quartiles of industry-level PPE physical attributes. It
also shows statistics of the fraction of PPE that is not firm-specific in an industry.

                 Variable                         mean     p25     p50     p75     s.d.
                 Transportation cost              0.520   0.378   0.481   0.675   0.199
                 Depreciation rate                0.245   0.157   0.215   0.323   0.117
                 Design cost share                0.159   0.145   0.157   0.179   0.028
                 Industry size (sales share)      0.016   0.002   0.005   0.020   0.022
                 Fraction PPE not firm-specific   0.717   0.605   0.740   0.833   0.140




                                                   61
IA4       Attributes and Recovery Rates of Inventory
   We measure the physical attributes of inventory in different industries along the following
dimensions. The first attribute is durability, or shelf life: some inventories are very perishable
(such as restaurants' fresh food inventory, or certain chemicals). The second and third
attributes include mobility and standardization/customization, similar to the observations
in Section 3.1 for PPE. The final attribute is the share of work-in-progress inventory, which
is generally not redeployable. As before, we measure industry-level attributes for each two-
digit SIC industry.
   We measure inventory durability/shelf life using the ratio of inventory purchase to in-
ventory stock for firms in Compustat ("churn rate"), and then take the average churn rate
in each industry. When inventory is perishable, most inventory needs to be purchased or
produced during the same period, instead of being stocked for future use. Industries with
the lowest inventory churn rate (longest shelf life) include construction, furniture stores, de-
partment stores, textile mills, and metal mining. Industries with the highest inventory churn
rate (shortest shelf life) include agricultural services, restaurants, recreational services, and
hotels.
   We measure inventory mobility using transportation cost data based on the BEA input-
output table, similar to the analysis in Section 3.1. We start by calculating the transporta-
tion cost (as a share of total production cost) for each commodity in the input-output table.
For each 4-digit input-output table industry (which can be mapped to a 4-digit NAICS in-
dustry), we calculate the overall transportation cost of its inputs as the transportation cost
of raw materials, and calculate the overall transportation cost of its output as the transporta-
tion cost of final goods. We merge the transportation cost of raw materials and final goods
into Compustat based on the 4-digit NAICS. We then calculate the transportation cost of
inventory in general for firms in each two-digit SIC industry, weighting by the amount of raw
materials and final goods (available in Compustat). Industries with the highest inventory
mobility include apparel, electronic manufacturing, and department stores. Industries with
the lowest inventory mobility include nonmetallic mining, construction, and coal mining.
   We measure inventory standardization/customization using the share of design cost in
total cost based on the BEA input-output table, also similar to the analysis in Section 3.1
for PPE. We start by calculating the design cost (as a share of total production cost) for
each commodity in the input-output table. For each 4-digit input-output table industry, we
calculate the overall design cost share of its inputs as the design cost of raw materials, and
calculate the overall design cost share of its output as the design cost share of final goods.
We merge the design cost of raw materials and final goods into Compustat based on the
4-digit NAICS. We then calculate the design cost of inventory in general for firms in each
two-digit SIC industry, weighting by the amount of raw materials and final goods (available
in Compustat). Industries with the lowest degree of customization include wood products,


                                               62
building material stores, auto dealers, and restaurants. Industries with the highest degree
of customization include communications, business services, and water transportation.
   Finally, we measure the share of work-in-progress inventory in total inventory for Com-
pustat firms, and take the average for each two-digit SIC industry.
   Table IA7, Panel A, shows industry-level summary statistics of the inventory physical
attributes. Table IA7, Panel B, shows the relationship between the physical attributes
and average inventory recovery rates in each industry. As in the analysis of PPE recovery
rates, we use physical attributes measured in 1997 (using 1997 Input-Ouput tables and
Compustat data). Since inventory in certain industries can be fairly perishable (e.g., fresh
food inventory of restaurants), it seems durability is a primary issue. When the inventory
is perishable, mobility and customization matter less (perishable inventory is difficult to
redeploy anyways). When inventory is more durable, mobility and customization matter
more. In addition, having a higher share of work-in-progress inventory is associated with a
slightly lower inventory liquidation recovery rate. The impact of industry size (the industry's
sales as a share of total sales in Compustat) is unclear like before, as shown in column (2).
   Connections with Rauch (1999). Rauch (1999) analyzes issues in international trade
and provides a classification of internationally traded commodities based on whether they
are traded on organized exchanges. This classification is sometimes used as a proxy for
specificity. These commodities are most closely related to goods categorized as inventory,
and we explore connections with the Rauch (1999) data below.
   In Table IA8, we look at how the physical attributes of inventory relate to the Rauch
(1999) measure. We follow similar specifications as those in Table IA7, Panel B. Specifically,
starting with the original Rauch (1999) data with 4-digit SITC codes, we first convert these
codes to the industry codes in the 1997 BEA input-output table following the procedure
in Nunn (2007). For each commodity (e.g., poultry, iron ore, paper, cereal), we have a
dummy variable which equals to one if it is classified as traded on an organized exchange
by Rauch (1999). Then, for each industry, we calculate the fraction of commodities it uses
that are exchange-traded, based on input composition from the BEA's input-output table.
This fraction is the left-hand-side variable in Table IA8. We use both the conservative
classification (column (1)) and the liberal classification (column (2)). The right-hand-side
variables are the same as those in Table IA7, which measure the physical attributes of the
industry's inventory (except we drop the share of work-in-progress inventory which are not
relevant for the Rauch (1999) data). Overall, we find that when goods are more customized
(higher design cost share), they are less likely to be traded on organized exchanges.16
  16
     In addition to the industry-level analysis, for each commodity we can also study the relationship
between exchange trading and the degree of customization. At the commodity level, we also find that
commodities with more customization are less likely to be exchange-traded. The correlation between the
exchange trading dummy of Rauch (1999) and the design cost share is around -0.25, and significant at the
0.001 level. As examples, commodities with low customization (low design cost share) include poultry and
egg, soybean and oilseed, and dairy, which are traded on exchanges. Commodities with high customization
include recording, breakfast cereal, newspaper, semiconductor product, and educational material, which are



                                                   63
   Finally, for the connection between the Rauch (1999) measure and inventory recovery
rates in our data, we find that the Rauch (1999) measure also plays a similar role as the
customization measure in Table IA7. In particular, in the regressions of Table IA7, Panel B,
if we replace our customization measure with the share of non-exchange traded commodities
used in an industry based on Rauch (1999) data, we get similar results.

                  Table IA7: Industry-Level Physical Attributes of Inventory
Panel A shows the mean, standard deviation, and quartiles of industry-level inventory physical attributes.
The physical attributes are calculated using BEA input-output flow table and Compustat data in 1997.
Panel B shows the relationship between industry-average inventory recovery rate and physical attributes of
inventory in the industry.

                                      Panel A. Summary Statistics

                   Variable                    mean        p25       p50      p75      s.d.
                   Work-in-progress share     0.201    0.049         0.152    0.271    0.197
                   Churn rate                25.940    7.100        11.910   36.813   32.568
                   Transportation cost        0.095    0.033         0.053    0.096    0.117
                   Design cost share          0.074    0.057         0.073    0.085    0.021


                        Panel B. Relationship with Inventory Recovery Rate

                                                                 Inventory Recovery Rate
                                                                    (1)          (2)
                      Churn rate                                 -0.013***    -0.013***
                                                                   (0.003)      (0.003)
                      Transportation cost                          -0.235*       -0.218
                                                                   (0.118)      (0.138)
                      Churn rate × Transportation cost              0.013         0.012
                                                                   (0.013)      (0.013)
                      Design cost share                           -3.809**      -3.979*
                                                                   (1.878)      (1.985)
                      Churn rate × Design cost share              0.127***    0.129***
                                                                   (0.043)      (0.045)
                      Work-in-progress share                        -0.219       -0.223
                                                                   (0.188)      (0.191)
                      Industry size (sales share)                                 0.322
                                                                                (0.930)
                      Constant                                   0.814***      0.819***
                                                                  (0.149)       (0.151)
                      Obs                                           45             45
                      R2                                           0.31           0.32
                                   Robust standard errors in parentheses




not traded on exchanges.


                                                      64
               Table IA8: Inventory Physical Attributes and Exchange Trading
The left-hand-side variable is the fraction of commodities used in an industry classified as exchange-traded
following Rauch (1999). Column (1) uses the conservative classification and column (2) uses the liberal
classification (see Rauch (1999) for more detail). The right-hand-side variables are the attributes of the
industry's inventory (same as those in Table IA7).


                                                           Fraction Exchange-Traded
                                                           Conservative    Liberal
                      Churn rate                               -0.002         -0.002
                                                              (0.003)        (0.003)
                      Transportation cost                      -0.057         -0.057
                                                              (0.072)        (0.072)
                      Churn rate × Transportation cost         -0.003         -0.003
                                                              (0.003)        (0.003)
                      Design cost share                       -1.965*       -2.249**
                                                              (1.146)        (1.097)
                      Churn rate × Design cost share            0.022          0.024
                                                              (0.030)        (0.031)
                      Constant                                 0.192*        0.234**
                                                              (0.096)        (0.093)
                      Obs                                        52             52
                      R2                                        0.14           0.18
                                   Robust standard errors in parentheses




                                                    65
IA5       Asset Attributes and Recovery Rates of Other As-
          sets
   In this section, we discuss the attributes that affect the liquidation recovery rates of
other assets, such as receivables and book intangibles.


IA5.1      Receivables
   Receivable recovery rates can be lower than 100% for several main reasons. First, past-
due receivables may not get paid in the end. Second, foreign receivables are difficult to
recover. Third, government receivables and receivables due from large, concentrated clients
(e.g., Walmart) can also be more difficult to recover. Fourth, some receivables can be offset
by payables to the same counterparties, and get netted out.
   As before, we measure industry-level receivable attributes in 1997. For past-due receiv-
ables, we use the share of doubtful receivables in total receivables from Compustat. For
foreign receivables, we calculate the share of non-US sales in total sales as a proxy, using
Compustat segment data. For government and large-counterparty receivables, we currently
do not have a proxy. For the possibility to offset receivables based on payables, we use
accounts payables (normalized by book assets) as a proxy. We calculate the average for
each two-digit SIC.
   Table IA9, Panel A, shows summary statistics of these attributes. Table IA9, Panel
B, shows their relationship with industry-average receivable recovery rate. As predicted,
receivable recovery rate is lower in industries with more doubtful receivables, foreign sales,
and accounts payables. The impact of industry size (the industry's sales as a share of total
sales in Compustat) is unclear like before, as shown in column (2).




                                             66
                      Table IA9: Industry-Level Attributes of Receivables
Panel A shows the mean, standard deviation, and quartiles of industry-level receivable attributes. The
attributes are calculated using Compustat data in 1997. Panel B shows the relationship between industry-
average receivable recovery rate and receivable attributes in the industry.

                                       Panel A. Summary Statistics

                   Variable                        mean     p25     p50       p75    s.d.
                   Doubtful receivable share       0.077    0.050   0.062    0.081   0.054
                   Foreign sale share              0.101    0.039   0.108    0.165   0.131
                   Accounts payable                0.099    0.064   0.092    0.118   0.045
                   Industry size (sales share)     0.016    0.001   0.005    0.022   0.023


                       Panel B. Relationship with Receivable Recovery Rate

                                         Receivable Recovery Rate
                                                            (1)             (2)
                              Doubtful receivable share     -0.944**   -0.913**
                                                             (0.354)    (0.364)
                              Foreign sale share             -0.174*    -0.176*
                                                             (0.094)    (0.095)
                              Accounts payable                -0.957     -0.966
                                                             (0.584)    (0.584)
                              Industry size (sales share)                 0.594
                                                                        (0.723)
                              Constant                      0.804***   0.791***
                                                             (0.068)    (0.064)
                              Obs                               47          47
                              R2                              0.14        0.15
                                    Robust standard errors in parentheses




IA5.2       Book Intangibles
   For book intangibles, the liquidation recovery rate can be affected by the form and value
of the intangibles. First, goodwill and organizational capital mainly derive value when
combined with the business as a going-concern, and generally do not have liquidation value.
Intangibles that are identifiable and transferable likely have higher recovery rates. Second,
industry specialists comment that transferable intangibles are mostly useful in the same
industry, and they are more valuable in industries with higher profitability.
   We measure these attributes at the industry level in 1997, as before. We measure the
industry-average share of goodwill in book intangibles in Compustat firms, as well as the
industry-average share of knowledge capital in total intangible stock estimated by Peters
and Taylor (2017) (which can proxy for the prevalence of transferable intangibles like patents
and technologies relative to organizational capital). We also measure industry-average ROA
(net income normalized by lagged book assets).
   Table IA10, Panel A, shows summary statistics of these industry-level attributes. Table
IA10, Panel B, shows their relationship with industry-average intangible recovery rate. As

                                                     67
predicted, intangible recovery rates are lower in industries with more goodwill and higher
in industries with more knowledge capital relative to organizational capital in intangible
stock. Intangible recovery rates are also weakly increasing in industry-average ROA. The
relationship with industry size is unclear like before.

                     Table IA10: Industry-Level Attributes of Intangibles
Panel A shows the mean, standard deviation, and quartiles of industry-level intangible attributes. The
attributes are calculated using Compustat data in 1997. Panel B shows the relationship between industry-
average book intangible recovery rate and intangible attributes in the industry.

                                     Panel A. Summary Statistics

              Variable                                 mean      p25       p50         p75   s.d.
              Goodwill share in book intangibles       0.587    0.497    0.596     0.702     0.201
              Knowledge capital share                  0.082    0.004    0.039     0.116     0.118
              Industry-average ROA                     -0.009   -0.028   0.002     0.036     0.075
              Industry size (sales share)              0.016     0.001   0.005     0.022     0.023


                    Panel B. Relationship with Book Intangible Recovery Rate

                                     Book Intangible Recovery Rate
                                                               (1)               (2)
                         Goodwill share in book intangibles      -0.442*     -0.483*
                                                                 (0.243)     (0.282)
                         Knowledge capital share                  0.302        0.359
                                                                 (0.228)     (0.217)
                         Industry-average ROA                     1.301        1.367
                                                                 (0.856)     (0.919)
                         Industry size (sales share)                          -0.721
                                                                             (1.126)
                         Constant                                0.424**     0.458**
                                                                 (0.185)     (0.220)
                         Obs                                        47          47
                         R2                                        0.11        0.11
                                 Robust standard errors in parentheses




                                                       68
IA6       Asset Specificity and Markup Cyclicality
   In this section, we present results that higher asset specificity also appears to be as-
sociated with more countercyclical markups. We use three different measures of firm-level
markups. The first one (muM ) follows De Loecker, Eeckhout, and Unger (2020) and uses
"Cost of Goods Sold" (COGS) for variable costs. The second one (muX ) comes from Traina
(2018) and Flynn, Gandhi, and Traina (2019), which also includes "Selling, General, and
Administrative Expenses" (SG&A) in variable costs. We thank James Traina for sharing
his data and code for these markup measures. The third one is sales over operating costs.
   Table IA11 shows the results. Panel A uses firm-level liquidation values (including PPE
and working capital, normalized by total book assets) constructed in Section 2.4. Panel
B instruments firm-level liquidation values using PPE recovery rates and inventory recov-
ery rates predicted by the physical attributes of PPE (Section 3.1) and inventory (Internet
Appendix Section IA4). It also uses the fraction of PPE that is firm-specific discussed in
Section 3.1. In all cases, we see that on average firm-level markup is not necessarily coun-
tercyclical. However, firm-level estimated markups are significantly counter-cyclical when
asset specificity is high (liquidation values are low), but pro-cyclical when asset specificity
is low (liquidation values are high). The results also hold for large firms only, or controlling
for proxies of financial constraints, to make sure liquidation values are not just capturing
the impact of financial constraints (Gilchrist, Schoenle, Sim, and Zakrajsek, 2017).




                                              69
                      Table IA11: Asset Specificity and Markup Cyclicality
Firm-level regressions where the left-hand-side variable is firm-level markup, measured following De Loecker
et al. (2020) in columns (1) to (3), following Traina (2018) and Flynn et al. (2019) in columns (4) to (6),
and using sales over operating costs in columns (7) to (9). Output gap is log real GDP minus log potential
GDP. Panel A uses firm-level liquidation values (including PPE and working capital), normalized by total
book assets. Panel B instruments firm-level liquidation values using PPE recovery rates predicted by the
physical attributes of PPE (Section 3.1) in columns (1), (4), and (7), and using inventory recovery rates
predicted by the physical attributes of inventory (Internet Appendix Section IA4) in columns (2), (5), and
(8). Panel B also uses the fraction of PPE that is firm-specific discussed in Section 3.2 in columns (3), (6),
and (9). Firm fixed effects and industry fixed effects are included in Panel A columns (3), (6), and (9), and
in Panel B. R2 does not include fixed effects. Sample period is 1980 to 2016.

                                            Panel A. Basic Results

                                                                       Firm-Level Markup
                                             muM                             muX                     Sales/Operating Costs
                                  (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)   (5)     (6)             (7)     (8)      (9)
Output gap                        -0.65     -2.52**   0.00    -0.19 -1.26   0.00  -0.67*** -1.74**   0.00
                                 (0.40)      (1.03)    (.)   (0.20) (0.75)   (.)   (0.24) (0.64)      (.)
Liquidation val                            -0.30*** -0.33***         -0.03  -0.02          0.33*** 0.44***
                                             (0.08)  (0.07)         (0.05) (0.03)           (0.04)  (0.04)
Output gap × Liquidation val                 5.92** 3.22**          3.52* 3.04***           3.84** 3.72***
                                             (2.84)  (1.52)         (1.80) (1.06)           (1.65)  (1.16)
Fixed effect                       N          N     Ind, Year          N       N       Ind, Year      N       N      Ind, Year
Obs                             104,442 96,139       95,062          104,688 96,264     95,193     145,446 134,056 132,695
R2                               0.01    0.02         0.02            0.05    0.05       0.01        0.26   0.28    0.08
                           Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by firm and time

                    Panel B. Liquidation Value Predicted by Physical Attributes

                                                                         Firm-Level Markup
                                                  muM                         muX          Sales/Operating Cost
                                           (1)     (2)         (3)      (4)    (5)    (6)   (7)    (8)     (9)
Output gap × Liquidation val              9.63** 4.91                 9.92*** 2.83*               8.36*** 4.01***
                                          (3.72) (3.41)                (2.03) (1.52)               (1.68) (1.44)
Output gap × Frac of PPE firm-spec                          -1.68                       -1.50**                     -1.41*
                                                           (1.38)                        (0.72)                     (0.77)
Fixed effect                                                               Industry, Year
Obs                                       95,062 93,930 97,912 95,193 94,061 98,091 132,695 131,446 137,109
R2                                                       0.01                 0.01                    0.06
                         Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by firm and time


    We also test the markup response to demand shocks from defense spending, for different
levels of asset specifciity, in the industry-level data from Nekarda and Ramey (2011). Table
IA12 shows the result for the industry-average markup using Compustat data as above, and
using the original markup measure in Nekarda and Ramey (2011). We also generally observe
that markup appears more countercyclical when asset specificity is high (liquidation values
are low).




                                                          70
                                       Table IA12: Asset Specificity and Markup Response to Defense Spending Shocks
     Industry-level annual regressions using data from Nekarda and Ramey (2011). The left-hand-side variable is industry-level markup, which is calculated as the
     (sales-weighted) industry average of firm-level markup following De Loecker et al. (2020) in columns (1) to (4), industry average of firm-level markup following
     Traina (2018); Flynn et al. (2019) in columns (5) to (8), and original average markup in Nekarda and Ramey (2011) Table 8 in columns (9) to (12). Liquidation value
     is the industry-average of firm-level liquidation value (including PPE and working capital, normalized by book assets). We also instrument the industry-average firm
     liquidation value using PPE recovery rates predicted by the physical attributes of PPE (Section 3.1) in columns (2), (6), and (10), and using inventory recovery rates
     predicted by the physical attributes of inventory (Internet Appendix Section IA4) in columns (3), (7), and (11). We also use the fraction of PPE that is firm-specific
     discussed in Section 3.2 in columns (4), (8), and (12). dly is annual growth of industry-level real output, instrumented by industry-level government demand from
     defense spending. Sample period is 1980 to the end of Nekarda and Ramey (2011) data.


                                                                                                   Markup
                                                         muM                                         muX                                            Original
                                        (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)       (5)        (6)      (7)             (8)       (9)      (10)         (11)      (12)
      dly                             0.003*    -0.027***    -0.025***   0.016**     0.000    -0.029***   -0.026***    0.012*      -0.258     0.259       0.213     -0.569
                                      (0.002)     (0.006)     (0.005)    (0.007)    (0.001)    (0.004)      (0.003)    (0.006)    (0.170)   (0.451)     (0.371)    (0.501)
      dly × Ind avg liq val                      0.101***    0.094***                         0.091***     0.081***                          -1.716      -1.573
                                                  (0.022)     (0.018)                          (0.017)      (0.013)                         (1.708)     (1.431)
      dly × Frac of PPE firm-spec                                        -0.052**                                     -0.047**                                      1.239




71
                                                                          (0.021)                                      (0.020)                                     (1.550)

      Liqval IV                          N        PPE        Inventory       /        N         PPE       Inventory       /         N        PPE       Inventory     /
      Fixed effect                                                                              Industry, Year
                                                         Standard errors in parentheses, clustered by industry and time
