                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION IN EMERGING ECONOMIES

                                        Andres Drenik
                                         Diego Perez

                                     Working Paper 27647
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27647


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2020




A previous version of this paper circulated under the title "Pricing in Multiple Currencies in
Domestic Markets." We thank Ariel Burstein, Giancarlo Corsetti, Javier Cravino, Oleg Itskhoki,
Matteo Maggiori, Dmitry Mukhin, Brent Neiman, and seminar participants at Columbia
University, the 2017 SED Meetings, NBER Summer Institute (IFM and EFMB), Minnesota
Workshop in Macroeconomic Theory, NYU, Chicago Booth International Macro-Finance
Conference, the 2018 AEA Meetings, and Harvard University for valuable comments, and the
Economics Department at Universidad de la Republica (Uruguay) for sharing the data. We also
thank Luigi Caloi, Rafael Guntin, Gustavo Pereira, and Emilio Zaratiegui for excellent research
assistance. Financial support from ISERP (Columbia University) is gratefully acknowledged. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.¸

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Andres Drenik and Diego Perez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Domestic Price Dollarization in Emerging Economies
Andres Drenik and Diego Perez
NBER Working Paper No. 27647
August 2020
JEL No. E31,F41

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper studies the dollarization of prices in retail markets of emerging economies. We
develop a model of the firm's optimal currency choice in retail markets in inflationary economies.
We derive theoretical predictions regarding the optimality of dollar pricing, and test them using
data from the largest e-trade platform in Latin America. Across countries, price dollarization is
positively correlated with asset dollarization and inflation, and negatively correlated with
exchange rate volatility. At the micro level, larger sellers are more likely to price in dollars, and
more tradeable goods are more likely to be posted in dollars. We then show that prices are sticky,
and hence the currency of prices determines the short-run reaction of both prices and quantities to
a nominal exchange rate shock.


Andres Drenik
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
ad3376@columbia.edu

Diego Perez
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
diego.perez@nyu.edu
                              DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                     1

                                      1. Introduction

  The currency in which prices are denominated is relevant for the macroeconomy. First,
since prices are rigid in the short-run, the currency of prices affects the transmission of
nominal exchange rate shocks to domestic prices and economic activity. Second, a large
share of prices set in foreign currency undermines the value of the local currency as a unit of
account and poses challenges to the conduct of monetary policy. Based on the predominance
of the use of the local currency in the domestic markets of advanced economies, most of the
literature on this topic focuses on the currency of invoicing in international trade. However,
with the exception of anecdotal evidence, there has not been any systematic analysis of
whether currency choice is an active margin in domestic markets of emerging economies. In
this paper, we develop a theoretical framework to study the currency choice of prices in retail
markets, and conduct an empirical study, guided by theory, of the role of dollar pricing in
domestic markets of emerging economies.
  In this paper, we develop a tractable model of the optimal choice of currency of prices
for a firm operating in a domestic retail market. We derive analytical predictions of how
the choice of currency is affected by the domestic inflation rate, exchange rate volatility,
and the demand and cost structure. We then conduct an empirical study of currency choice
in the domestic markets of various Latin American economies by analyzing novel high-
frequency data from the largest e-trade platform in Latin America. We first show that a
significant fraction of prices in domestic markets is set in US dollars, and that there is large
heterogeneity in the use of the dollar to set prices across countries. Consistent with the
model's predictions, we show that countries with more dollar pricing are countries that have
high levels of households' asset dollarization, lower exchange rate volatility, and, to a lesser
extent, higher inflation. Within each country, we show that larger sellers are more likely to
price in dollars, and more tradeable goods are more likely to be posted in dollars. We also
use a sufficient-statistic type-of-approach to show that observed currency choices are in line
with the theoretical predictions.
  We then argue that the currency of prices matters for the macroeconomy. We first doc-
ument that our findings are relevant for broader aggregates that go beyond online markets,
such as the dynamics of the CPI. Second, we show that the currency of prices determines the
short-run reaction of prices and quantities to a nominal exchange rate shock. This implies
that the currency choice of prices has implications for the allocative effects of exchange rate
movements.
                                 DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                  2

  The paper starts off with a model of the currency and price choices of firms in retail
markets. The framework builds on the model of Gopinath, Itskhoki, and Rigobon (2010),
and incorporates two key departures. First, it considers the problem of a firm operating
in the retail market. Second, it extends the analysis to economies with inflation. In the
model, the firm chooses the currency so that the evolution of its sticky preset price tracks
the optimal flexible price in the closest possible way. The firm prices in foreign currency when
the desired medium-run pass-through is above a cutoff level that depends on the properties of
inflation and the nominal exchange rate. We show that dollar pricing is more attractive when
inflation is higher, since dollar pricing avoids the erosion of the real value of local currency
prices caused by inflation, and less attractive when the exchange rate is more volatile. We
also show that the currency choice is affected by the demand for the good and, in particular,
dollar pricing is more likely when there is a larger share of the consumer's wealth that is
denominated in dollars. Finally, we show that dollar pricing is optimal for goods whose costs,
measured in local currency, co-move more strongly with the exchange rate. Therefore, goods
that are more tradable and whose input prices have a higher exchange rate pass-through, as
well as goods sold by firms that have more dollar-denominated debt, are more likely to be
priced in dollars.
  We then conduct an empirical study of the currency choice in the domestic markets of
various Latin American economies by analyzing novel high-frequency data from the largest
e-trade platform in Latin America. We also document that our findings are relevant for
broader aggregates that go beyond online markets. These data contain various features that
make it appropriate for our analysis. First, unlike official CPI data, it contains the currency
of denomination of prices. Second, the data allow for a comparable analysis across countries
and markets. Third, unlike most previously studied datasets, these data contain information
on prices and quantities sold.
  We begin the empirical work by documenting aggregate levels of price dollarization across
countries. The data show that, on average, the share of prices in dollars is 24% for goods,
27% for vehicles, and 43% for real estate units. These figures mask significant heterogeneity
across countries. Motivated by the theory, we analyze the cross-country relationship between
price dollarization, households' asset dollarization, inflation and exchange rate volatility.
Consistent with the model's predictions, price dollarization is positively correlated with
asset dollarization. That is, countries with a larger share of bank deposits in dollars tend
to have a larger share of prices set in dollars. Additionally, we find a negative cross-country
                                   DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                           3

correlation of price dollarization and nominal exchange rate volatility, and a positive, albeit
mild, correlation of price dollarization with past inflation. We also find a positive correlation
between price dollarization and the pass-through of exchange rate to import prices, and trade
openness.
  We then examine the empirical determinants of the currency choice of prices within coun-
tries. According to the theory, both goods' and firms' characteristics can be relevant de-
terminants of the currency choice. We perform a variance decomposition analysis of the
currency of prices, and find that the characteristics of both sellers and goods offered for
sale account for an important fraction of the observed variation in the currency of prices.
Next, we test two additional predictions of the theory. First, we assess whether the degree
of tradeability of goods is relevant in determining the currency choice of prices. For this, we
assign a tradeability index to each listing of goods by combining official sectoral trade and
output data from Argentina and Uruguay. Consistent with the theory, we find that goods
that are more tradeable are indeed more likely to be priced in dollars.
  Second, the model also predicts a relationship between the currency of prices and the firms'
currency of debt. Data limitations impede us to test this relationship directly. However,
previous literature has found a robust positive relationship between firms' size and the share
of debt in dollars. We therefore indirectly test the model's prediction by analyzing the
relationship between price dollarization and firms' size. We find that larger sellers--measured
by their revenues--are more likely to set prices in dollars. In particular, small sellers--those
with revenues below the 33rd percentile--price goods almost exclusively in local currency,
regardless of the country. Additionally, most sellers price their goods in a unique currency,
and multi-currency sellers are only common among large sellers and/or sellers of vehicles or
real estate units.
  In the last part of the paper, we study the relationship between currency choice of prices
and exchange rate pass-through. First, we explore the implications of the currency of de-
nomination of prices for the short-run transmission of nominal exchange rate shocks. In
particular, we estimate short-run pass-through regressions of the nominal exchange rate to
prices.1 Consistent with findings from the literature, we find that the currency of prices


  1In   the open economy literature, the label "pass-through" is most commonly used to refer to how domestic
prices of imports vary in response to movements in the exchange rate. In this paper we extend this label
to refer to how prices and quantities sold of various types of goods vary in response to movements in the
exchange rate.
                               DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                     4

determines the entirety of the pass-through in the short run. A nominal exchange rate de-
preciation triggers an increase in the relative price of goods posted in dollars (expressed
in the local currency) relative to those in local currency of the same magnitude. Second,
we estimate currency-specific pass-through conditional on a price change, which constitutes
an empirical measure of medium-run pass-through. According to our theory, dollar (local
currency) prices should have a medium-run pass-through that is higher (lower) than a cut-
off that depends on inflation and exchange rate volatility. We test this prediction and find
that the model correctly predicts currency choice in most markets and more disaggregated
categories.
  We further explore whether nominal exchange rate shocks differentially affect quantities
sold through their effect on prices. More specifically, we estimate similar short-run pass-
through regressions on quantities sold to estimate the differential effects of nominal exchange
rate shocks on quantities sold of goods posted in dollars relative to similar goods that are
posted in local currency. For example, for the case of Uruguay, we find that a depreciation of
the nominal exchange rate of 10% has an associated decrease in the quantities sold of goods
posted in dollars relative to goods posted in local currency of 15% two months after the
devaluation. Thus, we argue that the currency choice of prices is relevant for understanding
the transmission of nominal exchange rate shocks to allocations in the economy. These
findings contribute to the empirical literature on pass-through that has successfully shown
that the currency choice of prices is relevant for understanding the pass-through of nominal
exchange rate to prices and quantities at the border, but is more silent regarding its allocative
effects in domestic markets.
  Finally, we demonstrate that our findings are relevant for broader aggregates of the econ-
omy and go beyond the workings of the online marketplace. To do so, we investigate whether
the share of prices in dollars that we measure in the data from the online platform correlates
with the degree of pass-through estimated on the official CPI data. We study this relation-
ship across countries and also within one country across narrow types of goods. First, we
document that countries with larger levels of dollarization­as measured by aggregate data
from the online platform­have higher degrees of pass-through to aggregate official CPI data
at all horizons. This positive cross-country relationship holds if we separately analyze broad
markets of goods such as vehicles, real estate, and other consumer goods. Second, we perform
a similar analysis with disaggregated CPI data from Uruguay. We compute good-specific
degrees of pass-through, and good-specific shares of prices posted in dollars using data from
                              DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                     5

the online platform. We then show that there is a steep relationship between the degree
of pass-through and the share of price dollarization at the good level, with more dollarized
goods having larger pass-through on impact and over longer horizons.

Related Literature.
  Our paper is related to the growing literature that studies the macroeconomic effects of the
currency of denomination of prices in international markets, and the relationship between
prices and exchange rates. Burstein and Gopinath (2014) provide a survey of recent advances
in this topic. A large theoretical and empirical literature has focused on the determinants
of firms' currency choice of international prices, and the implications for the pass-through of
exchange rate shocks to prices of internationally traded goods (see, for example, Engel, 2006;
Goldberg and Tille, 2008; Gopinath et al., 2010; Goldberg and Tille, 2016; Mukhin, 2018;
Corsetti, Crowley, and Han, 2018). Recent contemporaneous work has also shown that the
currency choice in border prices determines the allocative effects of exchange rate shocks (see,
Cravino, 2018; Auer, Burstein, and Lein, 2019; Amiti, Itskhoki, and Konings, 2019; Corsetti,
Crowley, Han, and Song, 2019). Another set of papers have analyzed the pass-through of
exchange rate shocks to domestic prices, integrating the analysis of border and retail pricing
theoretically (see, for example, Burstein, Neves, and Rebelo, 2003; Burstein, Eichenbaum,
and Rebelo, 2005; Corsetti and Dedola, 2005; Burstein, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo, 2007;
Corsetti, Dedola, and Leduc, 2009), and empirically (see, for example, Auer et al., 2019).
We contribute to this literature along two dimensions. First, we document for the first time
that currency choice is an active margin when setting prices in domestic markets in emerging
economies, and that there is selection into dollar pricing as predicted by our theory. Second,
we show that this margin is relevant for the transmission of exchange rate shocks to both
prices and allocations in retail markets.
  Our paper is also related to the literature that studies financial dollarization in emerging
economies. Matsuyama, Kiyotaki, and Matsui (1993) and Uribe (1997) study the use of
an external currency as a means of payment. Other papers have studied the implications
of adopting the use of an external currency (full dollarization) on monetary credibility and
default risk (Barro and Gordon, 1983; Alesina and Barro, 2002; Arellano and Heathcote,
2010), and on the stability of the banking system (Gale and Vives, 2002). Another strand of
the literature studies conditions under which dollarization emerges endogenously, by stressing
the usefulness of dollar contracts due to their hedging properties (Ize and Levy Yeyati, 2003;
Rappoport, 2009) and the role of domestic policy risk (Drenik, Kirpalani, and Perez, 2018).
                                DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                 6

We contribute to this literature by documenting the existence of domestic price dollarization,
which is an understudied feature of dollarization, and showing how it is strongly linked to
the use of dollar as a store of value.
  Finally, our paper is also related to a recent growing literature on the global role of
the dollar that has studied the predominance of the dollar in denominating international
securities and international prices (see, for example, Farhi and Maggiori, 2017; Gopinath and
Stein, 2018; Maggiori, Neiman, and Schreger, 2019; Gopinath, Boz, Casas, Diez, Gourinchas,
and Plagborg-Møller, 2018; Egorov and Mukhin, 2020). We contribute to this literature by
documenting that the dollar is also prevalent as a unit of account of domestic prices in
emerging economies.
  The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the model and derives its testable
implications. Section 3 describes the data used in the main analysis. Section 4 conducts an
analysis of the currency denomination of prices across and within countries, and tests the
theoretical predictions of the model. Section 5 relates currency choice with exchange rate
pass-through to prices and quantities. Section 6 argues that currency choice is relevant for
the macroeconomy, and Section 7 concludes.


                   2. A Model of Domestic Price Dollarization

  In this Section, we develop a theoretical model of a firm's currency and price choices.
The model builds on the work of Gopinath et al. (2018), and generalizes it to study the
problem of firms that operate in retail markets in inflationary economies. The objective of
the theoretical analysis is to serve as a guide for the empirical analysis and to derive a set
of predictions that we later test in the data. In Appendix A, we provide further details on
the derivations of the model.
  We study the partial-equilibrium problem of a single domestic retailer that is choosing the
currency of denomination and price of its goods to maximize profits in a monopolistically-
competitive market. We first describe the demand structure that the firm faces and then
analyze the firm's problem.
  Demand for goods ­ Consider a continuum of households that have preferences over a
constant-elasticity-of-substitution consumption aggregator over different varieties. A house-
hold's demand for each good variety i at time t is given by
                                                            -
                                            Wt      Pit
                                    Cit =                       ,                         (1)
                                            Ptcpi   Ptcpi
                                  DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                              7
                                                              1
where Pit is the price of good i, Ptcpi =            1-
                                                   Pit  di   1-
                                                                      is the ideal price index, and Wt is the
household's wealth or income, all expressed in local currency.
  Firm's technology ­ Firm i produces good variety i and has access to the following pro-
                                                                 T       N
duction technology that uses tradable and non-tradable inputs, Yit and Yit , respectively, to
produce output Yit :

                                                    T        N   1- 
                                       Yit =      Yit      Yit              ,

where 0 <  < 1 is the share of tradable input used in production, and 0 <   1 governs
the degree of decreasing returns to scale. We introduce decreasing returns to scale as a
simple way to make optimal prices respond to demand shifters. We interpret the tradable
and non-tradable inputs used in production in a broad way. For example, for the case of
imported goods, which constitute a significant fraction of the goods analyzed in the dataset,
the tradable input would correspond to the good purchased at the border, and the non-
tradable input would correspond to local services associated with the retail activity (e.g.,
distribution, advertising and storage services). As we specify below, the main difference
between these two inputs is how their prices, PtT and PtN , respectively, co-move with the
exchange rate.
  We assume that firms have to pay a fraction  of their factors of production before pro-
duction takes place, and can finance these production costs at an interest rate it .2 We
introduce working capital to connect a firm's price decisions with its financial decisions.
Cost minimization yields the following cost function for producing Yit goods
                                                                 1-
                                       PtT          PtN                 1/
                          C (Yit ) =                                  Yit       (1 + it ) .              (2)
                                                  (1 -  )

Costs are increasing in the prices of both intermediate inputs, the quantity produced due to
decreasing returns to scale, and borrowing costs. We formalize and solve the cost minimiza-
tion problem in Appendix A. The flow profits of a firm are given by

                                         t = Pit Cit - C (Cit ),

  2The   timing assumption is that firms purchase their factors after observing shocks, and a fraction  of
them needs to be paid before production takes place. This requires firms to finance that share of factor
payments with intra-period loans that entail an interest rate of it . This timing assumption is commonly
used in models that assume the presence of working capital (e.g., Neumeyer and Perri, 2005; Jermann and
Quadrini, 2012).
                                   DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                            8

where used the equilibrium condition Yit = Cit . Firms are monopolistically competitive and
take into account the effect of their price choices on demand. It will be useful to compute
the price that maximizes flow profits given demand (1) and costs (2), which is given by
                                                                            1 
                        T          N     1-                       - 1/ -1     1- + 

    ~                 Pt         Pt                   Wt     1
   Pit =                                    (1 + it )                               . (3)
             ( - 1)            (1 -  )                Ptcpi Ptcpi

Given our demand structure, the optimal flexible price is non-decreasing in the prices of
inputs, the interest rate and the wealth of households.
  Firm's price setting problem ­ We consider the problem of a firm that faces nominal rigidi-
ties `
     a la Calvo (1983) and can choose to denominate its prices in local currency or foreign
currency (the US dollar, in our setting). The firm can adjust its price and the currency of
denomination of its price each period with an exogenous probability (1 - ). Henceforth, we
use small letters to denote the log of a variable.
  The value of a firm that has a log price pL in local currency is given by

                     VLt (pL ) = t (pL ) + Et [VLt+1 (pL )] +  (1 - ) Et [Vt+1 ] ,                       (4)

where 0 <  < 1 is the discount factor, VLt+1 (pL ) is the firm's continuation value if the firm
cannot adjust its price in the next period, and Vt+1 is the continuation value if the firm can
adjust the price and currency.3 Similarly, the value of a firm that set a log price pF in foreign
currency is given by

              VF t (pF ) = t (pF + et ) + Et [VF t+1 (pF + et+1 )] +  (1 - ) Et [Vt+1 ] ,                (5)

where et is the log of the exchange rate, expressed as units of domestic currency per foreign
currency.
  We can also define the optimal prices in local and foreign currency, when firms have the
opportunity to adjust their prices, as

                                         pct = arg max Vct (pct ),                                       (6)

for c = L, F . Finally, the firm's value of resetting its price and currency is given by Vt =
max {VLt (pLt ) , VF t (pF t )}.
  3Given   the symmetry between firms, we suppress the dependence of values and prices on i. Additionally,
we make explicit the dependence of profits, t (p), on the log of the price expressed in local currency and on
the period of time t. The subindex t indicates the dependence of the value functions on all the additional
relevant information, other than the price.
                                 DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                    9

  Exogenous processes ­ Before characterizing optimal choices, we make explicit assumptions
about the process of the exchange rate and about how costs and demand co-move with it.
We assume that the log of the exchange rate follows a random walk with drift

                                      et+1 = et + µ +   et+1 ,                               (7)

where    et   is white noise, and µ  0. This assumption is empirically relevant for the set of
emerging economies we analyze, since all of them exhibit higher rates of inflation than the
US and a positive drift in the nominal exchange rate vis-a-vis the US dollar.
  We assume that the log of the ideal price index, and the prices of tradable and non-tradable
inputs, follow

                                   pj                        j
                                    t = j et + (1 - j ) µt + t ,

                                                                                             j
where 0  j  1 is the pass-through of exchange rate fluctuations to price j , and             t   is
white noise, for j = {cpi, T, N }. According to this assumption, all prices grow at the rate
µ, implying that µ is both the expected depreciation and inflation rate. We further assume
that T > N , or equivalently, that the exchange rate pass-through to the price of tradable
inputs is larger than the pass-through to the price of non-tradable inputs. This assumption
is motivated by the fact that most of the imports of these countries are denominated in US
dollars (Gopinath, 2016), whereas on the other hand, non-tradable services are often quoted
in local currency (see Burstein et al., 2005, for supporting evidence of this assumption).
  We consider the case in which firms can finance working capital with a combination of
local and foreign currency debt. This implies that the firm's interest rate is given by

                                  it =  iF                L
                                         t + et + (1 -  )it ,


where et is the depreciation rate; iL      F
                                    t and it are the nominal interest rates in local and

foreign currency, respectively, which, for simplicity, we assume to be white noise; and  is
the share of debt denominated in foreign currency.
  Finally, we assume that a fraction of the households' wealth/income is denominated in
foreign currency. In particular, we assume that the log of households' wealth, expressed in
local currency, is given by
                                                                 w
                                  wt = w et + (1 - w ) µt +      t ,

                                                                                    w
where 0  w  1 is the share of wealth denominated in foreign currency, and           t   is white
noise.
                                DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                        10

  Optimal currency and price choices ­ We now characterize the optimal price and currency
choices. The following proposition generalizes familiar results on price and currency choices
to inflationary settings.

Proposition 1. Up to a first order approximation, the optimal prices in local and foreign
currency satisfy
                                                                
                                     pLt - (pF t + et ) = µ        .
                                                              1 - 
Additionally, up to a second order approximation, the difference in the value of pricing in
local and foreign currencies is given by

             Lt  VLt (pLt ) - VF t (pF t )
                                                        2
                            s        2      
                         ()     -µ             -s           + Covt (et+s , et+s - 2~
                                                                                   pt+s ) .
                   s=0
                                          1 - 
Thus, a firm chooses to set prices in local currency if and only if
                                                      
    1            1         µ2                     2                   Covt (et+s , p
                                                                                   ~t+s )
        1-                               > (1 - )           ()s-1 s                        MRPT.   (8)
    2         1 -        Var ( e )                    s=1
                                                                        Vart (et+s )

Proof. See Appendix A.

  The first result characterizes the optimal choice of prices in both currencies. When there
is positive inflation (µ > 0), the reset price in local currency is higher than that in foreign
currency. The reason is that inflation erodes the real value of nominal prices in local currency,
but not the value of prices in foreign currency. This is because the local currency value of
foreign currency prices increases with the exchange rate, which on average depreciates at
the rate of inflation. Firms take this into account and set higher prices in local currency
(compared to those in foreign currency) so that, on average, the real value of the price is not
too distant from the optimal flexible price during the period of price stickiness.
  The second result states that the currency choice depends on an inflation and a covariance
component, denoted as the medium-run pass-through (MRPT). The inflation component is
new to the analysis, whereas the MRPT component is already known from the literature
and is still present in our extended setting. The firm will choose to set prices in foreign
currency if the desired MRPT is greater than a cutoff value that is decreasing in inflation.
This implies that higher inflation rates (or higher deflation rates) makes foreign currency
pricing more attractive. The reason is that foreign currency pricing is a way of indexing
prices to inflation. The higher the inflation rate, the larger the erosion of local currency
                              DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                   11

prices relative to foreign currency prices, and the larger the incentives to choose the foreign
currency. According to the covariance component, foreign currency pricing is more attractive
when the optimal flexible price (3) covaries positively with the exchange rate. When µ = 0,
we recover the results in Gopinath et al. (2010), whereby currency choice is exclusively
determined by desired medium-run pass-through being greater or lower than one half.
  To test the main prediction of the theory, one needs to estimate M RP T . One of the main
insights of Gopinath et al. (2010) is to show that there exists a sufficient statistic for MRPT
that only requires available data. We show that this sufficient statistic is still valid in our
modified setup. Let  p
                     ¯t denote the change of a price (in local currency) between time t and
the time of the last adjustment t -  . Similarly, let et denote the change in the nominal
exchange rate between time t and t - 1.

Proposition 2. A regression of  p
                                ¯t on et provides a consistent estimate of MRPT.

Proof. See Appendix A.

  Thus, a broad way to test the prediction of the model for domestic currency choice is to
estimate MRPT for goods priced in local and foreign currency, and compare them with the
cutoff that depends on the discount factor, and other observable data. We should expect to
estimate a larger MRPT for goods priced in foreign currency.
  One drawback of the sufficient statistic approach is that it does not allow us to understand
how different mechanisms affect MRPT. Therefore, we also perform comparative statics
analysis. Results are summarized in the following proposition.

Proposition 3. All other things equal, firms are more likely to choose to price in foreign
currency when:
                                       L
   (1) the inflation rate is higher:   µ
                                            0 when µ > 0,
   (2) the variance of exchange rate shocks is lower,
                                                            L
   (3) the dollarization of households' assets is higher:   w
                                                                 0,
                                                                          L
   (4) the exchange rate pass-through of the tradable inputs is larger:   T
                                                                               0,
                                                 L
   (5) the share of tradable inputs is larger:   
                                                      0,
                                                     L
   (6) the dollarization of firms' debt is higher:   
                                                          0.

Proof. See Appendix A.

  The first result follows from the discussion above on the role of inflation on currency
choice. According to the second result, dollar pricing is more likely when the variance of
                              DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                     12

exchange rate shocks is lower. As equation (8) shows, firms base their currency choice on the
indexation features of each currency and the desired MRPT. Since the latter driver affects
currency choice as long as exchange rates are volatile, the former driver dominates when the
variance of exchange rate shocks becomes low enough and firms choose to price in foreign
currency. For example, consider the limiting case in which the variance of the exchange rate
is zero. In this case, all firms prefer the foreign currency because of its indexation benefits
that maintain the real value of prices. As the variance of the exchange rate increases, two
possibilities arise. First, if desired MRPT is high, the higher variance of the exchange rate
reinforces the preference for foreign currency. Second, if desired MRPT is low, the higher
variance of the exchange rate makes firms value more the local currency, in which case firms'
optimal choice eventually changes from foreign to local currency if the variance becomes
large enough.
  The remaining predictions regard how structural parameters affect currency choice through
their effects on desired MRPT. The third result states that dollar pricing is more likely
when there is larger dollarization of households' wealth. When there is larger households'
asset dollarization, exchange rate fluctuations precipitate wealth revaluations that shift the
demand for consumer goods. Due to the presence of decreasing returns to scale, firms would
like to adjust prices in response to movements in demand, and setting prices in dollars is
a way of doing so. The fourth result states that goods whose tradable input prices have a
higher exchange rate pass-through are more likely to be priced in dollars. This is because
the cost of those goods co-varies more strongly with the exchange rate and dollar pricing is
a way of making the price adjust to these fluctuations in costs. A related implication is the
fifth result, which states that more tradable goods are more likely to be priced in dollars.
This is due to the assumption that the exchange pass-through is larger for tradable inputs
than it is for non-tradable inputs. In various cases, the tradable input corresponds to the
good purchased at the border, whose price is commonly set in dollars and therefore co-moves
strongly with the exchange rate. Finally, firms with more dollarized debt are more likely
to set dollar prices, since exchange rate fluctuations affect more the financial component of
their costs, and firms would like to adjust their prices in response to costs movements.
  In the next sections, we test all the predictions of the theory, either directly or indirectly,
using both cross-country micro- and macro-level data.
                                   DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                  13

                       3. Data Description and Representativeness

3.1. Data Description
  The main dataset used in our analysis of the currency of denomination of prices comes
from the leading e-trade platform in Latin America: Mercado Libre (www.mercadolibre.com ).
The company was founded in 1999, currently operates in multiple countries, and has more
than 190 million users. In 2017, the platform sold a combined gross merchandise value of
USD 11.8 billion (26% of all e-commerce sales in Latin America).4
  Buyers and sellers transact on the platform as follows. To list goods on the platform,
sellers create a listing that includes a title describing the good, a picture and more detailed
description of the good, the selling price, and other characteristics of the good. Buyers can
find goods by either searching for the good by name or by navigating a category tree that
categorizes goods in different groups. Figure B.1 shows an example of what the platform
displays when a potential buyer searchers for a "Playstation 4" in Mercado Libre-Uruguay.
Once a buyer locates a good of interest, she can click on the listing and obtain more infor-
mation about the good. Figure B.2 shows how the listing is displayed to a potential buyer.
Finally, the buyer decides whether to make the purchase. A more detailed description of
the relevance of Mercado Libre in the online market in Latin America, how the platform
operates, and how payments are made can be found in Appendix C.1.
  The data collection process is facilitated by the provision of APIs by the platform, which
is a set of codes that can be used to download data directly from their servers. A description
of the data collection process is provided in Appendix C.2. At the listing level, we store daily
information on the start and end dates of the listing, seller identifiers, the title of the listing
describing the good, the unit price before taxes, the currency of denomination of prices, and
the quantities sold.
  The platform asks sellers to categorize the good being sold according to a pre-specified
set of choices. Each good is placed within a category tree that has multiple levels. The
first level contains goods defined broadly, such as computers, electronics, and health/beauty.
At the other extreme, the narrowest categories contain very detailed goods, such as an
iPhone X 32GB. Since the classification system on the platform is not standard, it is useful
to compare it to other product classifications, such as the 2018 US Harmonized System
(HS). In Table B.1, we show that for a subsample of relevant products, the platform's
classification at level 3 is comparable to, or even more specific than, the HS classification
  4See   Retail e-commerce sales in Latin America from Statista.
                                   DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                           14

used in international trade at 6 or 8 digits. Thus, the category tree at level 3 contains
goods that are narrowly defined.5 From our previous example shown in Figure B.2, the
code that stores the data would store information on the price of the good (USD569), the
description of the product ("Playstation 4 - 1 Tera (...)"), quantities sold (117), the category
tree (Videogames>PlayStation>PS4>Game System), and other variables. Before using the
data, we clean it in various dimensions to render it suitable for analysis. We provide details
of the cleaning procedure in Appendix C.3.
  The two most novel pieces of information are the currency of denomination of prices and
quantities sold. In most countries, sellers can choose between two currencies: the local
currency and the US dollar. With the rare exception of anecdotal evidence, to the best
of our knowledge this is the first paper to include data on currency choice for goods sold
domestically. In addition, we have high-frequency data on quantities sold, which is not
common in datasets from online markets. Having this information allows us to demonstrate
that currency choice not only matters for prices, but also for quantities.
  There are several benefits of using data from this platform. First, it contains data from
multiple countries and types of goods organized in a consistent way. The platform operates
in all major countries in Latin America. Our sample of countries varies depending on the
type of analysis we pursue. For the cross-country analysis we use data from 15 countries,
namely Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic,
Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, and Uruguay.6 For
the within-country analysis of price dollarization we study a subset of these countries. In
Appendix C.4 we justify the choice of sample of countries for each exercise. The second
benefit of the data is that in terms of coverage, the range of goods offered for sale and
transacted on this platform is wide. In addition to being a marketplace for consumer goods,
the platform expanded into the real estate and vehicles market by allowing users to list online
  5We   acknowledge that relative to previous literature that analyzes prices (e.g., Kaplan and Menzio, 2015;
Gorodnichenko and Talavera, 2017), we do not rely on product identifiers such as a universal product code
(UPC). Although sellers have the option to include this information, on average less than 10% of listings
do so. However, this is not a major concern. For part of the analysis, we exploit variation in prices and
quantities within the listing over time. The main advantage is that we can analyze a broader basket of goods
relative to previous literature.
   6In the cases of Brazil, Chile and Colombia, price dollarization is zero due to explicit regulation. For

example, in Brazil and Colombia the use of foreign currency is limited by the fact that residents cannot open
bank accounts denominated in foreign currency. We include these countries in the cross-country analysis in
Sections 4 and 6.
                                   DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                           15

ads.7 Thus, the results we present come from three broad markets and show that the facts
are not specific to a narrow group of goods.
  The third benefit of the data is the high-frequency nature of the data collection process.
Although our time span only covers March-October 2018, our data are collected on a daily
basis. This allows us to provide cleaner evidence on the effects of currency choices on the
response to high-frequency shocks like those that affect the exchange rate. Additionally, the
relatively short time span is not a major concern, since the sample period contains episodes
of medium and large devaluations, which we exploit in our empirical analysis.
  In addition to these data, our analysis makes use of historical data from the platform
covering the 2003-2012 period. This dataset includes a similar set of variables, but it records
information only when the listing is created or a transaction is made, and is only available for
Argentina and Uruguay. We use the historical data to analyze the relationship of tradeability
of goods and the currency of their prices in Section 4.2. We also complement the analysis with
data on aggregate and disaggregated price indices, and sectoral trade and value added across
all major Latin American countries. A description of these data is included in Appendices
C.5 and C.6. When analyzing the representativeness of the data and the importance of price
dollarization for broader aggregates at the micro level we put the focus on Uruguay. This
choice is driven by the fact that Uruguay is our flagship example of price dollarization in
domestic markets.

3.2. Summary Statistics
  Tables B.2-B.4 and Figure B.3 in the Appendix present descriptive statistics of the data.
Here, we provide a summary of the most relevant features of the platform. Overall, we have
data for 43.7 million listings and 3.5 million sellers. Among those countries that display some
degree of price dollarization, the biggest markets are Argentina, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay, and
the Dominican Republic.8 First, we provide summary statistics for sellers. On average,
sellers have 4.8 years of experience using the platform. In terms of the historical number of
transactions, sellers made on average 66 sales (137 when conditioning on making at least one
  7Unlike   the case of all other consumer goods, transactions of real estate and vehicles do not take place
within the platform. Each listing includes information about the property/vehicle (similar to the information
we have for the goods market) and contact information of the seller. These services are similar to those
provided by Zillow and Autotrader in the US.
   8Given the size of the dataset, we took a random sample in which the sampling unit is the seller (the size

of the random sample in each country is shown in Table B.2). After taking the random sample, we end up
with 434 million listing-day observations across all markets and countries.
                                     DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                             16

sale). During our window of observation, sellers had on average 7 active listings and made
7.5 sales (34 when conditioning on making at least one sale). Median revenue conditional on
having positive sales is USD4,600 (the highest percentiles of revenues correspond to sales in
the real estate and vehicles markets).
  One concern might be that most sellers/listings are dormant. However, we find that listings
are concentrated among active sellers: more than 75% of all listings in the goods market
belong to sellers that had at least 25 sales during the window of observation (less than 10% of
listings belong to sellers without sales). In addition, the platform gives special attention to a
subset of sellers: official stores. Not only do these sellers conform to the standard definition
of a firm, but they are also well-known brands/firms: Adidas, Dell, Levi's, Samsung, and
Walmart.9 Based on statistics from the platform (Mercado Libre Business Overview 2018 ),
21% of gross merchandise value is sold by large retailers/sellers, 61% by small and medium
enterprises, and only 18% by "hobby" sellers of used goods (which we exclude from our
analysis).
  Next, we provide descriptive statistics for the types of goods sold on the platform grouped
in 17 broad categories of goods. In the goods market, average unit prices range from USD44
in Clothing to USD330 in Cameras and accessories. In addition, there are the real estate
and vehicles markets, in which the average listed prices are USD161,400 and USD10,200,
respectively. For part of the analysis, we rely on the categorization of goods at level 3. In
general, the set of goods sold on the platform is tilted toward durables. Some examples
of the most common groups of goods at level 3 within each main category from Uruguay
are: portable speakers, SD memories, Playstation 4, electric guitars, sneakers for men, hard
drives. Additional summary statistics are provided in Appendix C.1.

3.3. Data Representativeness
  We analyze the relevance of goods that are available for sale on the platform (see Appendix
D for details). We do this by comparing data from the online platform with representative
microdata from the Uruguayan households consumption survey (Encuesta Nacional de Gas-
tos e Ingresos de los Hogares ). We find that the online platform has broad and relevant
coverage: goods that are traded on the platform account for 31% of the total consumption

  9In   addition, these official stores include large locally known retailers in each country. As an example, the
list of official stores in Uruguay can be accessed here . The reason these brands sell through the platform is
that e-commerce is not as well developed in Latin America as it is in other developed economies, and the
platform provides all of the infrastructure (including payment and shipping services) in a single platform.
                                    DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                                 17

basket. However, goods traded on the platform are heavily concentrated in certain categories
of the consumption basket, such as apparel, furniture, and home appliances. On the other
hand, other relevant consumption categories, such as food and services, are not offered on
the platform.
  In addition, in another paper (Drenik and Perez, 2019), we use the historical data from the
platform to show that the implicit inflation rate constructed from prices from the online data
closely tracks the aggregate unofficial inflation in Argentina for the period 2008-12. Finally,
Table D2 in the Appendix includes a list of other relevant websites in Latin America, where
dollar pricing can be found.

                       4. Stylized Facts about Price Dollarization

  In this section, we document the relevance of dollar pricing in the domestic markets of
various Latin American economies and perform an analysis, guided by our theory, of the
variation across and within countries.

4.1. Price Dollarization across Countries
  We first document that in a large number of countries, a significant share of prices is set
in dollars. For this, we compute average levels of price dollarization using data from the
online platform for the sample period March to October 2018. Table 1 shows the share of
prices set in dollars by country, broken down by type of market: vehicles, real estate, and
consumer goods. The average share of prices in dollars is 24% for goods, 27% for vehicles,
and 43% for real estate. There is heterogeneity in the degree of price dollarization across
countries, with significant levels of dollarization in Bolivia, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Peru, and
Uruguay, and considerably lower levels in Mexico.10

  Price Dollarization and Macroeconomic Variables ­ We analyze the variation in the degree
of price dollarization across countries to test the predictions of the theory. We present
the results broken down by vehicles, real estate, and consumer goods.11 Table 2 presents
  10Peru exhibits significant levels of price dollarization in spite of regulation that requires prices to be quoted

in local currency and, optionally, in any other currency (see Castellares and Toma (2018)). This regulation,
in place since 2004, induced a reduction in the levels of price dollarization, which were historically high. In
Brazil, Chile and Colombia, all prices are set in local currency due to regulation.
  11The model is most applicable to the case of consumer goods and vehicles, and to a lesser extent, to

real estate. The case of real estate has additional particularities since it is a market characterized by search
frictions and in which units have their specific price attached to them. However, the main trade-offs that
characterize currency choice in this model are also present in the case of real estate. In fact, in a previous
                                   DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                            18

                                Table 1. Price Dollarization by Country

                       Country                    Goods Vehicles Real Estate
                       Argentina                     0%         9%           76%
                       Bolivia                      42%        67%           83%
                       Brazil                        0%         0%            0%
                       Chile                         0%         0%            0%
                       Colombia                      0%         0%            0%
                       Costa Rica                    2%         4%           35%
                       Dominican Republic            3%        15%           51%
                       Guatemala                     7%         2%           55%
                       Honduras                     60%         6%           30%
                       Mexico                        0%         2%            7%
                       Nicaragua                    84%        81%           92%
                       Panama                       58%        13%           42%
                       Paraguay                     60%        57%           33%
                       Peru                          4%        68%           54%
                       Uruguay                      35%        85%           88%
                       Average                      24%        27%           43%

Notes: This table shows the fraction of prices denominated in US dollars on the online platform for each
country and type of market (goods, vehicles, and real estate). For the goods market in Argentina, dollar
pricing has not been allowed since 2012 (dollar pricing is still allowed for vehicles and real estate). In the
cases of Brazil, Chile and Colombia, price dollarization is zero due to explicit regulation.



correlations of price dollarization with households' asset dollarization, the inflation rate,
exchange rate volatility, and the exchange rate pass-through to import prices. Although
we do not interpret these correlations as causal, they still provide useful evidence that is
consistent the model's predictions.
  First, there is a high correlation between the share of prices in dollars and the average
share of bank deposits that are also denominated in dollars: countries with high levels of


version of this paper, Drenik and Perez (2018), we develop a model of currency choice in markets with search
frictions that naturally generate time-to-sell, and show that the first most of the predictions of the theory
carry through to that market.
                                   DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                            19

dollarization in deposits tend to have higher levels of price dollarization. This high correla-
tion is found in each of the three markets we analyze. This relationship is consistent with
the prediction of Proposition 3, by which setting prices in dollars is more attractive when
households have more wealth denominated in dollars, and constitutes a new fact that was
not explored in the literature before.

                     Table 2. Price Dollarization: Cross-Country Correlations

                                                    All (avg.) Goods Vehicles Real Estate
       Correlation with:
            Deposit Dollarization                       71%        66%        64%            59%
            Avg. Inflation (last 5 yrs)                 20%        19%         -3%           35%
            Avg. Inflation (last 20 yrs)                19%        11%         -4%           34%
            NXR Volatility                             -31%        -28%       -29%          -29%
            Avg. Inflation-NXR Vol. Ratio               61%        69%        49%            48%
            Import Prices Pass-through                  11%        32%        -13%           15%
            Trade Openness                              30%        73%        16%            5%

Notes: This table presents the correlation between the share of prices that are denominated in dollars for
each country and different macroeconomic variables. The first column presents the correlation with the
average degree of price dollarization across markets. The rest of the columns present the correlation in
the market of goods, vehicles, and real estate, respectively. Deposit dollarization is defined as the share of
deposits denominated in US dollars. Average inflation corresponds to the average annual inflation rate of the
last 5 and 20 years. Exchange rate volatility corresponds to the standard deviation of monthly changes in
the dollar exchange rate. Import prices pass-through corresponds to the contemporaneous pass-through of
the dollar exchange rate to the import price index. Trade openness is defined as the ratio of the sum of total
exports and imports and GDP. Cross-country correlations are computed with data from the 15 countries
from Table 1.



  Second, we also analyze the cross-country relationship between price dollarization and
inflation. Our theory predicts that countries with higher inflation rates should display higher
shares of price dollarization. Empirically, we find a positive, albeit mild, relationship between
these variables. The correlation of price dollarization with the average recent inflation (the
average of the last 5 years) is 20%. Similar results are found when looking at historical levels
of inflation (the average inflation in the last 20 years). This correlation is slightly stronger
with price dollarization in the real estate market.
                                 DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                       20

  Price dollarization exhibits a stronger correlation with the volatility of the nominal ex-
change rate: countries with a more volatile exchange rate have a larger share of prices
denominated in local currency. The correlation is -31% and similar across all markets. This
relationship is consistent with the prediction of Proposition 3, by which dollar pricing is
less likely when the variance of exchange rate shocks is higher. However, the theory also
predicts that currency choice is determined by the ratio between inflation and the volatility
of exchange rate shocks. The correlation between this ratio and price dollarization is much
higher: it is 61% across markets and reaches 69% in the goods market.
  Finally, we relate price dollarization with the model mechanisms associated with interna-
tional trade. We compute the correlation between price dollarization and the pass-through
of exchange rate to the import price index at the country level.12 Our theory predicts that
countries with higher exchange rate pass-through to import prices­which in the model corre-
spond to the prices of the tradable input­should display higher shares of price dollarization.
Empirically, we find a positive but small correlation. For the case of consumer goods, which
are the type of goods for which the theory is most applicable, the correlation is 32%. A
related prediction of the theory is that more tradable goods are more likely to be price in
dollars. Here, we provide a first test of this prediction using aggregate data by computing the
correlation between price dollarization and trade openness. We find a high correlation of 73%
between these variables in the goods market: countries that are more open to international
trade exhibit larger shares of prices set in dollars.

4.2. Price Dollarization at the Micro Level
  In this section, we study the patterns of dollarization of prices at the micro level. We
perform this analysis for the five countries with the largest amount of data and with a
positive share of dollar pricing in at least one market: Argentina, the Dominican Republic,
Mexico, Peru, and Uruguay. In order to do this, we first provide a variance decomposition
analysis of price dollarization to see whether this phenomenon is concentrated in certain
markets and/or whether it is associated with a subgroup of sellers. Then, we test two
additional predictions of our theory by exploring the extent to which characteristics of the
good and the seller are relevant in explaining the currency choice of prices.


  12The   pass-through is computed by regressing annual log changes of the import price index on annual
log changes of the exchange rate vis-a-vis the US dollar. We use annual data to maximize the number of
countries for which we can compute the pass-through.
                                    DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                        21

  Variance Decomposition Analysis ­ To assess the role of sellers' and goods' characteristics,
we carry out a variance decomposition analysis. Each listing in the data contains seller
identifiers. Additionally, the majority of the listings include a narrow categorization of the
good at level 3 in the category tree (see Section 3 for a description of the categorization of
goods). Examples of good categories at this level include smart TVs, Apple smartwatches,
soccer jerseys, strollers, mattresses, wallets, Playstation 4, and guitar amplifiers. We estimate
the following linear probability model for each of the main countries in the data separately:

                                              i
                                        dollars,c = s + c + i
                                                            s,c ,

            i
where dollars,c is a dummy variable that equals one if the price of good i, posted by seller
s in category c, is in dollars and zero if it is in local currency; s is a seller fixed effect; c
is a good-category fixed effect; and i
                                     s,c is the residual term. We restrict the sample to those

sellers that post more than one listing.13 We estimate the econometric model by OLS. We
then compute the variance of the estimated seller and category fixed effects, and express
them relative to the overall variance of the dependent variable. We report the results in the
first two columns of Table 3. Both seller and good characteristics are relevant in explaining
currency choices of prices. On average, seller fixed effects explain 37% of the variation in
the currency choice of prices, and category fixed effects explain 18%. There is significant
heterogeneity across countries: In Mexico, most of the explained variation is associated with
seller fixed effects, while in Peru, both sellers and good-categories explain the same amount
of variation. Finally, we also estimate the regression including category-seller fixed effects
(column 4 of Table 3). The explained variation increases significantly, ranging between 50%
to 90% in each country.
  We next analyze which features of sellers and goods are relevant in explaining the currency
denomination of prices. This analysis sheds light into which features drive selection into
foreign currency pricing, which as we show next, ultimately drives the short-run pass-through
of prices. Motivated by the predictions of our model, we assess the role the tradeability of
the good and the sellers' size in the determination of the currency of prices.

  Price Dollarization and Tradeability of Goods ­ In most countries, some types of goods
exhibit higher levels of dollarization than others. Examples of relatively more dollarized
goods include consumer electronics (e.g., mobile phones, digital cameras, smart TVs), home
  13Conditioning   on sellers that post multiple listings, the average number of listings per seller is 31.
Similarly, the average number of listings within categories at level 3 is 2,693.
                                     DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                             22


            Table 3. Currency Choice of Prices: Variance Decomposition Analysis

 Country                Category FE Seller FE Cat.-Seller FE # Obs. # Cat. # Sellers
 Argentina                    20%             24%              71%          1655986        189       160799
 Mexico                        2%             37%              50%          2430439       1948        94379
 Uruguay                      26%             43%              85%           916648       1730        52390
 Peru                         36%             41%              87%           555770       1281        35290
 Dominican Rep.                7%             40%              56%           474136        190        5429

Notes: This table presents the results of variance decomposition analysis of the currency choice of prices.
Each regression is estimated with OLS using data from each country separately. Sellers that only post one
listing are excluded from the regression. Results are reported as a fraction of the overall variance of the
dependent variable. The last three columns report the number of observations by group.


appliances (e.g. refrigerators, air conditioners), and vehicles. These types of goods tend to
have a large imported content. On the other hand, examples of goods that tend to be posted
in local currency include clothing and small gadgets, which tend to have a lower import
content.
  We examine whether more tradeable goods are more likely to be posted in dollars by
assigning a tradeability index to each listing of goods included in the historical dataset
of Argentina and Uruguay.14 We do this in multiple steps. First, we merge trade data on
imports with output data (at the 3-digit level of the ISIC classification) for the manufacturing
sector and compute a tradeability index for each sector, defined as the ratio of imports to
the sum of imports and output.15 Second, we map the tradeability indices to the data from
the online platform by matching manufacturing sectors to each category available in the
category tree provided by the platform. This step requires matching manufacturing sectors
to more than 30,000 categories in total. Finally, we assign to each listing the tradeability
index that corresponds to the finest category of the listing. This procedure shows that
there is substantial heterogeneity in tradeability across types of goods: clothing have low
tradeability, while computers are highly likely to be imported. We describe the trade and
output data, merging procedure, and tradeability indices in more detail in Appendix C.5.

  14For   this particular analysis, we work with the historical dataset, since its time period (2003-12) includes
the years for which we have industry-level data on exports, imports, and GDP.
   15We also compute, as an additional measure of tradeability, the share of external supply, defined as the

ratio of the sum of exports and imports to output. Results are robust to this alternative measure.
                                   DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                       23

  Next, we group listings of goods of each country by their degrees of tradeability: low
tradeability (those with tradeability indices in the first tercile), medium tradeability (those
with tradeability indices in the second tercile) and high tradeability (those with tradeability
indices in the third tercile). Columns (1) and (3) of Table 4 shows the share of listings posted
in dollars for these three groups, which we compute by regressing the price dollarization
dummy on tradeability terciles fixed effects. Goods that are more tradeable are more likely
to be denominated in dollars. The increasing relationship is stronger in Uruguay than in
Argentina. While in the share of dollar prices is around 1% and 5% for low tradeability
goods, this share increases to 20% and 36% in Argentina and Uruguay, respectively. This
increasing relationship between price dollarization and tradeability is robust to the inclusion
of seller fixed effects, as shown in columns (2) and (4).
  These findings are consistent with the prediction in Proposition 3, according to which
dollar pricing is more likely when the share of tradable inputs is larger. Since in these
countries the prices of imported goods at the border tend to be set in dollars (Gopinath,
2016), the costs of the tradable input of goods co-move more strongly with the exchange
rate and firms prefer to set their retail prices in dollars.
  One exception to this empirical pattern is the real estate market, which is non-tradable
and heavily dollarized.16 In a previous version of this paper, Drenik and Perez (2018), we
argue that this particular market is characterized by search frictions. There, we rationalize
price dollarization by documenting that the average time a real estate unit is available for
sale ranges between four and six months. This, coupled with the fact that inflation in local
currency is significantly larger than in foreign currency, results in sellers choosing to price
in dollars in the real estate market in order to avoid costs of changing prices frequently.
Later, we will show that the currency choice of listed prices does matter in this market, by
documenting that nominal exchange rates have a differential impact on the probability of
leaving the platform (which we interpret as a sale) as a function of the currency of the price.

  Price Dollarization and Size of Sellers ­ This section is motivated by the last theoretical
prediction of Proposition 3, by which firms with larger debt dollarization are more likely to
set prices in dollars. To test this prediction we would need data on firms' debt by currency,
which is not available. However, prior research has found a strong empirical relationship
between the size of the firm and the share of debt denominated in foreign currency (see, for
  16Although   real estate are non-tradable, their demand can have an international component as various
foreign investors buy properties in many of the countries, in particular in touristic destinations.
                                     DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                                24

                              Table 4. Price Dollarization and Tradeability

                                              Argentina                   Uruguay
                       1st Tercile        0.011                       0.047
                                         (0.000)                     (0.000)
                       2nd Tercile        0.109         0.022         0.277       0.098
                                         (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)     (0.001)
                       3rd Tercile        0.197         0.043         0.362       0.145
                                         (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.001)     (0.001)
                       N                34003505 33792430 2555929 2516957
                       R2                 0.147         0.577         0.301       0.539
                       Seller FE            No            Yes          No           Yes

Notes: This table shows the share of prices set in dollars in Argentina and Uruguay, by tercile of the trade-
ability index. The tradeability index is computed as the ratio of sectoral imports to the sum of sectoral
imports and output. The first column in each country estimates a linear probability model of price dol-
larization (0-1 dummy variable) on terciles of the tradeability index. The second column in each country
estimates a similar model by including seller fixed effects.




example, Kamil, 2012; Licandro and Mello, 2019; Richers, 2019; Salomao and Varela, 2019).
Therefore, to the extent that larger firms have larger debt dollarization, one can indirectly
test the model's prediction by analyzing the relationship between the seller's size and the
currency choice of prices.17
  For each country and market (goods, vehicles, and real estate) we sort sellers with positive
revenues according to their revenues on the platform and split them into three groups:
small sellers (those with revenues in the first tercile), medium sellers (those with revenues
in the second tercile) and large sellers (those with revenues in the third tercile). As a
point of reference, average revenues during the 8-month period for which we have data, for
small, medium, and large sellers of goods are USD36, USD323 and USD57,155, respectively;



  17An   alternative channel through which size can impact currency choice is through its markup elasticity
(see, for example, Amiti et al., 2019). If the markup elasticity is increasing in the firm's size, then larger firms
would find it more attractive to set prices in the local currency (which in their framework would correspond
to the currency of destination).
                                   DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                          25

USD1,699, USD6,856 and USD170,554, for sellers of vehicles; and USD353, USD30,001 and
USD16M, for sellers of real estate.18
  We then compute the dollarization of revenues (i.e., the share of revenues that corresponds
to listings posted in dollars). Columns (1)-(3) of Table 5 show the average dollarization of
revenues for sellers in each group for all countries. In almost all countries and all broad
types of goods, we observe an increasing relationship between the dollarization of revenues
and the size of sellers. For example, only 3% of revenues of small sellers in the goods market
in Uruguay come from goods posted in dollars. This figure increases to 22% for large sellers.
When performing the same analysis by computing size terciles weighted by sales--thereby
placing more focus on larger sellers19--we obtain similar results (reported in Table B.5). We
also show that these results are robust to controlling for category fixed effects (see Figure
B.4).
  Finally, we examine whether sellers are likely to post goods in multiple currencies. We
now focus on sellers with positive revenues and more than one listing, and again split them
into small, medium, and large sellers, according to their revenues, for each country and
broad type of good. We compute the share of sellers that post goods in multiple currencies
("multi-currency sellers"). The last three columns of Table 5 show the results. The share of
multi-currency sellers in the goods market is 8%. This low share is consistent with the fact
that seller fixed effects explain a large variation of the currency choice of prices. Additionally,
larger sellers are more likely to be multi-currency sellers. This last fact holds for almost all
countries and broad types of goods.

                5. Currency Choice and Exchange Rate Pass-through

  In this section, we analyze the empirical relationship between currency choice and exchange
rate pass-through. First, since the currency of denomination of prices can be relevant to the
extent that prices are sticky, we analyze how sticky are prices in the data and whether the
degree of price stickiness depends on their currencies. Then, we show that the currency
of prices determines the short-run pass-through of exchange rate movements to prices. In
addition, we estimate medium-run pass-through to prices and show that those estimates and
firms' currency choice are aligned with the predictions of the theory stated in Proposition 1.
  18The   low average revenues for small and medium sellers in the real estate market correspond to revenues
from temporary rentals.
   19For example, once we weight observations by sales, the average revenues for small, medium, and large

sellers of goods are USD3,794, USD260,130 and USD1,8M, respectively.
                                    DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                           26

                       Table 5. Price Dollarization and Sellers' Characteristics

                                      Dollarization of Revenues            Multi-Currency Sellers
        Country                       Small Medium           Large        Small Medium Large

        Goods
        Mexico                          0%        0%           0%           1%            0%   1%
        Uruguay                         3%        11%         22%           9%        17%      32%
        Peru                            2%        2%           7%           3%            4%   12%
        Dominican Republic              4%        11%          8%           7%            2%   5%
        Average                         2%        6%           9%           5%            6%   13%

        Vehicles
        Argentina                       0%        1%           7%           3%            4%   18%
        Mexico                          0%        0%           1%           1%            0%   2%
        Uruguay                        21%        91%         99%          30%        24%      15%
        Peru                           19%        81%         94%          19%        16%      16%
        Dominican Republic              2%        2%          23%          10%        17%      53%
        Average                         9%        35%         45%          12%        12%      21%

        Real Estate
        Argentina                       2%        26%         96%          18%        32%      85%
        Mexico                          0%        1%           8%           0%            3%   40%
        Uruguay                         6%        34%        100%          30%        36%      66%
        Peru                            3%        9%          65%          10%        13%      23%
        Dominican Republic             19%        24%         43%          50%        56%      88%
        Average                         6%        19%         62%          22%        28%      60%


Notes: This table analyzes currency choice by sellers. The sample is restricted to sellers with positive
revenues from active listings during March-October 2018. Columns 1-3 show the share of revenues that
correspond to listings posted in dollars for each country and type of good, by tercile of sellers' revenues in
dollars. Columns 4-6 show the share of sellers that post goods in multiple currencies. This sample is further
restricted to sellers with more than one listing. For the goods market in Argentina, dollar pricing has not
been allowed since 2012 (dollar pricing is still allowed for vehicles and real estate).
                                     DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                              27

Finally, we document that the currency of prices determines the short-run pass-through to
quantities. This analysis suggests that exchange rate movements have allocative effects due
to the presence of price dollarization.

5.1. Price Stickiness by Currency
  In this section, we document how often and by how much prices change. In the main
dataset, we observe the price of each listing on a daily basis and can therefore compute the
frequency and magnitude of price changes by currency. Table 6 shows various summary
statistics regarding price changes of goods, vehicles, and real estate in the main countries.
The first two columns show the frequency of price changes; that is, the average share of
prices that change on a daily basis. There is significant heterogeneity across types of goods
and also across countries. The frequencies of price changes range from 0.1% to 2.5% in most
countries and types of goods. Implied durations of prices in months are reported in columns
3 and 4.20 Large heterogeneity in the degree of price stickiness was previously estimated
across countries (see, for example, Blanco and Cravino (2019) for a cross-country analysis of
CPI data) and across sectors (see, for example, Nakamura and Steinsson (2008)). The last
four columns of Table 6 report the median size of price changes, which range between 7%
and 20% for price increases and -7% and -15% for price decreases. These magnitudes are
in the range of results from previous studies for the US (e.g., Bils and Klenow (2004) and
Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008)).
  In spite of the observed large heterogeneity, we observe regularities when we compare the
degree of price stickiness by currencies. With few exceptions, the frequency of price changes
is larger for prices in local currency than for prices in dollars. This is consistent with the
fact that inflation in local currency is higher than inflation in foreign currency in all of the
countries in our sample. Finally, changes in the currency of denomination of prices within
listings are very rare (results not shown). The two largest daily probabilities of a change are
found in the market for vehicles in Argentina and Uruguay, at 0.26% and 0.07%, respectively
(with implied durations of 1.05 and 3.9 years).


  20In   this analysis, we restrict the sample to listings that had at least one transaction and that had at least
60 days of data. In Appendix E, we replicate our analysis of price stickiness by including all listings with
at least 60 days of data, irrespective of whether they had a transaction or not. Assuming a constant hazard
rate  of a price change, the daily probability of a price change is equal to f = 1 - e- . Thus, the average
duration in months is given by (1/)/30 = (-1/ ln(1 - f ))/30.
                           Table 6. Price Stickiness by Currency: Listings with Positive Transactions

                         Freq. Price Changes      Implied Duration        Share Price Inc.      Med. Price Increase     Med. Price Decrease
Country                  Local Cur.   Dollar     Local Cur.   Dollar     Local Cur.   Dollar    Local Cur.   Dollar     Local Cur.   Dollar

Goods
Mexico                     1.07%      0.20%           3         17          48%       59%           9%        10%          -9%        -14%
Uruguay                    0.70%      0.54%           5         6           58%       53%          12%        10%          -14%       -11%
Peru                       0.37%      0.13%           9         26          40%       39%          14%        17%          -14%       -14%
Dominican Republic         0.34%      0.06%          10         53          34%       49%          15%        22%          -15%       -25%

Vehicles
Argentina                  1.86%      0.71%           2         5           71%       31%           8%         7%          -8%         -7%
Mexico                     0.67%      0.18%           5         19          18%       31%           6%        11%          -5%        -11%
Uruguay                    1.38%      0.51%           2         7           39%       17%          22%        11%          -11%        -8%
Peru                       1.86%      2.57%           2         1           0%         2%           .%         4%          -17%        -5%
Dominican Republic         0.23%      0.66%          15         5           14%       37%           9%         4%          -4%         -6%

Real Estate
Argentina                  0.43%      0.19%           8         17          72%       26%          12%         8%          -11%        -7%
Mexico                     0.14%      0.06%          24         53          40%       35%          11%        13%          -10%       -13%
Uruguay                    0.31%      0.15%          11         22          13%       32%           9%        10%          -8%        -10%
                                                                                                                                                 DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION




Peru                       1.59%      0.75%           2         4           75%       36%          22%        10%          -3%         -7%
Dominican Republic         0.21%      0.21%          16         16          38%        0%          12%         .%          -11%        -8%


Notes: This table presents statistics on price stickiness for each country and type of market (goods, vehicles, and real estate), by currency.
The sample is restricted to listings that had at least one sale and 60 days of data. The average daily frequency of price changes is the
fraction of listings that changed price in a given day. The average implied duration (in months) is equal to (-1/ln(1 - f ))/30, where f
is the daily frequency of price changes. The last six columns show the share of price changes that result in price increases, and the mean
absolute sizes of (log) price increases and decreases.
                                                                                                                                                 28
                                  DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                               29

5.2. Short-Run Exchange Rate Pass-through to Prices
  We now investigate the degree of pass-through of exchange rate movements to prices,
depending on their currency of denomination. To pursue this analysis, we exploit the fact
that we observe prices at a daily frequency for a period of 8 months (March to October
2018). In this section, we restrict attention to Argentina and Uruguay, which are the two
main countries that exhibit large degrees of price dollarization and experienced significant
movements in the nominal exchange rate during this time period (Figure B.5 shows the
dynamics of the nominal exchange rate for these two economies).21 The nature of the data
and the time period of analysis thereby allows us to estimate pass-through at a high frequency
in the short run.
  We first study the degree of pass-through to individual prices. We estimate the following
pass-through regression for each country and each type of market (goods, vehicles, and real
estate):
                  K                                       K
 pi,j,t = j +          d
                       k et-k ×   1{currencyi = d} +           lc
                                                               k  et-k × 1{currencyi = lc} +      i,j,t ,   (9)
                 k=0                                     k=0

where i indexes the individual listing, j indexes the category of the good, t is calendar
time (in days), j is a category fixed effect (to allow for category-specific average inflation
rates), pi,j,t is the daily difference in log prices (expressed in domestic currency), et is
the daily difference in the log nominal exchange rate (domestic currency per dollar), and
1{currencyi = d} (1{currencyi = lc}) is a dummy variable equal to one when the currency
of the price is in dollars (local currency). We focus on short-run responses and, given the
length of the observation window, set the number of lags K to 60 days. We are interested
in the cumulative pass-through for prices in local currency and in dollars at a horizon of n
                                n     lc        n     d
days, which are given by        k=0   k  and    k=0   k , respectively.
  Figure 1a shows pass-through estimates to prices of goods in Uruguay. Each solid line
                               n     cur
reports the estimates of       k=0   k   for cur = lc, d, and the dashed lines correspond to their
95% confidence intervals (standard errors are clustered at the listing level), as a function of
the number of lags n on the horizontal axis. We also include pass-through estimates when we
restrict these to be the same across currencies. The pass-through is close to zero for prices
  21
    In the other main countries for which we have large amounts of data (Dominican Republic, Mexico,
and Peru), either the nominal exchange rate displayed small variations during the window of observation or
the share of dollar prices is small. For these reasons, we cannot precisely estimate pass-through for these
countries.
                                        DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                              30

in local currency and close to one for prices in dollars. After 60 days, the majority of the
difference in pass-through across currencies persists. This is consistent with the measured
degree of price stickiness. Similar estimates are obtained for Argentina and Uruguay in the
markets for vehicles and real estate (see Figures B.6 and B.7). These results are consistent
with the findings of Gopinath et al. (2010), and suggest that in the short-run shocks in the
exchange rate convert almost one for one into shocks to relative prices of those goods posted
in different currencies.

5.3. Medium-Run Exchange Rate Pass-through to Prices
  In Section 2, we have shown that there exists a sufficient statistic for MRPT that can be
estimated with available data. Here, we provide estimates of the sufficient statistic and show
that the empirical evidence supports the model's predictions regarding currency choice. We
proceed by estimating

  pi,j,t = j +  d c ei,j,t × 1{currencyi = d} +  lc c ei,j,t × 1{currencyi = lc} +
  ¯                                                                                                   i,j,t ,   (10)

where i indexes the individual listing, j indexes the category of the good, t is calendar time
(in days), j is a category fixed effect, ¯
                                         pi,j,t is the change in log prices (expressed in domestic
currency) conditional on a price change, c ei,j,t is the cumulative change in the log nominal
exchange rate (domestic currency per dollar) over the duration of the previous price, and
1{currencyi = d} (1{currencyi = lc}) is a dummy variable equal to one when the currency
of the price is in dollars (local currency).22 The coefficients of interest are  d and  lc , which
estimates the pass-though conditional on a price change.
  Table 7 reports the OLS estimates of equation (10) for Argentina and Uruguay, and all
markets. The first four columns report the estimates and their standard error (clustered at
the listing level), and the fifth column reports the number of observations. In the goods
market in Uruguay, the exchange rate pass-through conditional on a price change is 1.07
(S.E. = 0.03) for prices denominated in dollars and 0.24 (S.E. = 0.01) for prices denominated
in local currency. A wider gap is observed in the market for vehicles and real estate. A similar
pattern is found in Argentina, but the difference in pass-through conditional on a price change
across currencies is smaller due to a larger pass-through to prices in local currency.

  22The                                                                     pi,j,t on ei,j,t = ei,j,t - ei,j,t-1 .
          sufficient statistic of Proposition 2 is based on a regression of ¯
We follow the regression specification in Gopinath et al. (2010), who show that in a calibrated model both
specifications yield similar results.
                                                                  DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                     31


               Figure 1. Exchange Rate Pass-through to Prices and Quantities

                                                              (a) Exchange Rate Pass-through to Prices

                                                  1


                       Cumulative pass-through
                                                 .8




                                                 .6




                                                 .4




                                                 .2




                                                  0


                                                        0        10       20           30      40        50   60
                                                                                      Days

                                                                          Aggregate          Local currency
                                                                          Dollar


                                                            (b) Exchange Rate Pass-through to Quantities

                                                   0
                   Cumulative pass-through




                                                  -.5




                                                  -1




                                                 -1.5



                                                        0         10       20          30     40         50   60
                                                                                      Days



Notes: These figures show the estimated pass-through to prices (in Panel 1a) and quantities (in Panel 1b)
for Uruguay in the goods market. Panel 1b presents estimates of pass-through to quantities sold of listings
posted in dollars relative to quantities sold of listings posted in local currency. Dashed lines correspond to
95% confidence intervals (standard errors are clustered at the listing level).
                                     DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                              32

                         Table 7. Pass-Through Conditional on Price Change

                                 Dollar        Non-Dollar                 MRPT            Price
                                 d                 lc
            Country                   S.E.                S.E.     N       Cutoff Dollarization
            Goods
            Uruguay          1.07 (0.03) 0.24 (0.01) 225569                 0.42           35%

            Vehicles
            Argentina        0.85 (0.01) 0.35 (0.00) 362707                 0.42           9%
            Uruguay          0.97 (0.05) 0.06 (0.25)             12065      0.46          85%

            Real Estate
            Argentina        0.88 (0.00) 0.46 (0.01)             45691      0.37          76%
            Uruguay          0.96 (0.05) 0.06 (0.09)             15871      0.44          88%


Notes: This table reports the estimated pass-through to prices for Argentina and Uruguay. The first panel
reports estimates for the goods market, the second panel for the vehicles market, and the last panel for
the real estate market. The first four columns report the point estimates and standard errors for listings
priced in dollars and local currency. The fifth column reports the number of observations and the R2 . Each
regression is estimated with OLS. Standard errors are clustered at the listing level. The sixth column reports
the cutoff value for MRPT derived in Proposition 1. This cutoff is computed with country-specific observed
inflation and volatility of nominal exchange rate, country-market-specific price stickiness, and annualized
discount factor of 0.96. In the market for real estate, we adjust the discount factor to take into account the
fact that the seller's objective is to sell a single unit of real estate, which ocurrs in 5 months on average. The
last column reports the share of prices in dollars.


  Proposition 1 predicts that firms choose dollar (local currency) pricing if MRPT is above
                        1              1     µ2
(below) the cutoff      2
                            1-       1-    Var( e )
                                                        . We compute this cutoff for each country and
market using data on country daily inflation and the variance of daily changes in the nominal
exchange rate, as well as country-market specific estimates of the daily probability of a price
change. The only parameter that is not measurable is the discount factor, which we set
 = 0.96(1/365) .23 The cutoffs, reported in column six of Table 7, are lower than 0.5 due
to the presence of inflation, and exhibit heterogeneity across countries and markets, due to
differential degrees of price stickiness. Consistent with the theory, the estimated MRPT for

  23The   results are robust to considering alternative values for the discount factor, and to performing the
analysis at a monthly frequency.
                                    DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                             33

dollar prices is always above the cutoff, whereas the estimated MRPT for local currency prices
is below the cutoff, with the exception of real estate in Argentina. To provide additional
validation of the model presented in Section 2, Table B.6 takes advantage of differences in the
degree of prices stickiness across more disaggregated definitions of categories and compares
estimates of MRPT across category-currency pairs with their respective cutoffs.24 Results
show that the theory has a high predictive power (between 70% and 80%) of the currency
of invoicing across narrowly defined categories.

  As noted in the theory, the differential short-run pass-through of goods priced in differ-
ent currencies can be capturing two effects. First, the short-run mechanical effect that an
exchange rate movement has on prices when these are sticky. Second, they may also reflect
the selection effect by which dollar prices are those that have a higher desired pass-through.
An outstanding challenge for this literature, including this paper, is to separate these two
channels in aggregate estimates of pass-through.

5.4. Exchange Rate Pass-through and Quantities
  We now focus on a more novel aspect of the analysis: whether changes in relative prices
generated by movements in the exchange rate differentially affect quantities sold. For each
listing, we observe the quantities sold at a daily frequency. These data allow us to estimate
whether a nominal exchange rate depreciation, which in the short run renders goods posted
in dollars more expensive relative to those in local currency, induces a negative effect on
relative quantities sold for goods priced in dollars. That is, with these data we are able
to estimate the short-run elasticity of demand using movements in the nominal exchange
rate as shocks to the relative prices of goods. To estimate these elasticities, we estimate the
following regression for each country and each type of good:
                                           K
                        qi,j,t = j,t +          k et-k 1{currencyi = d} +          i,j,t ,                 (11)
                                          k=0

where qi,j,t is the daily difference in log quantities sold in the case of goods, and the
absolute change in the case of vehicles and real estate. Thus, we estimate an elasticity in
the goods market and a semi-elasticity in the other two markets.25 We include category-time
  24Using   the second level of disaggregation offered by the platform, the table shows results for 192
categories.
   25We do not compute percent changes in the case of vehicles and real estate since the listings are associated

with one unit for sale/rent and therefore daily quantities sold are equal to zero with the exception of the
day of the transaction, in which they are equal to one.
                               DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                    34

fixed effects and measure categories of good j at level 3 in the category tree. This is a
fine categorization that corresponds to goods that are close substitutes. Examples of these
categories include Apple smart-watches, soccer jerseys, strollers, wallets and Playstation 4
(see Table B.4 for further examples).
                                                       K
  In Appendix F, we show how the estimate of           k=0 k   in specification (11) corresponds
to an estimate of the elasticity of demand from a nested CES structure in which each nest
corresponds to a category j . Two key features enable us to estimate this structural elasticity.
First, the finding that prices are sticky in the short-run and pass-through is complete for
prices in dollars and zero for prices in local currency implies that a shock to the exchange rate
corresponds to a shock of equal magnitude to the price of goods in dollars relative to goods
in local currency. Second, the inclusion of category-time fixed effects j,t in specification
(11), which capture any shifts in category-specific demand that are due to movements in
exchange rates or any other aggregate shocks.
  Figure 1b shows the estimation results for the goods market in Uruguay. The solid line
                            K
reports the estimates of    k=0 k   and the dashed lines their 95% confidence intervals (stan-
dard errors are clustered at the listing level), as a function of the number of lags n on the
horizontal axis. The estimated cumulative elasticity after a month is close to -1, and after
60 days it is close to -1.4. The magnitude of this short-run elasticity is in line with estimated
short-run elasticities for durable goods in the IO literature. For example, Gowrisankaran
and Rysman (2012) estimate the own price elasticity to be in the range of -1.2 to -2.6, de-
pending on whether the price change is temporary or not and whether the price change is
industry-wide or not. In the markets of vehicles and real estate, the estimated two-month
semi-elasticities range between -0.7 and -3.5 for Argentina and Uruguay (see Figures B.6 and
B.7), respectively. These semi-elasticities are economically relevant. After a 1% devaluation
of the exchange rate, the relative probability of a sale within two months in the market for
vehicles in Uruguay declines by 13% of the average bi-monthly sale probability for listings
priced in dollars. In standard New Keynesian models, changes in prices have immediate ef-
fects on quantities. However, we see that in all cases the estimated cumulative pass-through
is increasing over time. These delays could be due to search frictions or the fact that pur-
chases of durable goods are staggered over time, so the effects accumulate over time. Finally,
we also estimate specification (11) for prices instead of quantities, and find estimates that
are close to the difference between the pass through in dollars and local currency, estimated
in specification (9) (see Figures B.8 and B.9).
                                   DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                       35

  These findings point to a strong role of the currency of prices in determining the degree
of pass-through of exchange rate shocks to prices. This is stressed in the previous literature
for the case of import and export prices at the dock. Here, we argue that similar results are
obtained in retail markets of emerging economies that display price dollarization. Addition-
ally, our findings on quantities show that nominal exchange rate shocks have an effect on
quantities sold and economic activity through their effect on prices. Thus, sellers' currency
choices are not only relevant for the degree of pass-through to prices, but also for the effects
of nominal exchange rate shocks on real allocations in the short run. This effect of exchange
rate shocks on quantities via prices is implicitly assumed in every theory of endogenous
currency choice (including our model), and here we provide direct evidence for it.


                          6. Relevance for Broader Aggregates

  In this section, we argue that the currency of prices has relevant implication for the
macroeconomy by showing that the incidence of dollar pricing in the micro data from the
online platform is a strong predictor of the degree of pass-through in the CPI data. We do this
by comparing aggregate and market-specific pass-through across countries, and also across
fine types of goods within a particular country. Our results imply that price dollarization is
also relevant for broader aggregates such as the dynamics of the aggregate CPI.

6.1. Country-level analysis
  First, we compare the degree of pass-through to aggregate prices in three groups of
economies: economies that have a significant degree of price dollarization ("high dollar-
ization" economies), economies with positive but low degrees of price dollarization ("low
dollarization" economies), and economies with zero price dollarization ("non-dollarized"
economies). High dollarization economies include Argentina, Dominican Republic, Guatemala,
Paraguay, Peru, and Uruguay, all of which have average price dollarization--computed as
the simple average of price dollarization of goods, vehicles, and real estate--above 20% (see
Table 1).26 Low dollarized economies include Mexico and Costa Rica, both of which have
positive levels of price dollarization below 20%. Finally, non-dollarized economies include
Brazil, Chile, and Colombia, which are the Latin American economies that have zero dollar-
ization of prices in domestic markets, either de facto or due to regulation. For each group

  26We   exclude Bolivia, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Panama from this analysis, since they have or have had
a fixed exchange rate with the dollar for most of the past 20 years.
                                    DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                         36

of countries, we estimate the following regression:

                             24                   24                     3
               c,t = g +           g,k eg,t-k +         g,k U S,t-k +         g,k yc,t-k +   c,t ,     (12)
                             k=0                  k=0                   k=0


where c indexes the country, g indexes the country-group, t is calendar time (months), 
is aggregate domestic CPI inflation, e is the difference in the log nominal exchange rate
(domestic currency per dollar), U S is aggregate CPI inflation in the US, and y is GDP
growth. The number of lags is 24 months for the nominal exchange rate and the US inflation
rate, and 3 months for GDP growth.27 We are interested in the cumulative pass-through at
                                                        n
an horizon of n months, which is given by               k=0   g,k .
                                                                                    n
  Results are presented in Figure 2, which shows the estimates of                   k=0   g,k and their 95%
confidence intervals for the three groups of economies, as a function of the number of lags
n on the horizontal axis. The cumulative pass-through in high-dollarization economies is
higher than that of non-dollarized economies at all horizons. The on-impact pass-through is
0.14 in high-dollarization economies compared to 0.02 in non-dollarized economies, and the
pass-through after 2 years is 0.46 and 0.17, respectively. Furthermore, the point estimate of
the cumulative pass through for low-dollarization economies is always between that of non-
dollarized and high-dollarization economies. These differences are consistent with results
from the previous section that show that the short-run pass-through to prices is equal to one
for prices set in dollars, and zero for prices set in local currency.
  Next, we compute country-specific pass-through by estimating regression (12) for each
country in our sample, and analyze whether the degree of pass-through correlates with the
degree of price dollarization across countries. Figure 3 shows the estimated cumulative pass-
through at the 1-, 6-, and 12-month horizon (on the vertical axis) and the share of prices
in dollars (on the horizontal axis) for all countries in our sample. As indicated by the line
of best fit, there is a strong positive relationship between the degree of pass-through at all
horizons and the share of prices in dollars, with correlations that range between 40% and
70%.
  Finally, we argue that this positive relationship also persists when we focus on the cross-
country variation for each broad type of good. For this, we construct aggregate price indices

  27We   estimate the same specification as Gopinath et al. (2010), with the same number of lags. The sample
period used for this estimation is 1990-2018. For those countries whose data starts after 1990, we use all
available data. We provide more details on data used for the regressions in Appendix C.
                                                 DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                              37

            Figure 2. Price Dollarization and Aggregate Exchange Rate Pass-Through




                                .5
                                .4
             Cumulative pass-through
                                .3
                                .2
                                .1
                                0




                                       0        5           10              15       20             25
                                                                  Months

                                           Non-dollarized        Low dollarization   High dollarization


Notes: This figure shows the estimated pass-through to aggregate CPIs in three groups of countries: zero
dollarization (Brazil, Chile, and Colombia), low dollarization (Mexico and Costa Rica), and high dollarization
(Argentina, the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Paraguay, Peru, and Uruguay). Dashed lines correspond
to 95% confidence intervals.

for goods, vehicles and real estate for each country.28 We then estimate the pass-through
for each country-market in our sample, and analyze whether these correlate with the degree
of price dollarization across countries for each broad type of good. Table 8 reports the
correlation between the share of prices in dollars and the degree of pass-through at different
horizons, for goods, vehicles and real estate. These correlations are positive in all cases and
particularly strong for vehicles and real estate.
  One potential concern associated with the cross-country analysis is that the correlations
can be driven by a third common factor (for example, monetary policy), that jointly affects
price dollarization and CPI pass-through. To alleviate such concern we perform a within-
country analysis and exploit variation in price dollarization across different goods.
  28We   construct good-specific CPIs out of those level 2 categories of the CPI that contain goods that are
offered in the online platform. Vehicle-specific CPIs correspond to the "vehicles" categories of the CPI.
Real estate-specific CPIs correspond to the "rent" categories of the CPI. We provide more details of the
construction of the indices in Appendix C.6.
                                                                                           DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                                                                                                                                         38


                                                 Figure 3. Price Dollarization and Pass-Through: Cross-Country Evidence

                                       (a) 1M Pass-through                                                                         (b) 6M Pass-through                                                                         (c) 12M Pass-through




                                                                                                                .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                            .8
                                                        DOM
                    .25




                                                                                                                                                     DOM

                                                                                                                                                                PER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DOM
                                  .2




                                                                                                                                                                                          12 Months Cummulative Pass-through
 1 Months Cummulative Pass-through




                                                                                               6 Months Cummulative Pass-through
                                                                                                                              .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .6
                                                                                                                                                                ARG
                                                                                    URU
                                                                                                                                                                               URU
                     .15




                                                                                                                                               CRA                                                                                                         PER
                                                                   ARG




                                                                                                             .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                        .4
                                                                                                                                                                      PAR

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CRA
                                                  CRA                                                                                                                                                                                                      ARG
          .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          URU

                                           CHI                           PAR                                                                         GUA
                                                                                                                                       CHI                                                                                                                       PAR
                                                                                               .1




                                                                                                                                                                                           .2
                    .05




                                                                   PER                                                                 BRA
                                                                                                                                         MEX                                                                                       CHI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BRA          GUA
                                                                                                                                       COL                                                                                         COL
                                            MEX
                                                        GUA                                                                                                                                                                         MEX
                                           BRA
                                           COL
                    0




                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                       0           .2           .4           .6           .8                                       0            .2           .4           .6         .8                                        0           .2           .4           .6         .8
                                                    Share of Prices in Dollars                                                                   Share of Prices in Dollars                                                                 Share of Prices in Dollars




Notes: These figures plot estimates of exchange rate pass-through for each country in our sample, as a
function of the degree of price dollarization computed with data from the online platform. Panels (A), (B)
and (C) present estimates at the 1-, 6- and 12-month horizon, respectively. The red line is the best linear
fit of the point estimates.


                                                   Table 8. Price Dollarization and Pass-Through: Country-Market Evidence

                                                                                  1 month 6 months 12 months 18 months 24 months
                                                   Goods                          44.8%                                            22.6%                     30.7%                   38.6%                                                  12.1%
                                                   Vehicles                       67.5%                                            58.9%                     41.6%                   36.1%                                                  64.8%
                                                   Real Estate                    33.7%                                            57.7%                     60.8%                   50.8%                                                  47.1%
                                                   All                            49.0%                                            66.9%                     42.2%                   38.0%                                                  31.7%

Notes: This table reports the cross-country correlations between the share of prices in dollars (computed
with data from the online platform) and the estimated cumulative pass-through at different horizons for each
country-market.


6.2. Good-level analysis
                We carry out a complementary analysis in which we examine the relationship between
exchange rate pass-through and the degree of price dollarization for different good categories
of the CPI. Our analysis uses CPI price data on narrowly defined categories of goods, and
data on the incidence of dollar pricing from the online platform, both for the case of Uruguay.
                                    DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                            39

We obtained disaggregated data on more than 300 categories of goods that are part of the
CPI at a monthly frequency for the period 1997-2010. Examples of these categories include
digital cameras, glasses, tennis shoes, jeans, and mattresses. We then estimate the same
regression specification as in (12) for each good category, and obtain good-specific pass-
through estimates.29 Figure B.10 shows histograms of pass-through coefficients estimated at
the 1-, 6-, and 12-month horizon, for all products included in the CPI. In the aggregate, 16%
of products (with a combined weight of 12% in the aggregate CPI) have an on-impact pass-
through to prices above 50%. This share increases to 31% at a 6-month horizon. We also
estimate the fraction of prices set in dollars for each category in the CPI. Since the CPI data
do not include the currency of denomination of prices, we use historical data from the online
platform. For each category in the CPI, we identified whether there was a category in the
online platform's category tree that corresponds to the same type of good. Approximately
one-third of the categories in the CPI had a match in the data from the online platform,
which is consistent with findings of the representativeness analysis in Appendix D. For those
matched categories, we compute the fraction of prices set in dollars for all transactions of
goods in the corresponding categories of the online platform.
  We then assess the relationship between the estimated pass-through and the share of dollar
prices for each matched category of the CPI. Results are shown in Figure 4, which plots the
estimated cumulative pass-through at 1-, 6-, and 12-month horizons (on the vertical axis)
and the share of prices in dollars (on the horizontal axis) for each category. As shown by the
fit of a local linear regression in each of the panels, there is an increasing relationship between
pass-through and the share of prices denominated in dollars. The on-impact pass-through is
close to zero for those goods with a negligible share of dollar prices, and close to one for those
goods with a share of dollar prices above 50% (Figure 4a).30 For example, the on-impact
pass-through to prices of sport shoes, which are almost exclusively priced in local currency, is

  29Given   the length of the sample period, we set the number of lags to 12 months.
  30This   positive relationship is not exclusively driven by the goods with close to zero price dollarization.
The outcome of a linear regression of 1-month pass-through on the share of prices in dollars is a coefficient
of 1.52 (p - value = 0.000). If we restrict the sample to categories with a share of prices above 5% and
10%, we obtain coefficients of 0.85 and 0.59, with p - values of 0.005 and 0.068, respectively. Estimates of
on-impact pass-through can be different to the share of prices in dollars for two reasons: 1) adjustment of
prices denominated in local currency, and 2) the time period for which we have data on price dollarization
from the platform does not exactly coincide with the time period of the CPI data (on the platform, price
dollarization has been slowly decreasing over time).
                                                                                          DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                                                                                                                                           40

zero. On the other end, the pass-through to prices of computers, which have more than 80%
of prices denominated in dollars, is 0.95. For longer time horizons the relationship flattens,
as the pass-through of highly dollarized goods decreases and the pass-through of goods that
are almost exclusively priced in local currency increases. However, even 1 year after the
exchange rate shock, there are still significant differences in the pass-through of goods with
different shares of dollar prices.


                                                        Figure 4. Price Dollarization and Pass-through: Product Level

                                       (a) 1M Pass-through                                                       1                     (b) 6M Pass-through                                                                         (c) 12M Pass-through




                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                   1




                                                                                                                                                                                  Computers




                                                                                                                                                                                              12 Months Cummulative Pass-through
 1 Months Cummulative Pass-through




                                                                                               6 Months Cummulative Pass-through




                                                                                   Computers                                                                                                                                           Watches                                 Computers
                                                                                                                                          Watches
                                                                                                                    .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .5
                                           Watches
                                                                                                                         Sport shoes
                .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sport shoes
                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
 0




                            Sport shoes
                    -.5




                                                                                                                 -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                -.5




                                       0       .2              .4             .6     .8                                            0          .2              .4             .6     .8                                             0       .2              .4             .6     .8
                                                    Share of Prices in Dollars                                                                     Share of Prices in Dollars                                                                   Share of Prices in Dollars




Notes: These figures plot estimates of exchange rate pass-through using price indices of disaggregated
products from Uruguay, as a function of the degree of price dollarization computed with data from the
online platform. Panels (A), (B) and (C) present estimates at the 1-, 6- and 12-month horizon, respectively.
The red line is the nonlinear fit of the point estimates from a local linear regression and the gray bands
show 95% confidence intervals. The sample includes goods that are present both in the CPI and the online
platform. The category all corresponds to the correlation between the average share of prices in dollars
(computed as the average between goods, vehicles and real estate), and aggregate pass-through estimated
with aggregate CPI data.



                This analysis provides external validity for the results found using data from the online
platform. The fact that we find a close relationship between the share of prices in dollars
in the online platform and the pass-through of goods in the CPI data further suggests that
price data from the online platform are relevant for broader aggregates, such as the dynamics
of the aggregate CPI.
                              DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                   41

                             7. Conclusion and Discussion

  This paper provides an empirical investigation of the currency denomination of prices in
various Latin American economies, through the lens of a model of currency choice of prices
in domestic markets. Consistent with the model's predictions, there is extensive selection
in currency choice of prices, both at the micro and the macro level. At the micro level, we
show that larger sellers are more likely to post prices in dollars and that goods that are more
tradeable are more likely to be posted in dollars. At the macro level, the use of dollars when
pricing goods is strongly linked to the degree of asset dollarization and the ratio of average
inflation to exchange rate volatility in an economy, and weakly linked to the pass-through
to import prices. This result calls for further development of theories that provide a unified
framework to think about the use of the dollar fulfilling multiple roles of money (as in, for
example, Gopinath and Stein (2018)) and theories that account for the wider use of dollars
(as in, for example, Mukhin (2018) and Drenik et al. (2018)).
  Our paper also argues that the currency of denomination of prices is relevant for determin-
ing the degree of pass-through of nominal exchange rate shocks to both prices and quantities
in retail markets. This result highlights the value of introducing dollar pricing in sticky-
price models of small open economies to study the macroeconomic transmission of aggregate
shocks as in, for example, Gopinath et al. (2018).
                                 DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                          42

                                               References

Alesina, A. and R. J. Barro (2002): "Currency Unions," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117,
  409­436.
Amiti, M., O. Itskhoki, and J. Konings (2019): "Dominant Currencies: How firms choose currency
  invoicing and why it matters," Manuscript.
Arellano, C. and J. Heathcote (2010): "Dollarization and financial integration," Journal of Economic
  Theory, 145, 944­973.
Auer, R., A. Burstein, and S. M. Lein (2019): "Exchange Rates and Prices: Evidence from the 2015
  Swiss Franc Appreciation," Manuscript.
Barro, R. J. and D. B. Gordon (1983): "Rules, discretion and reputation in a model of monetary
  policy," Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, 101­121.
Bils, M. and P. J. Klenow (2004): "Some evidence on the importance of sticky prices," Journal of
  Political Economy, 112, 947­985.
Blanco, A. and J. Cravino (2019): "Price rigidities and the relative PPP," Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics.
Burstein, A., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2005): "Large Devaluations and the Real Exchange
  Rate," Journal of Political Economy, 113.
------ (2007): "Modeling exchange rate passthrough after large devaluations," Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics, 54, 346­368.
Burstein, A. and G. Gopinath (2014): "International Prices and Exchange Rates," in Handbook of
  International Economics, ed. by G. Gopinath, E. Helpman, and K. Rogoff, vol. 4, 391 ­ 451.
Burstein, A. T., J. C. Neves, and S. Rebelo (2003): "Distribution costs and real exchange rate
  dynamics during exchange-rate-based stabilizations," Journal of Monetary Economics, 50, 1189­1214.
Calvo, G. A. (1983): "Staggered prices in a utility-maximizing framework," Journal of Monetary Econom-
  ics, 12, 383­398.
Castellares, R. and H. Toma (2018): "Effects of a Mandatory Local Currency Pricing Law On the
  Exchange Rate Pass-Through," Manuscript.
Cavallo, A. (2017): "Are online and offline prices similar? evidence from large multi-channel retailers,"
  American Economic Review, 107, 283­303.
Corsetti, G., M. Crowley, and L. Han (2018): "Invoicing and Pricing-to-Market: A Study of Price
  and Markup Elasticities of UK Exporters," CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP13282.
Corsetti, G., M. Crowley, L. Han, and H. Song (2019): "Markets and Markup: A New Empirical
  Framework and Evidence on Exporters from China," CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP13904.
Corsetti, G. and L. Dedola (2005): "A macroeconomic model of international price discrimination,"
  Journal of International Economics, 67, 129­155.
Corsetti, G., L. Dedola, and S. Leduc (2009): "Optimal monetary policy and the sources of local-
  currency price stability," in International dimensions of monetary policy, University of Chicago Press,
  319­367.
                                   DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                      43

Cravino, J. (2018): "Exchange Rates, Aggregate Productivity and the Currency of Invoicing of Interna-
  tional Trade," Manuscript.
Drenik, A., R. Kirpalani, and D. J. Perez (2018): "Currency Choice in Contracts," Manuscript.
Drenik, A. and D. J. Perez (2018): "Pricing in Multiple Currencies in Domestic Markets," Manuscript.
------ (2019): "Price setting under uncertainty about inflation," Journal of Monetary Economics.
Egorov, K. and D. Mukhin (2020): "Optimal Policy under Dollar Pricing," .
Ellison, G. and S. F. Ellison (2009): "Search, obfuscation, and price elasticities on the internet,"
  Econometrica, 77, 427­452.
Engel, C. (2006): "Equivalence Results for Optimal Pass-through, Optimal Indexing to Exchange Rates,
  and Optimal Choice of Currency for Export Pricing," Journal of the European Economic Association, 4,
  1249­1260.
Farhi, E. and M. Maggiori (2017): "A model of the international monetary system," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 133, 295­355.
Gale, D. and X. Vives (2002): "Dollarization, Bailouts, and the Stability of the Banking System," The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 467­502.
Goldberg, L. S. and C. Tille (2008): "Vehicle currency use in international trade," Journal of Interna-
  tional Economics, 76, 177­192.
------ (2016): "Micro, macro, and strategic forces in international trade invoicing: Synthesis and novel
  patterns," Journal of International Economics, 102, 173­187.
Gopinath, G. (2016): "The International Price System," Jackson Hole Symposium Proceedings.
Gopinath, G., E. Boz, C. Casas, F. Diez, P.-O. Gourinchas, and M. Plagborg-Møller (2018):
  "Dominant Currency Paradigm," NBER Working Paper.
Gopinath, G., O. Itskhoki, and R. Rigobon (2010): "Currency Choice and Exchange Rate Pass-
  Through," American Economic Review, 100, 304­36.
Gopinath, G. and J. C. Stein (2018): "Banking, Trade, and the Making of a Dominant Currency,"
  Manuscript.
Gorodnichenko, Y. and O. Talavera (2017): "Price setting in online markets: Basic facts, international
  comparisons, and cross-border integration," American Economic Review, 107, 249­82.
Gowrisankaran, G. and M. Rysman (2012): "Dynamics of consumer demand for new durable goods,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 120, 1173­1219.
Ize, A. and E. Levy Yeyati (2003): "Financial dollarization," Journal of International Economics, 59,
  323­347.
Jermann, U. and V. Quadrini (2012): "Macroeconomic effects of financial shocks," American Economic
  Review, 102, 238­71.
Kamil, H. (2012): How do exchange rate regimes affect firms' incentives to hedge currency risk? Micro
  evidence for Latin America, 12-69, International Monetary Fund.
Kaplan, G. and G. Menzio (2015): "The morphology of price dispersion," International Economic Review,
  56, 1165­1206.
                                 DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                         44

Klenow, P. J. and O. Kryvtsov (2008): "State-dependent or time-dependent pricing: Does it matter
  for recent US inflation?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123, 863­904.
Licandro, G. and M. Mello (2019): "Foreign currency invoicing of domestic transactions as a hedging
  strategy: evidence for Uruguay," Journal of Applied Economics, 22, 622­634.
Maggiori, M., B. Neiman, and J. Schreger (2019): "International Currencies and Capital Allocation,"
  Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Matsuyama, K., N. Kiyotaki, and A. Matsui (1993): "Toward a theory of international currency," The
  Review of Economic Studies, 60, 283­307.
Mukhin, D. (2018): "An Equilibrium Model of the International Price System," Manuscript.
Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2008): "Five facts about prices: A reevaluation of menu cost models,"
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123, 1415­1464.
Neumeyer, P. A. and F. Perri (2005): "Business cycles in emerging economies: the role of interest
  rates," Journal of monetary Economics, 52, 345­380.
Rappoport, V. (2009): "Persistence of dollarization after price stabilization," Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics, 56, 979­989.
Richers, J. (2019): "UIP Violations and the Cost of Capital: Firm Level Evidence," Manuscript.
Salomao, J. and L. Varela (2019): "Exchange Rate Exposure and Firm Dynamics," CEPR Discussion
  Papers 12654, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.
Uribe, M. (1997): "Hysteresis in a simple model of currency substitution," Journal of Monetary Economics,
  40, 185­202.
       ONLINE APPENDIX FOR
"PRICING IN MULTIPLE CURRENCIES
    IN DOMESTIC MARKETS"

      ANDRES DRENIK              DIEGO J. PEREZ
    Department of Economics   Department of Economics
      Columbia University       New York University
                                   DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                                     2

                         Appendix A. Model Details and Proofs

  In this appendix, we provide further details on the model and the proofs of the propositions
in the main body.

A.1. Model details
  The cost minimization problem faced by the firms is given by:

                               C (y )  min                  T
                                                      PtT Yit         N
                                                              + PtN Yit (1 + it )
                                           T ,Y N
                                         Yit   it


subject to

                                                  T         N   1- 
                                                Yit       Yit          = y.

The solution to this problem is given by (2). The flexible price that maximizes flow profits
solves
                               -                                   1-                               -   1/
                Wt     Pit                PtT              PtN                      Wt      Pit
         max Pit cpi               -                                    (1 + it )                            .
          Pit   Pt     Ptcpi                             (1 -  )                    Ptcpi   Ptcpi

The solution to this problem is given by (3). Taking a log-linear approximation to this price
we obtain
                   T    1-   N              1/ - 1      ( - 1) (1/ - 1) cpi
p
~it   k+          pt +      pt +      it +         wt +                pt
             1-+       1-+       1-+       1-+            1-+     
                                                                                                                 (13)

where the constant is given by k = log ( ) - log ( - 1) - log( ) -  log( ) - (1 -  ) log(1 -  ).

A.2. Proof of Proposition 1
  We start by showing the first result that characterizes optimal price choices. The first
order conditions of the recursive problems (4) and (5) are given by
                                             
                                                    ()s Et [pt+s (pLt )] = 0,
                                            s=0
                                   
                                         ()s Et [pt+s (pF t + et+s )] = 0,
                                   s=0

where we denote by pt the first derivative of t (p). Taking a first order approximation of
pt+s (p) evaluated at p
                      ~t+s , we can express

                                     pt+s (p)                 ~t ) (p - p
                                                         ppt (p         ~t+s ) .
                                     DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                             3

Note that we also approximate state t + s with state t. Using this approximation we can
re-express the first order conditions as
                                              
                                                    ()s Et [pLt - p
                                                                  ~t+s ] = 0,                              (14)
                                              s=0
                                     
                                          ()s Et [pF t + et+s - p
                                                                ~t+s ] = 0.                                (15)
                                    s=0

Finally, we combine (14) and (15), and take expectations of future exchange rate to obtain
                        
pLt - (pF t + et ) = µ 1- 
                           .
  Now we show the second result of the proposition. Consider now the difference between
the value of setting optimal prices in local currency and the value of setting optimal prices
in foreign currency

                           Lt = VLt (pLt ) - VF t (pF t )
                                   
                               =         ()s Et [t+s (pLt ) - t+s (pF t + et+s )] .                        (16)
                                   s=0

Taking a second order approximation of the profit function evaluated at optimal flexible
price yields
                                                        1
                            t+s (p)        t+s (~                         ~t+s )2 ,
                                                              pt+s ) (p - p
                                                pt+s ) + ppt (~                                            (17)
                                                        2
where ppt refers to the second derivative of t (p). It can be shown that ppt (~
                                                                              pt+s ) < 0.
Substituting (17) into (16) we obtain
           ppt (~
                pt+s )
    Lt                        ()s Et (pLt - p
                                            ~t+s )2 - (pF t + et+s - p
                                                                     ~t+s )2
               2
           ppt (~
                pt+s )                                  
         =                    ()s Et         et + µ        - et+s (pLt + pF t + et+s - 2~
                                                                                        pt+s ) ,           (18)
               2                                      1 - 
where in the second line we used the first result of Proposition 1. We can re-express the
conditional expectation as
                             
             Et   et + µ        - et+s (pLt + pF t + et+s - 2~
                                                             pt+s ) =
                           1 - 
                           
             Et et + µ        - et+s Et [pLt + pF t + et+s - 2~
                                                              pt+s ] - Covt (et+s , et+s - 2~
                                                                                            pt+s ) .       (19)
                         1 - 
Finally, we use (13), together with the assumed exogenous processes, to compute the two
conditional expectations above:
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                       
           Et et + µ                                      pt+s ] = µ2
                          - et+s Et [pLt + pF t + et+s - 2~                               -s           .   (20)
                     1 -                                                             1 - 
                                  DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                             4

Substituting (19)-(20) into (18) yields our result.

A.3. Proof of Proposition 2
  We begin the proof by showing what the outcome of an OLS regression
                                                   Cov ( p¯t , et )
                                     M RP T =
                                                     Var (et )
recovers. First, we show that Cov ( p
                                    ¯t , et ) = Cov (¯
                                                     pt , et ). This follows from

  Cov (¯               pt- et ) - E (¯
       pt- , et ) = E (¯                                     pt- et )) - E (¯
                                     pt- ) E (et ) = E (Et- (¯              pt- ) µ = 0

and Et- (et - et-1 ) = µ. To obtain this result, we have used the law of iterated expectations.
Next, we use the definition of p
                               ¯t from Proposition 1 to rewrite  as
            Cov (¯
                 pt , et )   Cov ((1 - )         s
                                          s=0 ( ) Et (~
                                                      pt+s ) , et )
 M RP T =                  =
             Var (et )                  Var (et )
                                            
                                                       Cov (Et (~
                                                                pt+s ) , et )
                          = (1 - )               ()s
                                           s=0
                                                           Var (et )
                                            
                                                               pt+s ) et ) - E (Et (~
                                                       (E (Et (~                    pt+s )) E (et ))
                          = (1 - )               ()s
                                           s=0
                                                                       Var (et )
                                            
                                                               pt+s et )) - E (Et (~
                                                       (E (Et (~                   pt+s )) E (Et (et )))
                          = (1 - )               ()s
                                           s=0
                                                                          Var (et )
                                            
                                                       Cov (~
                                                            pt+s , et )
                          = (1 - )               ()s                    ,
                                           s=0
                                                         Var (et )

where we have used again the law of iterated expectations. The last step of the proof consists
of showing the last term in the previous equation is equal to MRPT.
  From the definition of MRPT in equation (8)
                                  
                              2                   Covt (et+s , p
                                                               ~t+s )
         M RP T = (1 - )                ()s-1 s
                                  s=1
                                                    Vart (et+s )
                                   
                                                    Covt (et + et+1 + . . . + et+s , p
                                                                                     ~t+s )
                  = (1 - )2             ()s-1 s
                                  s=1
                                                      Vart (et + et+1 + . . . + et+s )
                                   
                                                    Covt (et + et+1 + . . . + et+s , p
                                                                                     ~t+s )
                  = (1 - )2             ()s-1 s
                                  s=1
                                                               sVart (et+s )
                                                     s
                                                           Covt (et+j , p
                                                                        ~t+s )
                  = (1 - )2             ()s-1 s
                                  s=1               j =1
                                                            sVart (et+j )
                                  DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                                    5

where the last equation uses Vart (et+j ) = Vart (et+s ) for any j, s  1. Let

                                     ~ j,s,t  Covt (et+j , p
                                     
                                                           ~t+s )
                                                                  ,
                                                Vart (et+j )

which is the pass-through of an exchange rate shock in period t + j to prices in period t + s.
Then, we can rewrite MRPT as
                                                                          s
                     M RP T = (1 - )                ()    s-1
                                                                (1 - )          ~ j,s,t .
                                                                                                               (21)
                                              s=1                        j =1


An intermediate result (that we show below) is that

                                 ~ j,s,t = 
                                           ~ s-j,t = Covt (et , p
                                                                ~t+s-j )
                                                                         .                                     (22)
                                                       Vart (et )

That is, pass-through is only a function of the time since the shock occurred, and not of the
time it occurs. Imposing this result in the definition of MRPT (equation (21)), we obtain
                                                    
                                                                Covt (et , p
                                                                           ~t+s )
                       M RP T = (1 - )                    ()s                         ,
                                                    s=0
                                                                  Vart (et )

which is equal to the expression obtained for M RP T .
  Finally, we show that equation (22) holds:

                                           T + (1 -  )N                                     (1/ - 1) w
                 ~t+s ) = Covt
    Covt (et+j , p                et+j ,                et+s +                   et+s +                et+s
                                            1-+                1-+                           1-+     

                          ( - 1) (1/ - 1) cpi
                      +                       et+s
                               1-+    

                             T + (1 -  )N   (1/ - 1) w   ( - 1) (1/ - 1) cpi
                      ==                  +            +                                        vart (et+j )
                              1-+            1 -  +  
                                                              1-+    

                             T + (1 -  )N   (1/ - 1) w   ( - 1) (1/ - 1) cpi
                      ==                  +            +                                        vart (et ) .
                              1-+            1 -  +  
                                                              1-+    


The equation (22) follows from the fact that the last equation does not depend on j nor s.

A.4. Proof of Proposition 3
  To prove the results in this proposition we first compute the covariance term in (19):

                Covt (et+s , et+s - 2~
                                     pt+s ) = sVart (et ) - 2Covt (et+s , p
                                                                          ~t+s ) ,                             (23)

where in the first term we use the fact that the exchange rate follows a random walk. We
can also compute the covariance between the exchange rate and the optimal flexible price
                                         DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                         6

(13):
                                         T + (1 -  )N                             (1/ - 1) w
              ~t+s ) = Covt
 Covt (et+s , p                 et+s ,                et+s +             et+s +              et+s           (24)
                                          1-+                1-+                   1-+     

                         ( - 1) (1/ - 1) cpi
                     +                       et+s
                              1-+    

                                               T + (1 -  )N   (1/ - 1) w   ( - 1) (1/ - 1) cpi
                     = Vart (et+1 )                         +            +                              s   (25)
                                                1-+            1 -  +  
                                                                                1-+    

                           
                     +               .                                                                      (26)
                         1-+    

Substituting (23) and (26) into (18), we obtain
             ppt (~
                  pt+s )
    Lt   -
                 2
                                           2
                               
               ()s   -µ2          -s                                                                        (27)
         s=0
                             1 - 

                                1   T + (1 -  )N + (1/ - 1) (w + ( - 1) cpi )             
         +2Vart (et+1 )           -                                                s-               .       (28)
                                2                 1-+     
                                                                                        1-+   
                                                                                              


The comparative statics results follow directly by taking derivatives of Lt with respect to
each parameter and evaluating their sign. The fourth result also uses the assumption that
T > N . For the last result, we use the fact that the importance of the second term, relative
to the first term, diminishes as Vart (et+1 ) becomes smaller. Therefore, for Vart (et+1 )
low enough, the first term, which is always negative, dominates.
                                 DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                         7

                      Appendix B. Additional Tables and Figures

                 Figure B.1. Screenshot of Online Platform at the Search Stage




Notes: This figure shows an example of what the platform displays when a potential buyer searchers for a
"Playstation 4" in Mercado Libre-Uruguay.
                                 DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                         8

                 Figure B.2. Screenshot of Online Platform at the Listing Level




Notes: This figure shows how a listing is displayed to a potential buyer of a "Playstation 4" in Mercado
Libre-Uruguay.
              Table B.1. Comparison of Platform Categories and Harmonized System (HS) Categories

Mercado Libre Category                                     2018 HS Digit   Description
                                                                           Reception apparatus for television, whether or not incorporating radio-
Electronics, Audio and Video -- Televisions -- LED              8          broadcast receivers or sound or video recording or reproducing appara-
                                                                           tus
Cellphones and Telephones -- Cellphones and Smart-
                                                                6          Telephones for cellular networks or for other wireless networks
phones -- iPhone
Sports and Fitness -- Bicycles and Cycling -- Bicycles          6          Bicycles and other cycles (including delivery tricycles), not motorized
Babies -- Baby Caring Accessories -- Strollers                  8          Baby carriages (including strollers)
Home, Furniture and Garden -- Bedroom -- Mattresses
                                                                8          Mattresses: Of cellular rubber or plastics, whether or not covered
and Bedsprings
Consoles and Video Games -- PlayStation -- Playstation
                                                                8          Video game consoles and machines and parts and accessories thereof
4 - PS4
                                                                           Registers, account books, notebooks, order books, receipt books, letter
                                                                           pads, memorandum pads, diaries and similar articles, exercise books,
                                                                           blotting pads, binders (looseleaf or other), folders, file covers, manifold
Industries and Offices -- Office Equipment -- Stationery        4
                                                                           business forms, interleaved carbon sets and other articles of stationery,
                                                                           of paper or paperboard; albums for samples or for collections and book
                                                                           covers (including cover boards and book jackets) of paper or paperboard
                                                                                                                                                         DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION




                                                                           Musical instruments, the sound of which is produced, or must be am-
Musical Instruments -- Guitars -- Electric                      8
                                                                           plified, electrically (for example, organs, guitars, accordions): Other
Cameras and Accessories -- Digital Memory Cards --
                                                                8          Semiconductor media: Solid-state non-volatile storage devices
SD
Clothes, Shoes and Accessories -- T-shirts -- Women             8          T-shirts: Of cotton: Women's

 Notes: This table compares the classification system used by the online platform with the HS classification used in international
 trade. The first column includes common categories of goods classified at level 3 on the platform. Columns 2 and 3 show the digit
 and description of the closest category found in the 2018 US Harmonized System.
                                                                                                                                                         9
                                   DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                           10


                    Table B.2. Number of Listings and Sellers by Country

      Country                   Number of Listings Number of Sellers Random Sample
      Argentina                       18,594,13                1,751,160                100%
      Bolivia                           13,695                   2,847                  100%
      Costa Rica                       232,530                  40,493                  100%
      Dominican Republic              1,220,326                 22,091                  30%
      Guatemala                         33,704                   3,278                  100%
      Honduras                           2,383                    769                   100%
      Mexico                          17,711,34                1,086,456                 5%
      Nicaragua                          2,534                    796                   100%
      Panama                            41,526                   5,033                  100%
      Paraguay                          16,674                   2,798                  100%
      Peru                            2,277,882                 319,246                 30%
      Uruguay                         3,604,848                 269,319                 30%
      Total                          43,751,575                3,504,286                  -

Notes: This table shows the platform's size in terms of the number of unique listings and sellers by country,
before restricting and cleaning the data. Given the daily frequency of the data, we select a random sample
of listings due to computational considerations. The last column presents the size of the random sample by
country. We exclude data from the goods market in Argentina, where dollar pricing has not been allowed
since 2012. Given the reduction of the sample size, there is no computational need to reduce the sample size
in Argentina.
                                      Table B.3. Summary Statistics: Sellers

                                       Mean          SD        P10      P25       P50        p75         p90         p99
                                                Panel A: Historical Data
Age in years                             4.8          4.3      0.4       1.1       3.5        7.6       11.6        16.1
Number of transactions                  66.5       1364.9      0.0       0.0       0.0       5.0        31.0        949.0
Number of transactions (> 0)            137.5      1959.4      1.0       2.0       5.0       22.0       104.0      2127.0
                                          Panel B: Current Data
Number of listings                       6.9        693.4      1.0       1.0       1.0        2.0        4.0        67.0
Number of transactions                   7.5        546.3      0.0       0.0       0.0       0.0         1.0        52.0
Number of transactions (> 0)            34.6       1172.7      1.0       1.0       1.0        2.0       10.0        427.0
Total revenues                        167460.0 1.1e+07         0.0       0.0       0.0       0.0       5295.1     194196.8
Total revenues (> 0)                  772054.9 2.4e+07 155.7 1070.1 4627.8 10723.9 30935.6 5.6e+06
                                                                                                                                 DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION




Notes: This table presents summary statistics at the seller level for all countries. Panel A shows moments of the distribution
of sellers' experience (age) and the number of transactions (unconditional, and conditional on having made at least one
transaction) ever made in the platform. Only transactions in the goods market are included. Panel B shows moments of the
distribution of sellers' listings, transactions and revenues, computed from the micro data collected during March-October
2018 in all markets (goods, vehicles, and real estate).
                                                                                                                                 11
                                                Table B.4. Summary Statistics: Listings

Category                      % Foreign Curr.   # Listings   # Sellers   Avg. Price   SD. Price    Top Items
Elect., audio, video               17%           160,994      14,928       163.67      253.03      Portable speakers, LED TVs, Headphones
Cameras and accessories             4%           163,246      5,082        329.69      586.40      Lenses, Digital videocameras, SD cards
Cellphones and phones              12%           210,811      25,681       123.12      200.62      Samsung smartphone, iPhone, LG smartphone
Games and toys                      3%           88,915       9,103        51.68        65.96      Teddy bears, Cars with remote controls, Blocks
Videogames                         12%           55,155       8,712        83.27       115.41      Nintendo Wii, Playstation 4, Xbox One
Music instruments                  11%           28,651       3,009        265.22      348.12      Electric guitars, Keyboards, Drums
Health and beauty                   0%           411,119      16,867       59.79        47.54      Lipsticks, Moisturizers, Perfumes for women
Sports and fitness                 14%           107,412      14,970       77.97       106.11      Camping lamps, Soccer shirts, Bicycles
Baby related                        7%           31,361       5,943        51.01        68.12      Strollers, Diapers, Cribs
Clothing                            5%           277,050      38,996       44.27        40.52      Wallets, Sneakers for men, Pants for women
Real Estate                        49%          2,277,113    172,198     161,397.93   241,436.34   Apartments for rent, Houses for sale, Offices for rent
Industries, office                 18%           125,212      14,389       170.77      366.66      Ladders, Paint, Electrical tools
Home, furniture, appliances         9%           272,532      27,193       128.51      208.62      Mattresses, Space heaters, Cooking stoves
Computers                          11%           515,596      16,611       154.78      278.55      Keyboards, Video cards, Hard drives
Vehicles                           11%          2,184,255    788,559     10,273.91     9,278.73    BMW, Ford, Volkswagen
                                                                                                                                                            DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION




Car accessories                    11%           149,700      13,538       105.09      154.60      Tires for cars, Parts: brakes, Parts: transmission
Jewelry                             2%           126,235      9,473        194.52      281.79      Necklaces, Pendants, Watches for women


Notes: This table presents summary statistics for all listings on the platform, by broad categories of goods. The first column shows the fraction
of prices set in dollars. The second and third columns show the number of listings and sellers in each category. The fourth and fifth column
show the average price and the standard deviation of prices within the category. The last column shows the most common types of goods
(categorized at level 3) within broad categories.
                                                                                                                                                            12
                                   DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                             13


                      Figure B.3. Distribution of Listings by Sellers' Sales




                                         Sales = 0             0 < Sales  5
                                         5 < Sales  10         10 < Sales  25
                                          25 > Sales


Notes: This figure shows the concentration of listings in the goods market and across all countries, by sellers
with different number of sales made in active listings during March-October 2018.
                                   DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                            14

               Table B.5. Price Dollarization and Sellers' (Weighted) Characteristics

                                     Dollarization of Revenues           Multi-Currency Sellers
        Country                      Small Medium           Large       Small Medium Large

        Goods
        Mexico                        0%         0%          0%           1%        1%         5%
        Uruguay                       12%       31%         40%          19%        67%       69%
        Peru                          3%        23%         12%           6%        32%       31%
        Dominican Republic            8%         0%          5%           5%        0%        10%
        Average                       6%        13%         14%           8%        25%       29%

        Vehicles
        Argentina                     2%        19%         20%           9%        62%       63%
        Mexico                        0%         3%          4%           1%        7%        11%
        Uruguay                       69%       99%         100%         23%        16%       23%
        Peru                          53%       94%         96%          17%        18%       13%
        Dominican Republic            8%        56%         37%          29%       100%       90%
        Average                       27%       54%         51%          16%        40%       40%

        Real Estate
        Argentina                     40%       97%         98%          51%        98%       96%
        Mexico                        3%        19%         19%          18%        90%       93%
        Uruguay                       46%       100%        100%         47%        70%       100%
        Peru                          21%       96%         100%         15%        26%       21%
        Dominican Republic            28%       56%         75%          64%        90%       90%
        Average                       28%       74%         78%          39%        75%       80%


Notes: This table analyzes currency choice by sellers. The sample is restricted to sellers with positive
revenues from active listings during March-October 2018. Columns 1-3 show the share of revenues that
correspond to listings posted in dollars for each country and type of good, by tercile of sellers' revenues in
dollars. To construct the terciles we weighted each observation by the total revenues of sellers. Columns 4-6
show the share of sellers that post goods in multiple currencies. This sample is further restricted to sellers
with more than one listing. For the goods market in Argentina, dollar pricing has not been allowed since
2012.
                                    DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                              15

       Table B.6. Pass-Through Conditional on Price Change: Country-Market Evidence

                                            Share w. Model-
                                         Consistent Predictions # Categories
                                           Panel A: by Country
                        Argentina                   80%                       35
                        Uruguay                     71%                      157
                                           Panel B: by Market
                        Goods                       69%                      141
                        Vehicles                    83%                       24
                        Real Estate                 81%                       27

Notes: This table reports the share of category-currency pairs with estimated MRPT in accordance with the
theory--i.e. MRPT above the cutoff derived in Proposition 1 for dollar-priced goods and MRPT below the
cutoff for goods priced in local currency. The last column reports the number of markets included in each
share. Since not all markets contain enough observations of goods priced in both currencies, we estimate
equation (10) with OLS for each category-currency separately, where we use the second level of disaggreation
offered by the platform to define a market, and only consider estimates of MRPT for category-currency pairs
that have at least 100 observations. To construct the MRPT cutoff we use country-specific observed inflation
and volatility of nominal exchange rate, country-category-specific price stickiness in local currency, and a
annualized discount factor of 0.96. In the market for real estate, we adjust the discount factor to take into
account the fact that the seller's objective is to sell a single unit of real estate, which ocurrs in 5 months on
average.
                                                DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                                             16


                                  Figure B.4. Price Dollarization by Sellers' Size
              .3         (a) Goods (unconditional)                                  (b) Goods (with category F.E.)




                                                                           .2
              .2




                                                                           .1
              .1




                                                                           0
              0




                                                                           -.1
                   0        2          4              6              8     10 0          2           4              6              8     10
                                            Decile                                                        Decile

                                 Mexico              Uruguay                                   Mexico              Uruguay
                                 Peru                Dominican Republic                        Peru                Dominican Republic



                        (c) Vehicles (unconditional)                               (d) Vehicles (with category F.E.)
              1




                                                                           1
                                                                           .8
              .8




                                                                           .6
              .6




                                                                           .4
              .4




                                                                           .2
              .2




                                                                           0
              0




                   0        2          4              6              8     10 0          2           4              6              8     10
                                            Decile                                                        Decile

                                Mexico                Uruguay                                 Mexico                Uruguay
                                Peru                  Dominican Republic                      Peru                  Dominican Republic
                                Argentina                                                     Argentina



                       (e) Real Estate (unconditional)                            (f) Real Estate (with category F.E.)
              1




                                                                           1
                                                                           .8
              .8




                                                                           .6
              .6




                                                                           .4
              .4




                                                                           .2
              .2




                                                                           0
              0




                   0        2          4              6              8     10 0          2           4              6              8     10
                                            Decile                                                        Decile

                                Mexico                Uruguay                                 Mexico                Uruguay
                                Peru                  Dominican Republic                      Peru                  Dominican Republic
                                Argentina                                                     Argentina



Notes: The panels on the left hand side plot the point estimates of an OLS regression of a seller's share of revenues that
correspond to listings posted in dollars on a categorical variable indicating the sellers' decile of total revenues in dollars.
The panels on the right hand side plot similar results from a specification that also includes category fixed effects. The
dashed lines indicate 95% confidence intervals constructed with robust standard errors. We estimate one regression for
each country and type of good. The sample is restricted to sellers with positive revenues from active listings during
March-October 2018. For the goods market in Argentina, dollar pricing has not been allowed since 2012.
                                                                        DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                          17


                Figure B.5. Nominal Exchange Rate: Argentina and Uruguay

                                                                          ARS                               UYU




                                                                                              1.1
                                                           1.8
                     Nominal exchange rate (10May2018=1)
                                                           1.6




                                                                                              1.05
                                                           1.4
                                                           1.2




                                                                                              1
                                                           1




                                                            01may2018             01oct2018     01may2018         01oct2018




Notes: This figure shows the bilateral nominal exchange rate between the Argentinean Peso and the US dollar
(left), and the Uruguayan Peso and the US dollar (right), during the period of analysis (March-October 2018).
The nominal exchange rate has been normalized to 1 on the first day of the sample.
                                                                     DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                                                 18


                                    Figure B.6. Exchange Rate Pass-through to Prices and Quantities: Argentina

                                               (a) Vehicles: Prices                                                             (b) Vehicles: Quantities

                           1                                                                                          0
 Cumulative pass-through




                           .8




                                                                                           Cumulative pass-through
                                                                                                                     -.2


                           .6




                           .4                                                                                        -.4




                           .2


                                                                                                                     -.6

                           0

                                0        10        20          30     40         50   60
                                                              Days
                                                                                                                     -.8
                                                  Aggregate          Local currency
                                                                                                                           0    10      20     30     40     50   60
                                                  Dollar                                                                                      Days


                                              (c) Real Estate: Prices                                                          (d) Real Estate: Quantities
                           1                                                                                          0
 Cumulative pass-through




                           .8
                                                                                                                     -.2
                                                                                           Cumulative pass-through




                           .6

                                                                                                                     -.4


                           .4


                                                                                                                     -.6

                           .2




                                                                                                                     -.8
                           0

                                0        10        20          30     40         50   60
                                                              Days
                                                                                                                     -1
                                                  Aggregate          Local currency
                                                                                                                           0    10      20     30     40     50   60
                                                  Dollar                                                                                      Days



Notes: These figures show the estimated pass-through to prices (in Panels B.6a and B.6c) and quantities (in
Panels B.6b and B.6d) for Argentina in markets for vehicles and real estate. Panels B.6b and B.6d presents
estimates of pass-through to quantities sold of listings posted in dollars relative to quantities sold of listings
posted in local currency. Dashed lines correspond to 95% confidence intervals (standard errors are clustered
at the listing level).
                                                                     DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                                                          19


                                     Figure B.7. Exchange Rate Pass-through to Prices and Quantities: Uruguay

                                               (a) Vehicles: Prices                                                                        (b) Vehicles: Quantities

                            1                                                                                        0
 Cumulative pass-through




                                                                                           Cumulative pass-through
                                                                                                                     -1
                           .5




                                                                                                                     -2
                            0




                                                                                                                     -3

                           -.5

                                 0       10        20          30      40        50   60
                                                              Days
                                                                                                                     -4
                                                  Aggregate          Local currency
                                                                                                                              0       10        20      30      40    50   60
                                                  Dollar                                                                                               Days


                                              (c) Real Estate: Prices                                                                 (d) Real Estate: Quantities

                           1                                                                                              0
 Cumulative pass-through




                           .8

                                                                                                                      -.5
                                                                                           Cumulative pass-through




                           .6


                                                                                                                      -1
                           .4




                           .2                                                                                        -1.5




                           0
                                                                                                                      -2


                                 0       10        20          30      40        50   60
                                                              Days
                                                                                                                     -2.5
                                                  Aggregate          Local currency
                                                                                                                                  0   10         20     30      40    50   60
                                                  Dollar                                                                                               Days



Notes: These figures show the estimated pass-through to prices (in Panels B.7a and B.7c) and quantities (in
Panels B.7b and B.7d) for Uruguay in markets for vehicles and real estate. Panels B.7b and B.7d presents
estimates of pass-through to quantities sold of listings posted in dollars relative to quantities sold of listings
posted in local currency. Dashed lines correspond to 95% confidence intervals (standard errors are clustered
at the listing level).
                                                                 DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                20


             Figure B.8. Exchange Rate Pass-through with Time FE: Argentina

                                                                          (a) Vehicles: Prices

                                                       1




                             Cumulative pass-through
                                                       .9




                                                       .8




                                                       .7



                                                             0      10        20      30     40    50   60
                                                                                    Days


                                                                         (b) Real Estate: Prices
                                                        1
                             Cumulative pass-through




                                                       .95




                                                        .9




                                                       .85

                                                             0      10        20      30      40   50   60
                                                                                     Days



Notes: These figures show the estimated pass-through to prices for Argentina in markets of vehicles and
real estate. Panels present estimates of pass-through to prices of listings posted in dollars relative to prices
of listings posted in local currency (equation (11)). Dashed lines correspond to 95% confidence intervals
(standard errors are clustered at the listing level).
                                                                  DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                    21


              Figure B.9. Exchange Rate Pass-through with Time FE: Uruguay

                                                                             (a) Goods: Prices


                                                        1




                             Cumulative pass-through
                                                       .95




                                                        .9



                                                              0      10         20      30       40     50   60
                                                                                       Days


                                                                            (b) Vehicles: Prices
                                                        1.2




                                                       1.15
                             Cumulative pass-through




                                                        1.1




                                                       1.05




                                                         1




                                                        .95

                                                              0       10        20      30         40   50   60
                                                                                       Days


                                                                           (c) Real Estate: Prices
                                                        1.1




                                                       1.08
                             Cumulative pass-through




                                                       1.06




                                                       1.04




                                                       1.02




                                                         1


                                                              0       10        20      30         40   50   60
                                                                                       Days



Notes: These figures show the estimated pass-through to prices for Uruguay in markets of goods, vehicles and
real estate. Panels present estimates of pass-through to prices of listings posted in dollars relative to prices
of listings posted in local currency (equation (11)). Dashed lines correspond to 95% confidence intervals
(standard errors are clustered at the listing level).
                                                 DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                               22


                Figure B.10. Exchange Rate Pass-through to Prices in Uruguay: All Products

                       (a) 1M Pass-through                                                        (b) 6M Pass-through




                                                                                 2.5
           3




                                                                                 2
           2




                                                                                 1.5
 Density




                                                                       Density
                                                                                 1
           1




                                                                                 .5
           0




                                                                                 0
               -.5      0        .5                  1           1.5                        -.5       0         .5      1   1.5


                                                         (c) 12M Pass-through
                                      2
                                      1.5
                                 Density
                                   1  .5
                                      0




                                            -1           -.5    0                      .5         1       1.5



Notes: These figures present histograms of estimates of exchange rate pass-through for all goods included
in the CPI in Uruguay. Panels (A), (B) and (C) present estimates at the 1-, 6- and 12-month horizon,
respectively.
                                     DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                          23

                                  Appendix C. Data Description

C.1. Description of the Online Platform
  The following facts illustrate the importance of the platform in the regional e-commerce
market. In 2017, the platform sold 271 million items with a combined gross merchandise
value of USD11.8 billion (26% of all e-commerce sales in Latin America).31 In the same year,
10 million unique sellers and 33.7 million unique buyers used the platform. With 56 million
unique visitors in May 2018, Mercado Libre is the top retail site in Latin America, followed
by Amazon (22.4mm), B2W (16.1mm), Alibaba (11.8mm), and eBay (9.5mm).32
  In addition to providing intermediation services to buyers and sellers, the platform offers
two services to overcome the largest barriers to e-commerce in Latin America: shipping
infrastructure and access to electronic means of payment. Buyers can purchase goods on the
platform by using the firm's own digital payment system, "MercadoPago", which is similar
to PayPal and links payments to individual accounts in the system, external bank accounts,
or credit/debit cards (around 80% of transactions occur through MercadoPago). Buyers
can choose the currency with which to pay, regardless of the currency of the posted price.
However, if a buyer decides to buy in local currency a good that is posted in dollars, Mercado
Libre automatically converts the value of the good using the spot exchange rate plus a spread
(acting thereby as a foreign exchange transaction business). As a result, buyers must pay
an implicit transaction fee to the platform if they choose to pay with a different currency.
In addition, Mercado Libre launched "MercadoEnvio", a logistics service that arose from
alliances with the biggest logistics companies in each country (around 70% of transactions
used this shipping method).33
  One might question the usefulness of online data/e-commerce as a source of data on prices
and quantities. Online sales as a share of total retail are 2% in Latin America, which is not
much smaller than the share in advanced economies (around 8% in Europe and the US).34
However, this is a fast growing market, with online sales growing by more than 20% annually
in the last two years in all the major countries. In addition, Cavallo (2017) shows that a
  31See   Retail e-commerce sales in Latin America from Statista.
  32See   Most popular online retailers in Latin America from Statista.
  33In   order to sell and buy in this platform, users need to create a country-specific account. Despite this
possibility, users of the platform in one country cannot make purchases in the platform's site of another
country. We verified the shipping options in our dataset and there is no listing that offers international
shipping.
  34See   e-commerce share of total global retail sales in 2016, by region , from Statista.
                               DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                     24

large fraction of online prices is identical to the corresponding "offline" price in the physical
store.
  On the platform, sellers have incentives to keep the information in their listing updated,
since it is costly to use the platform's services; the cost of listing a good for sale for an
unlimited duration is 11% of the transacted price. Ads in the markets for real estate and
vehicles have a fixed duration (30, 60, 90, or 180 days). The lowest cost of listing a real
estate ad for 60 days goes from USD9 (for individuals) to USD142 (for professional realtors
who list multiple properties). The lowest cost of listing an ad for a vehicle for 60 days
goes from USD9 (for individuals) to USD124 (for professional car dealers who list multiple
units). Histograms of duration of listings and sellers are shown in Figures E.1a and E.1b.
The three modes that can be observed correspond to listings that expired after 30 and 60
days, and those with unlimited duration that remained active during the entire window of
observation. In the case of the goods market, sellers must also pay attention to inventories,
since the listing will be paused (not visible to buyers) whenever the quantities available for
sale reach zero and until sellers update the inventory to a positive number. Given these costs
and the presence of big firms (including large well-known local firms, international brands,
professional realtors, and car dealers), data from this online platform should be reliable.




C.2. Data Collection
  The data collection process is facilitated by the provision of APIs by the platform in order
to help developers create online apps to help sellers improve their sales. Every morning, a
Java script begins collecting data from all listings available on the platform, by combining
information on listings already stored in our dataset with new listings created during the
previous day. Our code first creates a list of all listings across three groups of markets and all
countries. Then, in a second round, it collects data on each specific listing. The idea behind
this second step is to recover almost all of the information a user observes when deciding
whether to purchase an item from a listing (see Figure B.2). There are only two exceptions
to this rule. First, we do not save the pictures sellers include in the listing. Second, we
record the title describing the good and the category tree used by the platform to categorize
the good, but not any additional text the seller includes to further describe the good (due
to computational constraints). In an additional step, the code downloads the full category
three across all countries and summary information at the seller level.
                               DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                     25

C.3. Data cleaning and variable construction
  Before using the micro data in the analysis, we implement a series of procedures to clean
the data. The following filters are applied to listings for goods. First, we drop all observations
coming from listings of "divisible" goods. In order to implement this filter, we make use of the
description of the good that sellers include in the listing and the description of the category
provided by the platform to isolate two types of listings: (1) those with sales in bulk, and (2)
those with "divisible" goods. More specifically, we delete all listings that contained any of the
following texts (in Spanish): promotion, batch, kilo (and variations), gram (and variations),
liter (and variations), meter (and variations), centimeter (and variations), kilometer (and
variations), pack, units, and "2 for 1". Based on this, we are able to identify the categories of
goods in which these words appeared more often and dropped them completely. In addition,
we delete categories containing heterogeneous goods. Overall, we delete all listings in the
following categories: Music, Books and Movies, Art and Antiquities, Food and Beverages,
Services, Collectibles and Hobbies, Pet related, and Other.
  Next, we delete all listings for used goods (except listings for used cars and properties). We
delete goods with high prices--i.e., those with prices above US$10,000 and above the 99th
percentile of the within-category price distribution (after converting all prices into the same
currency). Regarding listings for real estate and vehicles, we apply an algorithm to delete
listings with "unusual" prices (e.g., 1, 9999999, etc.). We also drop listings that experienced
log price changes above 100% in absolute terms. Finally, we delete all daily observations in
which the listing was temporarily paused (buyers do not see paused listings), either by the
seller or because the listing ran out of units available for sale. We also delete data on market-
country pairs (there are three markets: goods, real estate, and vehicles) without any dollar
pricing. After applying these filters, we end up with 434 million listing-day observations
across all markets and countries.
  An important variable in our analysis is the number of units sold by listing. As shown in
Figure B.2, the platform keeps track of the cumulative number of quantities sold (e.g., "117
sold"). Therefore, the number of units sold in any given day can be obtained by subtracting
the current value of this number from the one downloaded the previous day. This procedure
introduces a small amount of measurement error when inferring the price at which each
quantity was sold, since we only have data on one price per day. However, the importance
of this measurement error should be trivial due to the persistence of prices and the high
frequency of the data. When analyzing real estate and vehicles markets, we will consider
                                  DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                          26

the day of the sale as the day in which the seller decided to close the ad, as long as that
date is earlier than the expiration date of the listing (in this market, sellers pay to list the
ad for a fixed number of days, usually 30, 60, 90, or 180 days after which they can relist
the same ad by paying again). An important feature of the platform is that closed listings
cannot be reactivated. Thus, there are two reasons to close an ad before its expiration date:
the property/vehicle was sold, the sellers does not want to sell it anymore.
  Finally, we observe all price changes that occur during the life of a listing. We may not
observe a price change that occurs if the seller decides to relist a good in a new listing with
a different price once the original listing is closed. This is not a major concern since the
average life of a listing is 35, 82, and 57 days in the market for vehicles, goods, and real
estate, respectively.

C.4. Sample of Countries
  The choice of the sample of country varies across exercises and is based on the objective
of each exercise. For the cross-country analysis pursued in Sections 4.1 and 6, we include
the 12 countries that display some degree of price dollarization, namely Argentina, Bolivia,
Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, and Uruguay.35 We also include 3 more countries (Brazil, Chile and Colom-
bia), which have zero price dollarization due to regulation, as they are useful to understand
the cross-country differences. Results are robust to excluding these countries from the anal-
ysis.
  For the within-country analysis in Section 4.2, given that the focus is the selection at the
micro-level into different currencies, we narrow down the attention to the countries with
the largest amount of data and some degree of price dollarization. These countries are
Argentina, Mexico, Uruguay, Peru and Dominican Republic. For the analysis of the role of
tradeability we use the historical dataset that covers data for Uruguay and Argentina for the
2003-12 period. This is the most suitable data in terms of period of analysis, given that the
information on goods tradeability, is obtained from trade and sectoral output data for the
years of 2002 for Argentina, and 2007 for Uruguay. Finally, for the pass-through analysis we
focus on the case of Argentina and Uruguay, since these are economies with large amount of


  35Even   though Panama has a fixed exchange rate vis-a-vis the dollar, it still displays variation in the
currency of denomination of prices, which motivate us to include Panama in our analysis. All main results
are robust to excluding Panama from the analysis.
                              DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                  27

data, some degree of price dollarization and sufficient variation in the exchange rate during
the period of analysis.


C.5. Tradeability Indices
  We construct tradeability indices for 3-digit ISIC manufacturing industries as the ratio
between the sum of exports and imports over output. We obtain trade data for Argentina
and Uruguay from UN Comtrade World Integrated Solutions (WITS) and data on sectoral
output from UNIDO. Due to data availability issues, we use data from 2002 for Argentina
and data from 2007 for Uruguay. These data are merged using product concordance tables
provided by WITS.
  Next, we manually assign a 3-digit ISIC classification to each category of goods available
on the online platform, by reading the description of each category and finding the closest
match in the ISIC classification manual (United Nations (2008)). For those few categories
with more than one possible 3-digit ISIC classification, we computed the tradeability index by
first aggregating imports, exports, and output of all of these sectors and then computing the
ratio. Aggregate statistics are reported in Table C1. As expected, due to its size, Uruguay is
relatively more open to trade than Argentina. Additionally, more technologically advanced
products (e.g., cameras and computers) tend to be more imported in both economies, whereas
local production of clothing tends to be more relevant than imports of those goods. Table C1
also reports an additional measure of tradeability defined as the ratio of the sum of exports
and imports to output, which yields results similar to the baseline measure.


C.6. Other sources of data
  When analyzing the relevance of currency choice for broader aggregates, we use monthly
data for the 1990-2018 period (subject to data availability in each country). Data on deposit
dollarization, monthly nominal exchange rates and inflation rates of Latin American countries
were obtained from the Latin Macro Watch dataset produced by the IADB. Data on trade
openness were obtained from the World Bank. Data on the US monthly inflation rate were
obtained from the FRED database produced by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
Time series of GDP were obtained from national accounts of each country. Given the lack of
monthly series of GDP, we interpolate quarterly data on GDP using cubic interpolation to
obtain monthly series (results are unchanged if we use other monthly indicators of economic
activity).
                                   DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                            28


                      Table C1. Average Tradeability Indices by Category

       Category                             Imp./(Imp.+Output)            (Imp.+Exp.)/Output
                                            Argentina      Uruguay        Argentina      Uruguay
       Electronics, audio and video            47%           96%             223%         2380%
       Cameras and accessories                 62%           94%             794%         2363%
       Cellphones and phones                   65%           85%             486%          695%
       Games and toys                          55%           77%             158%          341%
       Videogames                              56%           79%             254%          459%
       Music and movies                        14%            3%              32%           8%
       Music instruments                       50%           78%             149%          341%
       Health and beauty                       33%           52%              91%          160%
       Sports and fitness                      37%           62%             100%          249%
       Baby related                            25%           47%             101%          164%
       Clothing                                16%           38%              30%           95%
       Industries, office                      36%           61%             139%          684%
       Home, furniture, garden                 26%           45%              99%          140%
       Computers                               69%           87%            1469%         1978%
       Hobbies                                 39%           48%             109%          265%
       Books and magazines                      7%            6%              16%           11%
       Jewelry                                 80%           89%             162%          342%
       Car accessories                         43%           80%             107%          149%
       Appliances                              22%           75%              51%          352%

Notes: This table presents average tradeability indices by broadest categories of goods on the online platform
for Argentina and Uruguay. The first index is constructed as the ratio of sectoral imports to the sum of
sectoral imports and output. The second index is constructed as the ratio of the sum of sectoral imports
and exports to sectoral output.


  To construct the category-market CPIs for each country we use detailed CPI level data.
The objective is to construct price indexes that represent the same markets as in the online
platform. The vehicles price index is given by the CPI component "vehicles." For most
countries this series is available for long periods and, in most cases, we can capture the
acquisition price (i.e., exclude maintenance or other related costs). The real estate price index
corresponds to the CPI component "rent." For most countries this series is available for long
                                   DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                            29

periods and captures the average cost of renting a real estate property. Finally, the goods
price index is constructed by identifying various categories of the CPI index and aggregating
them using their relative weight in the basket of consumption in each country. Goods
categories included in this index are durable, and exclude the rent and vehicle categories
considered before. Goods included in this category are, for example, house tools, electronics
or clothes. For each country the level of detail of the publicly available CPI data36 varies
and, as a consequence, the detail at which we can identify the categories included in this
index also varies.
  When analyzing the relevance of currency choice for specific categories of goods in the
Uruguayan CPI, we use monthly price indices from 1997 to 2010 produced by the national
statistical agency (INE).




  36This   is considering a long enough period of time needed for our estimations.
                               DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                    30

                      Appendix D. Representativeness Analysis

  We use the household consumption survey from Uruguay (Encuesta Nacional de Gastos e
Ingresos de los Hogares ) to analyze data on buyers' consumption patterns. This survey was
conducted in 2005-2006 and contains detailed information on consumption at the good level
for a representative sample of households. In this section, we discuss the representativeness
of our analysis in terms of the types of goods available for sale on the online platform relative
to the average household consumption basket.
  Table D1 compares the types of goods included in the average household consumption
basket (using data from the consumption survey) with the goods available on the online
platform. In the second column, we show the share of total monthly expenditure households
spend on broad categories of goods. These categories are the ones used officially when con-
structing the CPI. The third column presents the expenditure share in the average household
consumption basket, including only types of goods that are also available for sale on the on-
line platform. The last column simply reports the share of items available for sale on the
platform as a function of the total number of items in each consumption category.
  In terms of average expenditure shares, the goods included on the online platform cover
almost a third of total average monthly expenditures. In particular, we have a good cover-
age in Apparel, Furniture and Home Appliances, and Culture and Recreation, i.e., mostly
durable goods. As expected, we have almost no coverage of services and food items. There-
fore, aggregate price dollarization would be lower in the aggregate, because food should be
expected to be priced in local currency.
                                   DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                            31


         Table D1. Representativeness of the Basket of Goods Sold on the Online
         Platform

 Category                                   Share of total Expenditure share on Share of items on
                                             expenditure           online-platform           online-platform
 Food and Non-alcoholic Beverages                 23.0                    0.00                     0.00
 Alcoholic Beverages and Tobacco                  1.52                    99.9                     80.0
 Apparel                                          4.12                    95.3                     93.0
 Housing and Utilities                            30.2                    65.3                     43.7
 Furniture and Home Appliances                    3.97                    36.9                     72.6
 Medical Care                                     10.9                    3.80                     4.76
 Transportation                                   8.48                    5.13                     9.09
 Communications                                   4.16                    10.1                     12.5
 Culture and Recreation                           5.12                    48.6                     58.8
 Education                                        1.40                    0.00                     0.00
 Hotels and Restaurants                           2.42                    0.00                     0.00
 Other Goods and Services                         4.56                    22.2                     32.0
 Total                                           100.0                    31.4                     29.8

Notes: This table analyzes the representativeness of the data from the online platform by showing the fraction
those goods represent in the average household consumption basket. Data on households' expenditures are
from the national consumption survey from Uruguay (ENGIH) conducted in 2005-2006. The second column
shows the average split of total expenditures between large categories (those used when computing the official
CPI). The third column shows, for each category and overall, the average expenditure share for goods that
are also available for sale on the platform. The last column shows the share of types of goods, within
categories and overall, that are available for sale on the platform. Summary statistics were computed using
household weights.
                                   DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                           32


              Table D2. Price Dollarization in Latin America: Other Websites

          Country                       Market                        Website
          Argentina                  Real Estate        https://www.zonaprop.com.ar/
          Argentina                  Real Estate         https://www.argenprop.com/
          Argentina                  Real Estate          https://www.remax.com.ar/
          Argentina                  Real Estate            https://www.olx.com.ar/
          Argentina                    Vehicles            https://demotores.com.ar/
          Argentina                    Vehicles            http://www.deautos.com/
          Argentina                    Vehicles        https://www.autocosmos.com.ar/
          Argentina                    Vehicles             https://www.olx.com.ar/
          Argentina                    Vehicles           https://www.autofoco.com/
          Dominican Republic Real Estate                   https://indominicana.com
          Dominican Republic Real Estate                  https://www.remaxrd.com/
          Dominican Republic Real Estate                   https://www.olimare.com/
          Dominican Republic Real Estate                 https://www.supercasas.com/
          Dominican Republic           Vehicles         https://www.supercarros.com/
          Peru                       Real Estate        https://www.adondevivir.com/
          Peru                       Real Estate       https://www.laencontre.com.pe/
          Peru                         Vehicles               https://neoauto.com/
          Peru                         Vehicles             https://www.olx.com.pe/
          Peru                         Vehicles         https://peru.todoautos.com.pe/
          Mexico                     Real Estate        https://www.inmuebles24.com/
          Mexico                     Real Estate      https://www.vivanuncios.com.mx/
          Mexico                     Real Estate         https://www.remax.com.mx/
          Uruguay                       Goods         https://www.tiendainglesa.com.uy
          Uruguay                       Goods             https://www.devoto.com.uy
          Uruguay                       Goods             https://www.disco.com.uy/
          Uruguay                       Goods             https://www.geant.com.uy/
          Uruguay                       Goods             https://magiccenter.com.uy/
          Uruguay                       Goods        https://nelsonsobrero.com.uy/store/
          Uruguay                       Goods          https://www.multiahorro.com.uy

Notes: This table includes links to relevant websites in Latin American where dollar pricing is also present.
                                       DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                        33

                    Appendix E. Price Dollarization: Further Results


                     Figure E.1. Histogram of Duration of Listings and Sellers

                                      (a) Histogram of Duration of Listings
                          .08
                          .06
                    Fraction
                      .04 .02
                          0




                                  0       50          100            150          200
                                                   Number of days


                                      (b) Histogram of Duration of Sellers
                        .25
                        .2  .15
                     Fraction
                   .1   .05
                        0




                                  0      50         100             150         200
                                                  Number of days



Notes: Panel (A) plots the histogram of the duration (in days) of listings on the platform during the March-
October 2018 period. Panel (B) plots the histogram of the number of days a seller had an active listing on the
platform during the March-October 2018 period. Both figures contain censored and uncensored durations of
listings and sellers.
                                               Table E1. Price Stickiness by Currency

                         Freq. Price Changes      Implied Duration        Share Price Inc.      Med. Price Increase     Med. Price Decrease
Country                  Local Cur.   Dollar     Local Cur.   Dollar     Local Cur.   Dollar    Local Cur.   Dollar     Local Cur.   Dollar

Goods
Mexico                     3.34%      0.16%           1         21          44%       55%           7%        14%          -7%        -17%
Uruguay                    0.72%      0.27%           5         12          56%       54%          11%        10%          -13%       -12%
Peru                       0.29%      0.09%          11         37          39%       46%          14%        16%          -14%       -15%
Dominican Republic         0.08%      0.02%          40        173          33%       31%          15%        22%          -16%       -27%

Vehicles
Argentina                  2.05%      0.74%           2         4           71%       32%           9%         7%          -8%         -7%
Mexico                     0.72%      0.14%           5         23          19%       30%           7%        11%          -5%        -12%
Uruguay                    1.22%      0.54%           3         6           49%       20%          20%        10%          -16%        -8%
Peru                       0.96%      1.41%           3         2           17%       14%          14%        12%          -8%         -6%
Dominican Republic         0.19%      0.16%          17         20          14%       17%          11%         6%          -6%         -6%

Real Estate
Argentina                  0.60%      0.19%           6         18          78%       31%          13%         9%          -14%        -8%
Mexico                     0.13%      0.07%          25         51          45%       42%          11%        14%          -10%       -14%
Uruguay                    0.34%      0.19%          10         18          22%       40%          16%        10%          -10%       -10%
                                                                                                                                                 DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION




Peru                       0.73%      0.65%           5         5           35%       24%          22%        11%          -17%        -9%
Dominican Republic         0.01%      0.01%          256       546          38%       42%          13%        17%          -10%       -11%


Notes: This table presents statistics on price stickiness for each country and type of market (goods, vehicles, and real estate), by currency.
The sample is restricted to listings with at least 60 days of data. The average daily frequency of price changes is the fraction of listings
that changed price in a given day. The average implied duration (in months) is equal to (-1/ ln(1 - f ))/30, where f is the daily frequency
of price changes. The last six columns show the share of price changes that result in price increases, and the mean absolute sizes of (log)
price increases and decreases.
                                                                                                                                                 34
                               DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                                  35

    Appendix F. Structural Interpretation of Pass-through Regressions

  This appendix shows that the pass-through regressions on quantities can have a structural
interpretation, under which the estimated parameters reflect the elasticity of demand. We
analyze a generalized version of the demand structure of the model presented in Section 2.
For simplicity, we isolate from dynamic considerations and consider a static environment.
The dynamics of pass-through to quantities sold can be generated by slow adjustments of
demand to price changes due to, for example, search frictions in online markets (see, for
example, Ellison and Ellison (2009)).
  Consider a representative consumer whose preferences are given by the following nested
CES function:
                                                                               
                                                                     -1        - 1
                                               N                        -1
                                        1              1       -1
                       U =         j (e)            ij Cij
                                                       
                                                                             dj        ,
                               J              i=1


where  is the elasticity of substitution across good categories j  J ,                     is the elasticity of
substitution within goods of a category j , Cij denotes consumption of good i in category j
(henceforth, good ij ), ij are demand preference shocks associated with good i in category
j , and j (e) are preference shocks associated with category j . We allow for good-category
preference shocks to depend on the (log of) exchange rate e. The dependence of j on e
captures the fact that households that have different exposures of their incomes to the ex-
change rate can have different j . For example, this could capture a situation in which richer
households have a higher elasticity of income to the exchange rate and stronger preferences
for durable goods than poorer households. As we show below, our econometric strategy can
allow for a differential impact of e on j , and still estimate .
  The budget constraint of the household is given by

                                        N
                                             Pij (e)Cij = W (e).
                                     J i=1


where Pij (e) is the price of good i in category j in local currency and W (e) is household
income (or wealth) in local currency, both of which are allowed to vary with the exchange
rate. Demand for good ij is given by

                                                           -             -
                                             Pij (e)            Pj (e)       W (e)
                        Cij = ij j (e)                                             ,                      (29)
                                             Pj (e)             P (e)        P (e)
                                  DOMESTIC PRICE DOLLARIZATION                                          36

where Pj and P are the category j and aggregate price indices, respectively, and given by
                                                                    1
                                               N                   1-
                                                          1-
                                  Pj (e) =           ij Pij  (e)        ,
                                               i=1
                                                                     1
                                                                    1-
                                   P (e) =         j (e)Pj1- (e)            .

Consider now a depreciation in the exchange rate of e > 0, and denote x = log X for
any variable X . Given our empirical findings that in the short-run, prices are sticky and
pass-through is one for prices in local currency and zero for prices in dollars, we have that

                                       pij = e1{currij = d},                                          (30)

where 1{currij = d} is an indicator function that equals one when the currency of good ij
is the dollar. Log-differentiating (29) and using (30) yields

   cij = - e1{currij = d} + [j (e) + ( -  )pj (e) - (1 -  )p(e) + w(e)] .                             (31)

It is straightforward to see that the second term in (31) is captured by the category-time
fixed effects jt included in the regression specification (11). This implies that the estimate of
  n
  k=1 k   in (11) corresponds to an estimate of the elasticity of demand . The key identifying
assumption that we make to be able to estimate this elasticity is that ij does not depend
on e. In other words, we assume that, within goods of a given category j , the exchange rate
does not differentially affect their demand. We consider this to be a realistic assumption,
since the identified categories in the data correspond to very narrowly defined sets of goods
(see Table B.4).

                                              References

United Nations (2008): "International Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic Activities (ISIC),
  Rev. 4," New York: United Nations.
