                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   TWO TALES OF DEBT

                                        Amir Kermani
                                         Yueran Ma

                                      Working Paper 27641
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27641


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                         August 2020, Revised November 2020




We thank Douglas Baird, Bo Becker, Mitchell Berlin, Doug Diamond, Jason Donaldson, Andrea
Eisfeldt, Victoria Ivashina, Steve Kaplan, Anil Kashyap, John Moore, Justin Murfin, Giorgia
Piacentino, Raghu Rajan, Michael Roberts, José Scheinkman, Per Stromberg, Amir Sufi, Harald
Uhlig, seminar participants at BIS, Chicago Booth, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Columbia
GSB, LSE, Maryland, NYU Stern, Philadelphia Fed, Swedish House of Finance, University of
Hawaii, Virtual Finance Workshop, and WashU Olin, and conference participants at Red Rock
for insightful comments and discussions. We also thank finance professionals John Coons and
Doug Jung for sharing their knowledge. We are grateful to Fatin Alia Ali, Leonel Drukker, Abbas
Rezaei, and Julien Weber for outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Amir Kermani and Yueran Ma. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Two Tales of Debt
Amir Kermani and Yueran Ma
NBER Working Paper No. 27641
August 2020, Revised November 2020
JEL No. G32,G33

                                          ABSTRACT

We analyze the heterogeneous nature of corporate debt contracts, some focusing on liquidation
values of discrete assets whereas others on going-concern values of the business. Using hand-
collected data on firm attributes, we present several findings. First, firms on average have limited
liquidation values. Second, companies with lower liquidation values have more debt backed by
going-concern values and more intensive monitoring of firm performance. They have higher
interest rates only for debt against discrete assets. Third, secured debt is not always tied to
liquidation values of discrete assets. We present a model that matches the empirical findings,
which demonstrates how creditor monitoring and covenants facilitate borrowing well beyond
liquidation values.


Amir Kermani
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
545 Student Services Building #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
kermani@berkeley.edu

Yueran Ma
The University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Ave.
Chicago, IL 60637
Yueran.Ma@chicagobooth.edu
1    Introduction
    Debt is one of the most widely used contracts for financing companies around the
world. The nature and enforcement of debt contracts have long been key questions in
economics research. Broadly speaking, there are two general approaches of debt en-
forcement (Djankov, Hart, McLiesh, and Shleifer, 2008; Diamond, Hu, and Rajan, 2020).
In one approach, creditors lend against the liquidation value of discrete assets, namely
separable and often tangible assets that can be evaluated (and if needed repossessed) on
a standalone basis. For this type of debt, lenders mainly focus on assessing liquidation
values of the assets pledged to them, which can be relied on even if the firm is gone, and
set borrowing limits accordingly. In another approach, creditors lend against the value
of the firm as an operating business (i.e., going-concern value)--this value may benefit
from human capital, organizational structure, and business relations, and may not be
captured by discrete or tangible assets. For this type of debt, lenders' payoffs are tied
to the value created by the business, and the allocation of control rights (over business
decisions) between firms and creditors can play an important role.
    These two approaches of debt enforcement are also reflected in the rich collection of
corporate debt contracts in the US.1 In particular, firms' debt contracts can be backed
by different aspects of the firm, as exemplified by the priority rules in bankruptcy. For
instance, in Chapter 11 a debt contract secured by a piece of equipment has the highest
priority claim against the value of the equipment (i.e., it obtains a senior claim up to the
transaction or liquidation value of the equipment). On the other hand, a debt contract
secured by a blanket lien on the firm as a whole has the highest priority claim against
the going-concern value of the firm (i.e., it obtains a senior claim up to the firm's going-
concern value, minus the liquidation value of any discrete assets pledged separately).
These different types of debt can also differ substantially in creditor monitoring and
represent lending technologies that require different creditor expertise. The multiple
forms of debt contracts and multifaceted priority rules echo the observation of debt
heterogeneity emphasized by Rauh and Sufi (2010), and paint a more intricate picture
than classic benchmarks such as Townsend (1979).
    Why do firms use different types of debt, some of which focus on the liquidation
value of discrete assets while others focus on the going-concern value of the company as
a whole? What determines the prevalence of each type? What ultimately shapes firms'
total debt capacity? We address these questions using a new hand-collected dataset that
    1 Commercial  mortgages, equipment loans, and loans against working capital are standard examples
of lending against discrete assets, while a substantial portion of business loans and most corporate bonds
in the US are backed by the cash flow value of the firm as a whole (Lian and Ma, 2020).



                                                    1
documents the liquidation values of discrete assets and going-concern values of firms in
different industries. We use these variations in firm attributes to demonstrate how the
focus of debt enforcement shifts and why. Empirically, we show that the two approaches
of debt enforcement account for a number of debt features, including debt composition,
monitoring mechanisms, interest rates, and creditor recovery rates in default. We then
present a model that explains the usage of different types of debt, their contractual
provisions, and why they take priority against different aspects of the firm. Overall,
the empirical evidence and the theory point towards an integrated view of debt contract
features where the multifaceted priority rules, combined with provisions like covenants,
strengthen creditors' incentives to monitor firm performance and help firms borrow
beyond the liquidation value of discrete assets.
   Measuring the liquidation values of various types of assets across industries is an
essential but challenging task. We hand collect this information from one of the most
systematic disclosure sources, based on Chapter 11 filings between 2000 and 2016. We
obtain estimated liquidation recovery rates (i.e., liquidation value as a fraction of net
book value) for each main asset category (fixed asset, inventory, receivable, etc.), which
reflect projected liquidation values if the firm were to cease operations and liquidate
its assets in a piecemeal manner.2 We take the average liquidation recovery rate of
each asset class in each two-digit SIC industry to reduce noise. We then estimate the
liquidation values of Compustat firms using the liquidation recovery rates of each type
of asset in their industry, and the book value of assets they have. In addition, we also
use the Chapter 11 cases to collect firms' going-concern values in restructuring. We use
firms' market values (or acquisition values) after emergence if available, and firm value
estimates in Chapter 11 plans otherwise. We normalize the going-concern value by total
book assets at filing to compute the going-concern recovery rate, and take the average
for each two-digit SIC.
   We perform extensive checks about the informativeness of the data. For liquidation
values of different assets, we cross check with prior work that documents equipment liq-
uidation values using auctions data in a particular industry (Ramey and Shapiro, 2001)
and with realized liquidation proceeds in Chapter 7 cases. These checks verify that our
data is consistent with market-based transactions. We also cross check with liquidation
value benchmarks that creditors use in ex ante lending decisions for non-financial firms
   2 These estimates commonly derive from appraisals by specialists in asset valuations and conducting
liquidations, who perform on-site field exams and simulate live liquidations. Later we also analyze
default recovery rates of debt from Moody's, which do not directly measure liquidation values of firms'
assets because most cases in Moody's data are restructurings not liquidations, payments to non-debt
stakeholders (e.g., tax claims, trade creditors) are often not included, and payments to debt also depend
on seniority etc.



                                                   2
in general, and with proceeds from sales of fixed assets among Compustat firms. In a
companion paper (Kermani and Ma, 2020), we further show that variations in liquida-
tion recovery rates are closely tied to the physical attributes of assets used in different
industries, measured independently based on industry-wide data from the BEA. These
checks verify that our data lines up with the relevant features of non-financial firms
more generally. For going-concern values in restructuring, we cross check estimates in
Chapter 11 plans and post-emergence market trading data, which are consistent with
each other on average. Overall, we do not find evidence of systematic biases. While
these measures inevitably contain some noise, they have substantial explanatory power
for the behavior of non-financial firms despite possible attenuation biases.
   Among Compustat firms, we find that the estimated liquidation value of fixed assets
(property, plant, and equipment, or PPE) plus working capital (inventory and receivable)
is on average 23% of total book assets, and 44% if we additionally include all cash
holdings. This compares to total liabilities of 49% for the average Compustat firm, and
69% for the average non-investment grade firm. In other words, liquidation values
per se are limiting for supporting firms' liabilities. Meanwhile, the average Chapter 11
going-concern recovery rate is 81%, with an inter-quartile range of 68% to 100%.
   After documenting the properties of firms' assets, we investigate key features of
firms' debt contracts in detail, including debt composition, strictness of financial covenants,
interest rates, and creditor recovery rates in default. We show how they vary as a func-
tion of firms' liquidation values, going-concern values, and borrowing amount. We
demonstrate that all of these debt features reflect the relevance of the two approaches of
debt enforcement. For most non-financial firms, a first-order issue is to preserve going-
concern values, and doing so may require some creditors to monitor firm performance;
meanwhile, another set of creditors focus on assessing the liquidation value of liquid as-
sets, which they can rely on regardless of firm performance. The two approaches entail
different lender expertise, and the dichotomy can also enhance monitoring incentives.
   For debt composition, we organize debt into three groups. We start with whether
creditors have claims against discrete assets or against the business as a whole (com-
monly referred to as "asset-based debt" and "cash flow-based debt" by creditors, and
we follow their terminology).3 In bankruptcy, payoffs of the former are primarily driven
by the value of the particular assets pledged to them, while payoffs of the latter depend
on the cash flow value of the firm as a whole. US bankruptcy laws impose the auto-
matic stay, which prevents asset-based debt from seizing assets or using such actions as
threats to obtain more than what its claim is entitled to. In ex ante lending decisions,
   3 One could alternatively refer to them as "liquidation value-based debt" and "going-concern value-
based debt" to reflect their economic properties. In this paper we follow the terms lenders use.


                                                  3
asset-based debt also stipulates borrowing limits given by the liquidation value of the
particular assets pledged. We then further decompose cash flow-based debt into a part
with light monitoring such as bonds, and a part with strong monitoring such as loans
(which often impose stringent financial covenants and exercise creditor control rights as
highlighted by Roberts and Sufi (2009) among others).4
   For asset-based debt, where creditors have claims against discrete assets (e.g., equip-
ment loans), the prevalence increases with liquidation values and decreases with industry-
average Chapter 11 going-concern values. Its share in total debt is high for the first
5% to 10% of book leverage, and falls substantially as firms take on more debt, espe-
cially for firms with low liquidation values. For cash flow-based bonds, where creditors
have claims against the firm as a whole but do not typically have active interventions
of firms' actions, the prevalence decreases with liquidation values and increases with
going-concern values. The share in total debt is highest for the medium range of lever-
age. For cash flow-based loans, where creditors have claims against the firm as a whole
and engage in active monitoring and control, the prevalence decreases with liquida-
tion values and increases with going-concern values. Such debt is most common when
firms have high levels of leverage. Overall, debt composition displays some pecking
order: firms rely more on asset-based debt against liquid and generic assets for the ini-
tial amount of borrowing (which can have a slight cost advantage, but many firms do
not have a large amount of such assets), then use more cash flow-based debt with weak
control for medium levels of borrowing, and eventually have a greater prevalence of
cash flow-based debt with strong control for high levels of leverage. Results are similar
if we use industry-average liquidation values (instead of firm-level liquidation values).
   Furthermore, our framework sheds new light on the classic issue of secured debt. As
mentioned at the beginning, secured debt is not necessarily about discrete or tangible
assets (in contrast to the conventional notion in the economics literature). In the US, hav-
ing security (or "collateral") allows creditors to obtain priority and seniority: creditors
can take priority against the value of discrete assets through secured asset-based debt, or
against the going-concern value of the firm through secured cash flow-based debt (with
security against "substantially all assets" of the firm, sometimes referred to as "blanket
liens"). A key economic function of blanket liens is to implement strong control over
the company, so they can be viewed as another representation of cash flow-based debt
with strong control. In the data, we find that the prevalence of secured cash flow-based
debt decreases with liquidation values, increases with leverage (especially for firms with
low liquidation values), and increases with industry-average Chapter 11 going-concern
   4 Throughout  this paper, we use the terms "monitoring" and "control rights" to refer to monitoring of
firms' operating performance and control over business decisions.


                                                   4
values. Indeed, these features are similar to cash flow-based loans discussed above, and
are the opposite of asset-based debt.
   We then examine covenant tightness as another indicator of the intensity of credi-
tor monitoring. We measure covenant tightness following Murfin (2012), and estimate
the probability of covenant violations based on covenant thresholds specified at loan
issuance. We find that financial covenants in loans, especially performance covenants
(generally specified as a function of firms' operating earnings), are tighter when liqui-
dation values are lower and when leverage is higher. Financial covenants also tend to
be tighter when the industry-level Chapter 11 going-concern values are higher.
   Additionally, we analyze other debt characteristics to corroborate the nature of dif-
ferent types of debt and what their lenders focus on. We show that the interest rates
of asset-based debt decrease with liquidation values, but this pattern does not hold for
cash flow-based debt. We also find that the default recovery rate of asset-based debt
has a significant positive dependence on liquidation values of discrete assets, but not on
firms' Chapter 11 going-concern values. The default recovery rate of cash flow-based
debt displays the opposite pattern. These results are in line with the payment determi-
nation and priority rules under US bankruptcy laws.
   Finally, we find that total borrowing does not depend on liquidation values for large
firms and firms with positive earnings. Total borrowing does have a strong positive
relationship with liquidation values for small firms and firms with negative earnings.
   We provide a simple model of creditor monitoring which illuminates the empirical
findings and closely follows the US institutional settings. In the model, an entrepreneur
invests in a project that can result in success or failure (liquidation). The probability of
success depends on costly effort by the entrepreneur, which is not contractible (moral
hazard). However, there is an observable noisy signal of performance in an interim
period, and the contract can allocate control rights of the project to an informed lender
as a function of the signal. This design can be thought of as a financial covenant. Upon
a low realization of the signal, the informed lender can investigate and find out the true
effort of the entrepreneur. If low effort is detected upon investigation, the informed
lender can threat an intervention, which can be interpreted as Chapter 11 restructuring.
   The model offers several takeaways that are consistent with the data. First, the model
shows that monitoring and creditor control are more important when liquidation values
are low and leverage is high. Second, monitoring is undertaken by a subset of cash flow-
based debt. In particular, the model pinpoints that such creditors have high priority
against the firm's business value in success and in restructuring, but not against the
liquidation value. This ensures that the informed lender has the skin in the game to pay
for the monitoring cost, and at the same time has time-consistent incentives to intervene

                                             5
if low effort is detected. Third, as long as covenants can be enforced and monitoring is
not too costly, liquidation values affect debt composition but not necessarily total debt
capacity. Fourth, although there is only a small fraction of debt with strong monitoring,
it can provide valuable services to other creditors and help the firm borrow beyond the
liquidation value. In comparison, the way to obtain debt capacity beyond liquidation
values in several classic models is to threat seizing assets, which is not consistent with
the automatic stay under US bankruptcy laws.
   The empirical evidence and the model suggest that financial development requires
not just secure property rights, but also institutional structures that preserve firms'
going-concern values (e.g., restructuring-oriented bankruptcy systems, creditor moni-
toring, covenant enforcement). Better property right institutions (e.g., enhancing cred-
itors' ability to seize tangible assets) can help lenders avoid paying monitoring costs.
However, given the low liquidation values of firms in most industries, control right in-
stitutions (e.g., enhancing creditors' ability to monitor firm performance) are ultimately
essential for firms' access to debt financing.


1.1    Literature Review
   Our work relates to several strands of literature. First, our analysis is related to, and
in large part motivated by, prior studies on different perspectives of debt enforcement.
One branch of work focuses on pledging tangible assets that creditors can seize (Hart
and Moore, 1994, 1998; Kiyotaki and Moore, 1997; Rampini and Viswanathan, 2010, 2013;
Demarzo, 2019), which has influenced empirical analyses of both firms and households
(Benmelech, Garmaise, and Moskowitz, 2005; Almeida and Campello, 2007; Benmelech
and Bergman, 2009; Mian and Sufi, 2011; Chaney, Sraer, and Thesmar, 2012).5 Another
branch of work points to the importance of creditor monitoring and control rights (Di-
amond, 1984; Aghion and Bolton, 1992; Dewatripont and Tirole, 1994; Holmstrom and
                            ¨
Tirole, 1997; Kaplan and Stromberg, 2003; Diamond, Hu, and Rajan, 2019), and docu-
ments the role of financial covenants for implementing creditor control rights (Smith
and Warner, 1979; Chava and Roberts, 2008; Roberts and Sufi, 2009; Nini, Smith, and
Sufi, 2012; Matvos, 2013; Becker and Ivashina, 2016; Green, 2018; Berlin, Nini, and Edi-
son, 2020). We contribute to the literature by providing new data on firms' liquidation
values and going-concern values, and demonstrating how they shape the relevance of
different approaches of debt enforcement both empirically and in a parsimonious model.
    5 The properties of asset-based debt in our data are in line with classic studies of such debt, which

often focus on industries including commercial real estate and airlines where liquidation values are high
and asset-based debt is prominent. Nonetheless, the majority of non-financial firms may not have high
liquidation values and rely much more on borrowing against firm value as an operating business.



                                                   6
   Second, our work connects to research on debt structure, which has covered a num-
ber of issues, including loans versus bonds (Denis and Mihov, 2003; De Fiore and Uh-
lig, 2011, 2015; Crouzet, 2018), interactions among creditors (Bolton and Scharfstein,
1996; Repullo and Suarez, 1998; Park, 2000), secured debt (Donaldson, Gromb, and Pi-
acentino, 2020; Benmelech, Kumar, and Rajan, 2020a), interest rates (Luck and Santos,
2020; Benmelech, Kumar, and Rajan, 2020b), and implications of asset-based and cash
flow-based debt (Lian and Ma, 2020; Ivashina, Laeven, and Moral-Benito, 2020). In
addition, some early work studies how liquidation costs affect debt choices of firms
emerging from bankruptcy (Alderson and Betker, 1995). We utilize information from
bankruptcy filings, extract the industry-level features, and show the explanatory power
for debt contracts of firms in general (i.e., firms with varying degrees of leverage outside
bankruptcy). Our empirical and theoretical analyses also provide an integrated frame-
work for a number of debt characteristics (e.g., debt composition, financial covenants,
interest rates, default recovery rates) that are often analyzed one at a time.
   Third, our work relates to studies on law and finance that investigate the impor-
tance of bankruptcy regimes and legal institutions for enforcing debt contracts (Gertner
and Scharfstein, 1991; Porta, Lopez-de Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1998; Acemoglu and
Johnson, 2005; Beck and Levine, 2005; Djankov, McLiesh, and Shleifer, 2007; Haselmann,
                                                                              ¨
Pistor, and Vig, 2010; Becker and Josephson, 2016), and for real outcomes (Stromberg,
2000; Ponticelli and Alencar, 2016; Iverson, 2018; Bernstein, Colonnelli, and Iverson,
2019; Corbae and D'Erasmo, 2020; Iverson, Madsen, Wang, and Xu, 2020). Liquidation
values of separable and tangible assets can be especially important for debt contracts
in earlier stages of financial development, where restructuring-based bankruptcy sys-
tems are less developed and verifiablity of financial performance is limited (Gan, 2007;
Benmelech, 2009). Our results suggest that further advancement of financial develop-
ment requires improvements in institutions which can facilitate creditor monitoring of
firm performance and restructuring of companies in financial distress to preserve firms'
going-concern values.6

   The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the data and presents
the basic statistics. Section 3 shows our main empirical results about how debt features
vary with firms' liquidation values, going-concern values, and the amount of borrowing.
Section 4 presents the model. Section 5 concludes.
   6 Our result can also provide a rationale for the limitations of laws and bankruptcy reforms that focus
on creditors' rights to access and seize hard assets (Acharya, Amihud, and Litov, 2011; Vig, 2013).




                                                    7
2     Data and Definition
    In this section, we describe the data collection and the definition of main variables.


2.1     Liquidation Values and Chapter 11 Going-Concern Values
    We hand collect data on liquidation recovery rates of major asset categories (i.e.,
PPE, inventory, receivable, etc.) and going-concern firm values in restructuring, from
Chapter 11 filings between 2000 and 2016. We describe the data collection process below
and perform extensive checks to verify the informativeness of the data.


2.1.1       Data Collection
    We begin with a list of Chapter 11 filings by public US non-financial firms from
New Generation Research BankruptcyData.Com. We then retrieve disclosure state-
ments of Chapter 11 cases from Public Access to Court Electronic Records (PACER) and
BankruptcyData.Com. The disclosure statements provide a comprehensive set of infor-
mation, including estimates of the going-concern value of the business and estimates
of the liquidation value of the assets. When a case has multiple disclosure statements,
we use the earliest version. If the information we need is not available, we then use the
latest version.

Liquidation Values
    In US Chapter 11, firms continue to operate, but they are also asked to perform a
liquidation analysis and document the liquidation value of their assets if they were liq-
uidated in Chapter 7. In this scenario, the firm would cease operations and a trustee
would sell off its assets (on a largely piecemeal basis over a roughly one year horizon).
US bankruptcy laws require that claim holders should receive at least as much payments
in Chapter 11 restructuring as what they would have received in liquidation.7 To our
knowledge, the liquidation analysis in Chapter 11 cases provides the most comprehen-
sive reporting of liquidation values covering all types of assets across different industries
(whereas secondary market trading data is sparse for many types of real assets, and it
is also difficult to know the asset composition across industries to aggregate values of
individual items to the firm level).
    The liquidation analysis typically presents a summary table with the net book value
(i.e., historical cost net of depreciation), liquidation value, and liquidation recovery rate
(liquidation value as a fraction of net book value), for each type of asset (PPE, inventory,
    7 The   liquidation analysis is performed for both in-court and prepackaged Chapter 11 cases.



                                                     8
receivable, etc.) and for the firm overall.8 It also includes additional notes that explain
in more detail the sources and assumptions of the estimates. The estimates commonly
derive from appraisals by companies that specialize in asset liquidations and valuations,
who perform field exams and simulate live liquidations to assess the liquidation value
of different types of assets. These specialists routinely conduct asset liquidations, which
give them knowledge and information about how the liquidation would proceed (e.g.,
how much can be sold to primary, secondary, and tertiary buyers). They are also respon-
sible for assessing liquidation values for lenders, and some liquidation analyses directly
use estimates by lenders. By definition, the liquidation value captures the value of re-
allocating standalone and separable assets by themselves, not combined with human
capital or organizational capital.9
    Figure 1 shows two examples of the liquidation analysis summary tables, from a
chemical company Lyondell and a communication products company Sorenson Com-
munications. As shown in these cases, the liquidation analysis often includes several
scenarios (low, midpoint, high). We use the midpoint estimate in the baseline, and the
average of low and high scenarios when the midpoint is not available. Section IA2
in the Internet Appendix presents excerpts from notes to Lyondell's liquidation analy-
sis, which show that the liquidation value of PPE comes from plant-level appraisals by
American Appraisal Associates, and the liquidation value of inventory and receivable
uses lenders' assessment for credit facilities against working capital assets. Both firms
continue to operate after Chapter 11, but the filings provide unique disclosures of the
liquidation value assessments of their assets.
    The liquidation analysis data has several advantages. First, it covers the liquidation
value of all assets owned by a firm, instead of the resale value of only assets that are
traded frequently in secondary markets, pledged to lenders, or sold off (Berger, Ofek,
and Swary, 1996; Murfin and Pratt, 2019). For instance, specialized, illiquid assets may
not trade in secondary markets or be pledged to lenders. Firms' asset sales could have
a number of strategic considerations (Maksimovic and Phillips, 2001). Second, the liq-
uidation analysis data shows not just the liquidation value in dollar amounts but also
the liquidation recovery rate, i.e., liquidation value as a fraction of book value, whereas
    8 Because the liquidation recovery rates are normalized by the net book value of assets, we also check

that the depreciation rates firms use for book assets are reasonable. For each firm in Compustat, we
calculate its PPE depreciation rate, as well as the fixed asset depreciation rate in its industry according to
BEA's fixed asset tables. We find that depreciation rates used by firms are very similar to those used by
the BEA (the correlation is over 0.5 and the average difference is about one percentage point).
    9 Whether different pieces of these discrete assets are likely to be sold together or separately relies

on the assessment and simulations by appraisal specialists. As shown in the examples of Figure 1, firms
often provide high, midpoint, and low estimates of the liquidation value, which in part reflect whether
items with possible synergies could be sold together (e.g., plant and equipment). For PPE recovery rates,
the high estimate is on average two percentage points higher than the midpoint estimate.


                                                      9
most other data sources do not have information about book values or recovery rates.
Having liquidation recovery rates is important for comparisons across different types
of assets, and for constructing firm-level liquidation value estimates among a broader
set of firms. Finally, compared to indirect proxies of asset specificity in previous work
(Rauch, 1999; Benmelech, 2009; Kim and Kung, 2017), our data allows for assessment
of magnitudes, such as comparisons of liquidation values with going-concern values or
with debt values.
    In the main analyses, we use the average liquidation recovery rates for each type
of asset in a given industry (two-digit SIC). With the assumption that owned assets
are similar in an industry, we can construct liquidation value estimates of a firm k in
industry i and year t as:
                                                        i NBVt
                                               k            j      kj
                                         LiqValt =                      ,                                   (1)
                                                        j

            j                                                                                                 kj
where i is the average liquidation recovery rate of asset type j in industry i, and NBVt
is the net book value of asset type j of firm k in year t. In Kermani and Ma (2020), we
verify that liquidation recovery rates are largely an industry feature, and are closely tied
to the physical attributes of assets used in each industry. For PPE, for instance, we find
that physical attributes (such as mobility, durability, and standardization) measured
using BEA data can account for roughly 40% of the cross-industry variation in PPE
liquidation recovery rates. We also analyze variations of liquidation recovery rates due
to time-varying macroeconomic conditions or industry conditions (Shleifer and Vishny,
1992). We find that macro conditions and industry conditions have relatively weak
impact on liquidation recovery rates on average, but stronger impact for assets that
are relatively standardized and used economy-wide or industry-wide (instead of being
customized and firm-specific). Overall, time-varying economic conditions seem unlikely
to offset major differences across industries due to physical attributes.10
    Our data covers assets owned by firms. Some assets firms use may be under op-
erating leases, instead of being owned (Benmelech and Bergman, 2008; Eisfeldt and
Rampini, 2009).11 In Internet Appendix Section IA3, we perform robustness checks of
our main results, assuming operating lease liabilities are akin to asset-based debt and
the leased assets contribute to the liquidation value of discrete assets (lessors can even-
tually repossess the particular assets they lease to firms when leases end). In addition,
   10 For  instance, to bring PPE liquidation recovery rates from the highest industries (e.g., transportation
at around 69%) to the median (e.g., a typical manufacturing industry at around 35%), macro or industry
conditions need to change by more than 1.5 standard deviations.
   11 For capital leases (instead of operating leases), it is typically viewed that the lessee is likely to have

ultimate ownership of the leased asset (e.g., buy the asset at the end of the lease). In this case, the leased
asset always shows up on the asset side of the lessee's balance sheet, and the lease shows up on the
liability side and is included in asset-based debt in our classification.


                                                      10
to gauge the prevalence of opearting leases, we check data from the new accounting
rule (Accounting Standards Update 842) adopted in 2019 which requires firms to report
leased (right-of-use) assets and corresponding operating lease liabilities. We find that
the median ratio of leased assets to owned assets is about 3.5% among Compustat firms
(inter-quartile range 1.6% to 8.1%), which is reasonably small.12 Moreover, we also find
that the prevalence of operating leases appears to be primarily an industry feature, and
industry fixed effects (e.g., two-digit SIC) account for about 40% of R2 in the variation
of the ratio of leased assets to owned assets.13 This is in line with our observation above
that the features of firms' assets have general similarities within an industry.

Going-Concern Values in Restructuring
    We also hand collect data on firms' going-concern values in Chapter 11 restructur-
ing. Specifically, we collect data on the estimated firm going-concern values from the
valuation analysis in Chapter 11. We also collect data on the post-emergence market
values (market value of equity plus book value of debt, within one year of Chapter 11
confirmation) for firms that emerged as public companies, and enterprise values in ac-
quisition for firms that were acquired. We normalize the going-concern value by total
assets at filing, which provides an estimate of the going-concern recovery rate.
    In the baseline analysis, we use post-emergence market value or acquisition value
if they are available, and supplement with estimates from the Chapter 11 valuation
analysis otherwise. On average, the valuation analysis estimate is similar to the post-
emergence market value when both types of data are available (i.e., the average differ-
ence is close to zero), consistent with the observation in Gilson, Hotchkiss, and Ruback
(2000). In Internet Appendix Section IA2, we show that the distributions of these two
values are also similar, which indicates that the going-concern value estimates from the
Chapter 11 valuation analysis seem reasonably reliable. Finally, we take the average
of going-concern recovery rates in each industry. The Chapter 11 recovery rates also
vary across industries because firms in some industries can perform well in Chapter 11
restructuring, while firms in other industries may experience more disruptions in oper-
ations or are more difficult to restructure (the extreme being financial intermediaries as
discussed in Ma and Scheinkman (2020)).
  12 Another   way to estimate the prevalence of operating leases is to calculate assets owned by the two
lessor sectors using BEA data, which are 5320 (Rental and Leasing Services and Lessors of Intangible
Assets) and 5310 (Real Estate, which includes REITs that lease real estate properties to others). The total
(non-residential) assets owned by these two sectors are also less than 5% of total assets owned by non-
financial corporate businesses in the Flow of Funds. Since the lessor sectors also include some lessors to
households (e.g., car rentals), this estimate would be upward biased.
   13 The ratio of leased to owned assets is high for retail (average above 20% for apparel stores, depart-

ment stores, restaurants, and furniture stores), modest for airlines and cinemas (average around 10%),
and low (average below 10%) for most other industries.



                                                    11
   At the industry level, there is no strong correlation between going-concern recovery
rates and liquidation recovery rates of discrete assets. The correlation between industry-
average going-concern recovery rate and industry-average liquidation recovery rate of
PPE, inventory, and receivable is 0.05 ( p-value 0.76), -0.21 ( p-value 0.17), and 0.08 ( p-
value 0.61), respectively.

Data Coverage
   We are able to find liquidation analysis data for non-cash assets for 387 cases in 48
two-digit SIC industries, and going-concern values for 328 cases in 49 two-digit SIC
industries. Table IA1 shows the number of cases for each industry. For some small in-
dustries such as fishing (less than one firm in Compustat per year in our sample period),
building materials (5 to 15 firms in Compustat per year), special construction (10 to 20
firms in Compustat per year), we have few observations. For large industries such as
business services (500 to 1,000 firms in Compustat per year), chemicals (600 to 700 firms
in Compustat per year), mining (200 to 300 firms in Compustat per year), communica-
tions (100 to 300 firms in Compustat per year), etc., we have many observations.


2.1.2   Cross Checks
   We perform a number of checks for the liquidation recovery rates in our data. There
are three types of possible concerns. The first type of concern is that firms in Chapter
11 may have incentives to understate the liquidation value of their assets, so that they
can justify restructuring. We note that for the median Chapter 11 firm in our data, the
going-concern value is twice as much as the gross liquidation value, so the manipulation
incentive may not be very strong. The second type of concern is that firms in Chapter
11 are special and different from the typical non-financial firm, because Chapter 11 may
occur when the firm, its industry, or the economy experiences unfavorable conditions,
which may contribute to lower liquidation values. The third type of concern is that the
reported liquidation values can be noisy or arbitrary, and are therefore uninformative.
   In the following, we discuss four categories of checks in light of these concerns.
First, we verify that our data is consistent with market-based outcomes (in settings
where such data is available), including liquidation proceeds in Chapter 7 and auction
proceeds. Second, the data is also consistent with liquidation value benchmarks that
creditors use in ex ante lending decisions to non-financial firms, and the data for PPE is
broadly in line with proceeds from PPE sales among Compustat firms. Third, we find
that the key determinants of the liquidation recovery rates appear to be the physical
characteristics of assets used in different industries (measured from all firms in the
industry). Firm-specific conditions and industry conditions can have some impact (e.g.,

                                            12
change liquidation recovery rates by five percentage points), but do not seem to make
a qualitative difference. About 12% of our data comes from NBER recessions and 33%
from industry recessions (i.e., industry revenue growth in the bottom quartile), so it
does not overwhelmingly represent conditions in economic downturns. Finally, while
the data inevitably contains some noise, in this paper and in Kermani and Ma (2020),
we find that it has substantial explanatory power for the behavior of non-financial firms
in general. Overall, we do not observe evidence of systematic biases or undervaluation
in the data. We also find that the data is broadly consistent with the features relevant to
non-financial firms in general, and is informative for their behavior.
    Comparison with Chapter 7 Liquidation Proceeds. We cross check the estimated
liquidation values in our data with liquidation proceeds realized in Chapter 7 cases, and
the results are reported in Table IA2. We cannot use Chapter 7 cases for our main anal-
yses because they primarily release total liquidation proceeds realized by the trustee,
so we cannot obtain the liquidation recovery rates for each type of assets. Instead, we
can only analyze whether the total liquidation proceeds in Chapter 7 cases are compa-
rable with the total estimated liquidation values in the liquidation analysis of Chapter
11 cases. A further complication is that, in Chapter 7 cases, the trustee may "abandon"
certain assets, whose values are not included in the reported gross liquidation receipts
(Bris, Welch, and Zhu, 2006). This can happen if the assets have little value, or are fully
encumbered (i.e., they are pledged to certain creditors and the estimated liquidation
value is less than the amount of debt against such assets) so the trustee returns the as-
sets to creditors for foreclosures (instead of the trustee selling the assets).14 Accordingly,
we make the following assumptions. In the "basic" scenario, we only use the gross
liquidation receipts from the trustee report. In the "medium" scenario, we add 50% of
either asset-based debt or secured debt. This assumes that 50% of such debt claims are
associated with abandoned assets and they cover close to par. In the "high" scenario,
we add 100% of either asset-based debt or secured debt. This assumes all of such debt
claims are associated with abandoned assets and they recover close to par, which is an
aggressive assumption that likely over-estimates the total liquidation value.
    In Table IA2, we compare the total estimated liquidation value in Chapter 11 cases
with the liquidation value in Chapter 7 cases, controlling for industry and time fixed
effects. We normalize total liquidation values by total assets at filing. Table IA2 shows
that the actual Chapter 7 liquidation value is less than the Chapter 11 liquidation anal-
ysis estimates in the "basic" scenario, about the same in the "medium" scenario, and
  14 Ifthe estimated liquidation value of an asset is greater than the debt value against it, then there is
excess value in the asset that belongs to the bankruptcy estate. Such assets would be sold by the trustee,
and the excess value would be used to pay other claim holders.



                                                    13
slightly higher in the "high" scenario. Overall, the total liquidation value in Chapter 7
seems to match with estimates in the Chapter 11 liquidation analysis on average.
    Comparison with Auction Proceeds. Ramey and Shapiro (2001) collect detailed data
from liquidation auctions of aerospace manufacturing equipment. They estimate that
the average liquidation recovery rate is 28% of replacement cost. In our data, based on
the same three-digit SIC (372), the liquidation recovery rate on machinery and equip-
ment is 32%, which is very similar.
    Comparison with Lenders' Benchmarks. Our data is also consistent with the ad-
vance rate (i.e., the maximum allowed ratio of debt amount to book assets) that creditors
use for lending against discrete assets, which reflects their liquidation value assessment.
Such assessment also comes from field examinations and liquidation simulations of spe-
cialist appraisers. The advance rate for lending against industrial PPE is generally 20%
to 30% of book value, according to a large bank. In our data, the average industry-
level PPE liquidation recovery rate is 35%. The advance rate for lending against in-
ventory is generally 50% to 60% of book value for eligible inventory (see also OCC
Comptroller's Handbook on Asset-Based Lending, or the variable BorrowerBasePercentage in
DealScan when the variable BorrowerBaseType is "Eligible Inventory"),15 where about
80% of inventory is eligible (e.g., work-in-progress inventory often ineligible), which
implies 40% to 48% of total book inventory. In our data, the average industry-level in-
ventory liquidation recovery is 44%. The advance rate for lending against receivables
is generally 80% of book value for eligible receivables (see also the OCC handbook, or
the variable BorrowerBasePercentage in DealScan when the variable BorrowerBaseType is
"Eligible Accounts Receivable"), where about 80% of receivables are eligible (e.g., gov-
ernment receivable, foreign receivable are typically not eligible), which implies 64% of
total book receivables. In our data, the average industry-level receivable liquidation
recovery rate is 63%.
    Comparison with PPE Sale Recovery Rates of Compustat Firms. In Kermani and
Ma (2020), we compute the industry-level recovery rates implied by PPE sales among
all Compustat firms. We find that they are similar to the PPE liquidation recovery rates
in our data, with a significant positive correlation between the two measures across
industries.
    Determinants of Liquidation Recovery Rates. In Kermani and Ma (2020), we ana-
lyze determinants of liquidation recovery rates in detail. We find that they are strongly
shaped by the physical attributes of assets used in an industry, measured independently
   15 Asset-based  debt (i.e., debt against the liquidation value of discrete, separable assets) typically has a
borrowing base requirement, which specifies the maximum amount of debt allowed for borrowing against
particular assets. In DealScan, the variable BorrowerBaseType specifies the assets pledged, and the variable
BorrowerBasePercentage specifies the advanced rate against those asset.


                                                      14
among all firms in the industry using BEA data. Indeed, if there are no reallocation
frictions--i.e., if PPE is costless to transport, fully durable, and fully standardized--
then the data suggests that the recovery rate would be 100%. In addition, we find that
better general economic conditions and industry conditions can improve liquidation re-
covery rates, especially when assets are less custom-designed (assets highly customized
to a given firm do not seem to have much liquidation value in any case). Nonetheless,
it would take substantial changes in macroeconomic or industry conditions to change
PPE liquidation recovery rates by more than ten or twenty percentage points (even if no
assets are custom-designed). Similarly, firm-specific conditions may affect liquidation
recovery rates, but in normal circumstances they do not seem to make a qualitative dif-
ference. In particular, the liquidation value captures the value in alternative use, rather
than the quality or the performance of the current business (e.g., the real estate of a
book store making losses may have high liquidation value, while the customized equip-
ment of a pharmaceutical company with higher cash flows may have little liquidation
value). In sum, while economic conditions can affect liquidation recovery rates, they do
not seem to offset the impact of physical attributes: they do not easily erase differences
across industries or lead to drastically different overall liquidation recovery rates.

   Taken together, we do not find that our data systematically understates the liquida-
tion recovery rates, relative to Chapter 7 proceeds, auction proceeds, or lenders' esti-
mates (although it is difficult to rule out idiosyncratic issues in some particular cases).
Given that the liquidation recovery rate data is most comprehensive for Chapter 11
firms, we investigate extensively whether it is reflective of non-financial firms more
generally. The checks above and our empirical analyses in the rest of the paper suggest
that it provides relevant information for firms in general in a given industry.


2.2   Debt Characteristics

Debt Composition
   We collect data on the composition of non-financial firms' outstanding debt from
CapitalIQ. CapitalIQ's debt detail dataset provides comprehensive information for indi-
vidual debt contracts (including amount outstanding and descriptions of contract fea-
tures), covering most Compustat firms since 2003.
   We classify debt as follows. First, we classify debt into asset-based debt and cash
flow-based debt as in Lian and Ma (2020), according to the economic determinants of
creditors' claims in the US institutional setting. Asset-based debt refers to debt against
discrete assets, such as commercial mortgages against commercial real estate, as well
as asset-based loans against PPE, inventory, receivable, oil and gas reserves, etc. Asset-

                                             15
based debt generally ensures that it has clear and exclusive claims against the value of a
particular asset by explicitly taking security interests in the asset, and can be identified
accordingly. Lenders also commonly limit the size of asset-based debt by the estimated
liquidation value of the particular assets pledged to them (hence the name), where the
liquidation value is assessed in ways similar to our data as discussed in Section 2.1. Cash
flow-based debt refers to debt against the firm as a whole, and can take the form of both
loans (e.g., many syndicated loans) and bonds. It can be either secured by the firm
as a whole ("substantially all assets" in contractual parlance, and often referred to as
"blanket liens," excluding particular assets pledged to asset-based debt), or unsecured.
Debt capacity in this case is not related to liquidation values of discrete assets, but
commonly tied to cash flows generated by the business in the form of operating earnings
(hence the name) as a reflection of the firm's going-concern values.16 Overall, the terms
"asset-based debt" and "cash flow-based debt" follow the common usage by creditors,
and can be thought of as shorthand references to debt claims based on the liquidation
value of discrete assets and the going-concern value of the firm (one could come up with
alternative abbreviations such as "liquidation value-based debt" and "going concern
value-based debt", but in this paper we follow the terms commonly used by lenders.).
We also analyze the difference between this categorization and secured vs. unsecured
debt in detail in Section 3.1.
    The going-concern value of the firm and the liquidation value of discrete assets can
be very different, given the role of human capital, organizational capital, and business
model, as well as the high degree of asset specificity as shown in Section 2.1. Section
2.1 also documents that the liquidation recovery rates of discrete assets and the going-
concern value of the firm are not very correlated. The distinction of different types of
debt, with priority over different aspects of the firm, is especially relevant when firms
have multiple sets of creditors (if there is only one creditor, then the payoff in default is
driven by the firm's going-concern value if the firm is restructured and liquidation value
if the firm is liquidated, regardless of whether the contract is explicitly tied to discrete
assets). In our data, the average firm has six debt contracts outstanding according to
CapitalIQ data (roughly three asset-based debt contracts and three cash flow-based debt
contracts), and the number of claimants is larger if trade creditors and other non-debt
liabilities are also taken into account. In practice, different lenders commonly specialize
in different lending approaches: some have expertise in evaluating the liquidation value
of discrete assets (Gopal, 2019), while others have expertise in analyzing and monitoring
  16 The  classification procedures and default resolutions are also discussed in detail in Lian and Ma
(2020). In US Chapter 11, which is most relevant for major non-financial firms, payoffs of asset-based debt
are primarily driven by the value of discrete assets pledged to them, while payoffs of cash flow-based
debt are primarily driven by the going-concern value of the firm, which we verify in Section 3.3.


                                                    16
firms' operations (Berger, Minnis, and Sutherland, 2017).
   Second, among cash flow-based debt, we further classify debt into those with strong
and weak control. In the baseline analysis, we use loans as a proxy for strong control
and bonds as a proxy for weak control, as loans have more concentrated ownership and
stronger monitoring than bonds (Diamond, 1984, 1991; Berlin and Loeys, 1988; Holm-
strom and Tirole, 1997). In additional analyses in Section 3, we can also use high priority
(i.e., secured by blanket liens on the firm as a whole) as a proxy for strong control: since
it is difficult for borrowers to raise additional financing without the permission or sup-
port of lenders with blanket liens, such lenders can have strong power.

Covenant Tightness
   We collect data on financial covenants in commercial loans from DealScan. We focus
on loan covenants because they are more active and more stringent compared to bond
covenants. In particular, financial covenants in loans generally require compliance on
a quarterly basis throughout the life of the loan (whereas financial covenants in bonds
mainly require compliance if the borrower takes certain actions). DealScan provides
information about the threshold of compliance, which allows us to estimate covenant
tightness following Murfin (2012). Covenant information in DealScan becomes widely
available since 1996.

Interest Rates and Default Recovery Rates of Debt
   We collect data on interest rates for all outstanding debt from CapitalIQ. We also
collect additional interest rate data for loan issuance from DealScan.
   We collect data on default recovery rates for different debt instruments from Moody's
Default and Recovery Database. The default recovery rates of debt are different from the
liquidation recovery rates of firms' assets discussed in Section 2.1. The default recovery
rates of debt are different from the liquidation recovery rates of firms' assets discussed
in Section 2.1. In particular, the liquidation recovery rates capture the properties of
firms' assets, and we use them to calculate firms' liquidation values on the asset side.
The default recovery rates of debt, on the other hand, depend on not just firms' asset
features but also their capital structures and payments to non-debt claims (e.g., tax
claims, trade creditors). In addition, the debt default recovery rates cannot directly
separate firms' liquidation values and going-concern values. The default recovery rate
of an individual debt instrument is also a function of its seniority and other contract
features. In Section 3.3, we show that the default recovery rates of asset-based debt are
primarily sensitive to liquidation values of discrete assets, whereas the default recovery
rates of cash flow-based debt are primarily sensitive to firms' going-concern values, in
line with the payment determination rules in bankruptcy in the US.


                                            17
2.3    Summary Statistics
    Table 1, Panel A, shows summary statistics of industry-level liquidation recovery
rates for different types of assets. For PPE, the average is 35%. The inter-quartile range
is 24% to 44% (the top quartile includes industries such as transportation, wholesale,
and hotels, while the bottom quartile includes industries such as personal services and
education). For inventory, the average 44%. The inter-quartile range is 34% to 56% (the
top quartile includes industries such as auto dealers, apparel stores, and supermarkets,
while the bottom quartile includes industries such as restaurants, construction, and IT).
For receivables, the average is 63%. The inter-quartile range is 55% to 71% (the top
quartile includes industries such as utilities, medical devices, and mining, while the
bottom quartile includes industries such as education and airlines).17
    Table 1, Panel A, also shows summary statistics of the firm-level liquidation value
(normalized by book assets) estimated for Compustat firms. This value is calculated by
combining the industry-level liquidation recovery rates with the book value of each type
of asset a firm has, as in Equation (1). We include PPE and working capital (inventory
and receivable) in the baseline variable. The mean and median of the baseline variable is
23%; the inter-quartile range is 12% to 33%. When cash holdings are included, the mean
and median is around 43%; the inter-quartile range is 30% to 54%. We can also include
book intangibles to account for potential liquidation values from those intangible assets
that do not have physical presence but are well-defined and separable (such as usage
rights, licenses, patents, software, data).18 The average firm-level liquidation value from
book intangibles is about 2.5%, and all results are similar when they are included. Figure
2, Panel A, shows a breakdown of liquidation values contributed by different types of
assets for the average firm. Liquidation value from PPE is on average 9% of book assets,
while liquidation value of inventory and receivable combined is about 14%.
    The last row of Table 1, Panel A, shows summary statistics of the Chapter 11 going-
concern value. This variable is calculated by industry as discussed in Section 2.1.1
(average Chapter 11 going-concern value normalized by total book assets at filing), and
applied to firms more generally based on their industries. The mean and median Chap-
ter 11 going-concern recovery rate is about 81%; the inter-quartile range is 68% to 100%.
Figure 2, Panel B, plots the distribution of the Chapter 11 going-concern value (dashed
  17 Receivables   may not have full liquidation recovery rates because of past due receivables, as well as
foreign receivables, government receivables, and receivables from concentrated large customers, which
are difficult to enforce. Some receivables may also be offset by payables to the same counterparties.
   18 According to accounting rules, intangible assets appear on firms' balance sheets (i.e., book intangi-

bles) if they are acquired from outside. Many of such intangible assets are separable and can generate
liquidation values on a standalone basis. On the other hand, other forms of intangibles, such as organi-
zational capital, are not separable from the firm and do not generate liquidation values.



                                                    18
blue line) compared to the distribution of the liquidation value (solid red line for not
including cash, and dotted green line for including cash), and the former tends to be
much higher.
   Finally, Table 1, Panel B, shows summary statistics for total book leverage and debt
composition among non-financial firms in our sample from Compustat.


2.4    Borrowing Relative to Liquidation Values
   In Figure 3, we document the distribution of firms' liabilities relative to their liqui-
dation values. Panel A plots the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of total debt
relative to the liquidation value of fixed assets and working capital. It shows that total
debt exceeds the liquidation value of fixed assets and working capital for many firms,
including 52% of firms with positive leverage and 81% of non-investment grade firms.
In addition, liquidations in practice can have overhead costs that are roughly 5% to 10%
of asset liquidation values, which we have not subtracted from the liquidation value
estimates (i.e., the liquidation values we use represent "gross liquidation values" which
refer to proceeds from asset sales, instead of "net liquidation values" which further
subtract overhead costs).
   Panel B plots the CDF of total liabilities relative to cash plus the liquidation value
of fixed assets and working capital (solid red line). Total liabilities include non-debt
liabilities which are also important claims against the firm (e.g., trade credit, employee
compensation, taxes) and share the pie with debt holders.19 The liquidation value in-
cluding cash could be generous given that cash holdings often serve liquidity purposes
(Alfaro, Bloom, and Lin, 2019) and discretionary cash holdings may fluctuate. We find
that 71% of firms with positive leverage and 94% of non-investment grade firms have
more liabilities than the liquidation value of their PPE and working capital plus cash.
These fractions are also sizable. In comparison, the dashed blue line in Panel B shows
the CDF of total liabilities relative to industry-average Chapter 11 going-concern value.
In this case about 70% of firms have a ratio below one, and even fewer firms (6%) have
total debt above the industry-average Chapter 11 going-concern value.
   Overall, the results suggest that firms' liquidation values appear limited, and not
necessarily sufficient to support their debt and liabilities in general.
  19 Some   non-debt liabilities like taxes can be formally more senior than debt claims (and employees
and critical vendors are also often paid during bankruptcy before debt holders are paid). Regular trade
creditors are typically treated as general unsecured creditors in bankruptcy.




                                                  19
3     Liquidation Values, Chapter 11 Values, and Debt Char-
      acteristics
    In this section, we present the main results of how debt characteristics vary based
on liquidation values, Chapter 11 values, and the amount of borrowing. The analyses
demonstrate how the two approaches of debt enforcement shape a number of debt
features, including debt composition, financial covenants, interest rates, and creditor
recovery rates in default.


3.1   Debt Composition
    We start with debt composition. As explained in Section 2, we organize debt into
three categories: 1) asset-based debt (debt against discrete assets like PPE and working
capital), 2) cash flow-based debt with weak control (debt against the firm as a whole
with light creditor intervention, such as bonds), and 3) cash flow-based debt with strong
control (debt against the firm as a whole with more intensive creditor involvement,
such as loans). For liquidation values, we use firm-level liquidation values of PPE and
working capital in the main analyses. We control for cash holdings but do not put
them directly in liquidation values, since cash holdings can be fairly discretionary. We
also perform robustness checks using the average liquidation value in an industry to
further reduce the impact of firms' discretionary choices. For Chapter 11 going-concern
values, we use the average Chapter 11 going-concern recovery rate (going-concern value
normalized by total book asset at filing) in the two-digit SIC industry. For leverage, we
use the ratio of total debt to book assets. In Internet Appendix Section IA3, we show
that the main results are similar if we also include operating leases as another form of
asset-based debt and another contributor to the liquidation value of discrete assets.

A. Asset-Based Debt
    Figure 4 shows binscatter plots of the share of asset-based debt in total debt (Panel
A) and the amount of asset-based debt normalized by book assets (Panel B), for firms
with low liquidation values in blue circles and high liquidation values in red diamonds.
The 20 bins are formed by book leverage, and the low vs. high liquidation value groups
represent firms in the bottom and top terciles of liquidation values in each year. Each
dot represents the mean value among all firms in the bin.
    Figure 4, Panel A, shows that the share of asset-based debt in total debt is relatively
high when firms borrow a small amount (book leverage below 5% or 10%), and falls
off when firms borrow more, especially for firms with low liquidation values. Corre-


                                            20
spondingly, Figure 4, Panel B, shows that the amount of asset-based debt relative to total
assets increases roughly linearly with leverage for firms with high liquidation values,
but plateaus as leverage increases for firms with low liquidation values. The results
suggest some degree of pecking order: asset-based debt against generic and liquid as-
sets could be less costly, so they are more prevalent when firms need a small amount
of debt. However, when firms need to borrow more, they do not necessarily have many
such assets, and the prevalence of asset-based debt declines.20
    Table 2 reports results in regressions, which enable us to control for other firm char-
acteristics that may affect debt choices. Column (1) shows that the share of asset-based
debt increases with liquidation values. Column (2) shows that the share decreases with
leverage, especially when liquidation values are low. Columns (3) and (4) show the
amount of asset-based debt increases with total indebtedness, especially for firms with
high liquidation values. In addition, the prevalence of asset-based debt decreases with
going-concern values (industry-level Chapter 11 values and current firm market values).

B. Cash Flow-Based Debt with Weak Control
    Figure 5 shows binscatter plots of the share of cash flow-based bonds in total debt
(Panel A) and the amount normalized by book assets (Panel B), for firms with low liqui-
dation values in blue circles and high liquidation values in red diamonds. The share of
this type of debt is hump-shaped, and is highest for medium ranges of leverage. As we
show next, this hump-shaped pattern is driven by the fact that firms with high leverage
rely more on debt with strong monitoring. The plot also shows that the prevalence of
this type of debt is also higher for firms with low liquidation values, and the impact of
liquidation values is stronger as leverage increases. Table 3 presents these results in re-
gressions. Table 3 also suggests that the prevalence of cash flow-based bonds increases
with firms' going-concern values (the industry-level Chapter 11 value, as well as the
firm's current market value).

C. Cash Flow-Based Debt with Strong Control
    Figure 6 shows binscatter plots of the share of cash flow-based loans in total debt
(Panel A) and the amount normalized by book assets (Panel B), for firms with low
liquidation values in blue circles and high liquidation values in red diamonds. This
result suggests that firms with low liquidation values and high leverage rely more on
cash flow-based debt with strong control. For firms in the bottom tercile of liquidation
   20 Inthe data, we do not find that firms use up all the liquidation value of discrete assets for asset-based
debt before taking on cash flow-based debt. One important reason is that many discrete assets can be
specialized and illiquid, which are not easy to pledge directly. Another reason is some asset-based debt
may involve fixed costs. For instance, to receive an asset-based revolver, a firm needs to set up a system
to record and report the amount of receivable and inventory to lenders on a regular basis, and to have
lenders conduct field exams of their assets, which can be cumbersome.


                                                      21
values, the reliance on cash flow-based loans increases substantially after book leverage
exceeds 20%. This is close to the average firm-level liquidation value in this group.
For the firms in the top tercile of liquidation values, on the other hand, the increase in
the reliance on cash flow-based loans takes place at book leverage above around 35%.
Again, this threshold is close to the average firm-level liquidation value in this group.
Table 4 presents results in regressions, which also shows that the prevalence of this type
of debt decreases with liquidation values, and increases with going-concern values (the
industry-level Chapter 11 value, as well as the firm's current market value). As we
discuss in Section 4, cash flow-based loans, despite being less than 25% of total debt
even for firms with high leverage, can provide an important monitoring role for high
leverage firms, which benefits cash flow-based debt in general (including bond holders).

D. Essence of Secured Debt
    Our analyses can also shed new light on the nature of secured debt, which is a classic
issue in economics research (Berger and Udell, 1990; Donaldson, Gromb, and Piacentino,
2020; Benmelech, Kumar, and Rajan, 2020a; Rampini and Viswanathan, 2020). Although
the academic literature typically associates secured debt with debt against separable or
tangible assets (i.e., asset-based debt in our categorization), this is not necessarily the
case in practice. Under US law, creditors can obtain priority by taking security (Baird
and Jackson, 1984). They can do so with respect to different aspects of the firm: creditors
can take priority over the standalone value of discrete assets (secured asset-based debt),
or over the going-concern value of the firm (secured cash flow-based debt).21
    Asset-based debt is typically explicitly secured by discrete assets, to make it clear
that it has priority over the value of such assets. In bankruptcy, asset-based debt would
have a high priority claim (i.e., secured claim) up to the standalone value of the assets
pledged to it, and a low priority (i.e., unsecured deficiency claim) for the remaining
face value (if the face value exceeds the value of the assets pledged to it). Meanwhile,
cash flow-based debt can take security in the form of "substantially all assets" (other
than assets pledged to asset-based debt), sometimes referred to as "blanket liens" ("all
assets" in this context include business synergies and organizational capital, not just
tangible assets, and effectively refer to the company as a whole). Such a claim has
priority over the going-concern value of the firm. In Chapter 11, its collateral value is
given by the going-concern value of the firm as a whole (minus the liquidation value
of discrete assets pledged to asset-based debt).22 Secured cash flow-based debt is often
   21 Unsecured   or subordinated debt, on the other hand, represent low priority debt claims which are
marginal claimants to the pool of value. In Chapter 11 restructuring, the marginal value is given by the
firm's going-concern value; in Chapter 7 liquidation, the marginal value is given by the liquidation value.
   22 This priority rule is also recognized by ratings agencies. For example, Fitch writes in its report: "Fitch

recognizes that an ABL is entitled to priority over other first lien cash flow-based debt to the extent of the


                                                      22
used to implement strong creditor control over the firm, given that much of firm value
is pledged to these creditors and it is difficult to raise new debt without their consent.
    Figure IA1 and Table 5 show that secured cash flow-based debt displays very differ-
ent properties than those observed for asset-based debt in Figure 4 and Table 2. First,
secured cash flow-based debt is more prevalent among low liquidation value firms,
while asset-based debt is more prevalent among high liquidation value firms. Second,
the share of secured cash flow-based debt in total debt increases with leverage, while
that of asset-based debt decreases with leverage. Third, secured cash flow-based debt
increases with Chapter 11 going-concern values, like cash flow-based loans and bonds.
In contrast, asset-based debt decreases with Chapter 11 going-concern values. Overall,
the results show that secured debt has different components with different economic
properties, consistent with observations in Ivashina, Laeven, and Moral-Benito (2020)
and Lian and Ma (2020), and should not be uniformly viewed as borrowing against the
liquidation value of separable or tangible assets.
    Finally, several studies find that the share of secured debt in total debt is higher for
firms with lower ratings (Rauh and Sufi, 2010; Benmelech, Kumar, and Rajan, 2020a).
In our data, the average share of secured debt among investment grade and non-
investment grade firms is 19% and 46% respectively, consistent with this observation.
The average share of asset-based debt changes from 19% to 29%, primarily driven by
lower firm value and higher volatility of low rated firms. Meanwhile, the average share
of secured cash flow-based debt changes from 1% to 19%, and accounts for a substantial
part of the increase in secured debt among low rated firms.

E. Industry-Level Results
    One possible concern is that the firm-level liquidation value can be affected by a
given firm's choices about asset composition. While choices with respect to the combi-
nation of asset composition and debt composition can be a reflection of the connections
between asset attributes and debt structures in our framework, one might worry about
other factors that affect both sides. Accordingly, in Appendix Table IA3 we present
additional results using industry-level liquidation values (i.e., the average firm-level liq-
uidation value from PPE and working capital over total assets in an industry), which
are not affected by the asset choices of a given firm. The findings are similar to the main
results in Tables 2 to 4. Asset-based debt is more prevalent when liquidation values
are higher, and the sensitivity of asset-based debt to liquidation values is higher when
value of specific collateral securing the ABL. Therefore, in allocating the adjusted EV to the two classes of
senior secured claims, Fitch first allocates the portion attributable to the liquidation value of the specific
assets securing the ABL (referred to as the "collateral component"); and the enterprise value for the other
first lien debt is net of the amount allocated to the ABL collateral component" (Dabas, Simonton, and
Oline, 2013). "ABL" and "EV" stand for "asset-based lending" and "enterprise value."


                                                     23
leverage is higher. Cash flow-based loans and bonds are more prevalent when liquida-
tion values are lower, and the sensitivity to liquidation value is also more pronounced
when leverage is higher. Finally, cash flow-based loans and bonds are increasing in the
industry's Chapter 11 going-concern value, while asset-based debt is not.

F. Within-Firm Variations
   In the above analyses, we exploit cross-sectional variations in firms' liquidation val-
ues and Chapter 11 values, since these variations in firms' asset attributes are largely
shaped by exogenous forces and industry features. In comparison, within-firm varia-
tions in the liquidation value are more likely to be contaminated by firm-specific deci-
sions to acquire or finance certain assets. Nonetheless, it is reasonable to ask whether
the "pecking order" of debt composition we show also holds within a firm (i.e., debt
composition depends on the level of borrowing). We present this result in Appendix Ta-
ble IA4, where we add firm fixed effects to focus on within-firm variations. We examine
how debt composition changes with leverage. We also examine how this relationship
depends on liquidation values, by interacting leverage with industry-level liquidation
values (we use industry-level liquidation values here so that the interaction coefficient
is driven only by within-firm changes in leverage, not by within-firm changes in liq-
uidation values). We confirm that the pecking order results are very similar in this
within-firm analysis. The share of asset-based debt declines as book leverage increases,
especially for firms with low liquidation values. Meanwhile, the share of cash flow-
based debt rises, and the shift to cash flow-based loans is especially pronounced for
firms with low liquidation values.

G. Liquidation Values by Type of Asset
   In the above, for parsimony we combine all asset-based debt in one group and study
the relationship between the total amount of asset-based debt and the overall liquidation
value. Below we also take a step further and investigate the relationship between differ-
ent components of asset-based debt and different components of the liquidation value.
Columns (1) and (2) of Table IA5 examine how the fraction of asset-based debt backed
by working capital (i.e., inventory and receivable) and by PPE in total debt relates to
the liquidation value of working capital vs. PPE. We find that the liquidation value of
working capital is mainly predictive of the share of asset-based debt backed by working
capital, and not the share of asset-based debt backed by PPE. The reverse holds for the
liquidation value of PPE, which is predictive of the share of asset-based debt backed by
PPE (not working capital). Columns (3) and (4) repeat the same analysis, but normalize
the amount of each type of debt by book assets, which produce similar results. This
analysis shows that each type of asset-based debt depends primarily on the liquidation


                                           24
value of a particular type of asset, consistent with the design of asset-based debt.


3.2       Covenant Strictness
   To further investigate the role of creditor monitoring, we also examine the tight-
ness of financial covenants, as a function of liquidation values, Chapter 11 values, and
indebtedness.
   We measure covenant tightness following the procedure of Murfin (2012). The mea-
sure captures the probability of violating a financial covenant, given the firm's cur-
rent financial conditions and the thresholds of financial covenants. We match covenant
thresholds set at loan issuance from DealScan with the borrower's financial conditions
from Compustat. Specifically, following Murfin (2012), we represent the thresholds of
financial ratios set by the covenants as r, which is a K × 1 vector and K is the number of
covenants the firm has. The corresponding actual financial ratios of the firm are denoted
by r and evolve as follows:
                                       r = r +  NK (0, ),                                             (2)

where  is the covariance matrix of financial ratios, estimated as in Murfin (2012). The
firm violates a financial covenant if it does not meet one of the K thresholds, i.e., there
exists k such that rk < rk . Covenant strictness is measured as the probability of violating
at least one covenant, that is
                                          p = 1 - FK (r - r),                                         (3)

where FK is the multivariate normal CDF with mean 0 and variance . Internet Ap-
pendix Section IA4 explains the details of the estimation.
   We assign financial covenants into two groups. The first group consists of perfor-
mance covenants, which are tied to firms' operating performance, commonly measured
using operating earnings (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortiza-
tion, or EBITDA). Examples include restrictions on maximum debt-to-earnings ratios
and minimum interest coverage ratios (which are equivalent to maximum ratios of debt
payments to earnings). Performance covenants are often viewed as playing a role as trip
wires to facilitate the contingent allocation of control rights, which allows lenders to
intervene in managerial actions if firms have poor operating performance (Christensen
and Nikolaev, 2012).23 The second group consists of other financial covenants, includ-
  23 It is not necessary to have moral hazard to justify the existence of financial covenants, such as re-
strictions on the ratio of debt to earnings. Restrictions on maximum debt to earnings ratios can arise
if multiples of earnings approximate how much lenders can receive in default (e.g., Chapter 11), as ex-
plained in Lian and Ma (2020) (just as restrictions on maximum debt to liquidation values can arise if
lenders are paid based on liquidation values in default Kiyotaki and Moore (1997). However, with moral
hazard, earnings-based covenants can have additional functions for ameliorating moral hazard, as we


                                                   25
ing covenants on book leverage (e.g., maximum debt-to-asset or debt-to-equity ratios)
and liquidity metrics (e.g., minimum current assets to current liabilities). They aim to
ensure that firms have sufficient capital or liquidity, but their prevalence has declined
substantially in recent decades (Demerjian, 2011).
    Figure 7 and Table 6 show the variation of covenant tightness. Covenants are tighter
when leverage is higher, consistent with prior studies of the agency theory of covenants
(Bradley and Roberts, 2015). In addition, the tightness of performance covenants is
higher, and increases more with leverage, for firms with lower liquidation values. This is
in line with the results on cash flow-based debt with strong control in Table 4 and Table
5, which also point to more intensive creditor monitoring in these settings. Furthermore,
covenant tightness increases with the industry-level Chapter 11 value. As we discuss
further in Section 4, enforcing covenants requires effective threat (i.e., if borrowers do not
comply with creditors' requests, creditors can accelerate the loan, which likely results
in bankruptcy filings). The credibility of the threat can depend on the Chapter 11 value
(i.e., how well firms in a given industry can function in Chapter 11 restructuring), which
drives what creditors can get if they were to accelerate the loan and send the firm to
restructuring in Chapter 11. More generally, as we also see in Tables 4 and 5, the strength
of creditor control rights tends to increase with Chapter 11 values.


3.3     Additional Results

    In the following we analyze several additional debt characteristics, including interest
rates and default recovery rates, to further corroborate the focus of different types of
debt. We also perform additional checks to examine whether asset-based debt plays a
role in monitoring firms' operational performance.

A. Interest Rates
    Figure 8, Panel A, shows a binscatter plot of interest rates on asset-based debt and
book leverage for firms in the top and bottom terciles of liquidation values (controlling
for year fixed effects and firm size). Figure 8, Panel B, investigates the same relationship,
but for cash flow-based debt. These plots show several interesting patterns. First, firms
with low liquidation values pay significantly higher interest rates when they borrow
through asset-based debt. This relationship, however, does not exist for cash flow-based
debt. Second, interest rates on cash flow-based debt are relatively more sensitive to firm
leverage than interest rates on asset-based debt. Both of these patterns are consistent
with the observation that asset-based debt relies mainly on the liquidation value of
discrete assets, whereas cash flow-based debt relies on the going-concern value of the
illustrate in Section 4.

                                             26
firm. While these patterns provide useful information, one might be worried that they
can be affected by endogenous sorting of firms into different types of debt. For example,
perhaps firms with low liquidation values yet choose to borrow asset-based debt could
be riskier than firms with high liquidation values and borrow through asset-based debt,
leading to higher observed interest rates.
   In Table 8, we address such concerns by exploiting variations in the interest rates
on different types of debt of the same firm within the same year, or even within the
same loan package, similar to the empirical strategy of Benmelech, Kumar, and Rajan
(2020b). In columns (1) to (4), we use interest rate information on outstanding debt
from CapitalIQ, and control for firm-year fixed effects to absorb any time-varying firm
characteristics. We use interest rates on loans and bonds in column (1) and focus on
loans in column (2). The results suggest that higher liquidation values are associated
with significantly lower interest rates on asset-based debt relative to cash flow-based
debt. In columns (3) and (4), we repeat the same analysis for firms above and below me-
dian leverage. Comparing the results in column (3) and (4), we see that the differential
impact of liquidation values on the interest rates of asset-based loans is slightly larger
for firms with higher leverage. Finally, in column (5), we use interest rate data from
DealScan and compare interest rates on different types of loans issued in the same loan
package. Again we find that higher liquidation values are associated with significantly
lower interest rates particularly for asset-based loans.
   Overall, the results on interest rates suggest that higher liquidation values from dis-
crete assets can make asset-based debt relatively cheaper. Correspondingly, higher liq-
uidation values are associated with a higher prevalence of asset-based debt. Meanwhile,
interest rates on cash flow-based debt do not seem to depend on liquidation values.

B. Debt Recovery Rates in Default
   Besides the interest rate results which show the ex ante pricing of different types of
debt, we also examine debt recovery rates in bankruptcy which provides direct evidence
on the ex post importance of liquidation values and going-concern values for different
debt claims in default resolution.
   In Table 9, we use debt recovery rates from Moody's Default & Recovery Database
(DRD) to investigate this issue. Not all firms in the DRD database are public firms.
Therefore, we perform our analysis both for the entire sample (odd columns), and for
the sample of public firms for which we can find data on their Chapter 11 liquidation
analysis as well as pre-filing financial information (even columns). Accordingly, in the
odd columns the independent variables include industry-average liquidation values and
going-concern values (matched based on industries); in even columns the independent


                                             27
variables include firm-level liquidation values, going-concern values, and pre-filing firm
financials. In columns (5) and (6), we replace the estimate of Chapter 11 going-concern
values with the bottom quartile of average Q (i.e., market value of assets over book value
of assets) in the industry. The idea is that the bottom quartile of industry Q should be
informative about the going-concern values of firms in restructuring.
   Overall, the results of Table 9 suggest that the recovery rate of asset-based debt
is mainly affected by the liquidation value of discrete assets, and it does not depend
much on the going-concern value of the firm. In contrast, the recovery rate of cash
flow-based debt is driven by the going-concern value of the firm, not the liquidation
value. These results are consistent with the interest rate results shown earlier. They are
also consistent with US bankruptcy laws. They verify that asset-based lenders would
mainly focus on the liquidation value of discrete assets pledged to them, whereas cash
flow-based lenders would be more focused on the going-concern value of the firm.

C. Comparison with Book Values of "Tangible Assets"
   In Internet Appendix Table IA6, we also compare our liquidation value measure with
the book value of "tangible assets" often used in prior work (Rajan and Zingales, 1995;
Almeida and Campello, 2007; Rampini and Viswanathan, 2013). Conceptually, measur-
ing the liquidation value of discrete assets is important for several reasons. First, in ex
ante lending decisions of asset-based debt, creditors specify borrowing limits according
to the estimated liquidation value of discrete assets pledged. Second, in ex post default
resolutions, payoffs of asset-based debt are also primarily determined by the liquidation
value of the discrete assets pledged.
   In the data, we examine how different measures explain both the quantity and the
interest rates of asset-based debt. We show comparisons with two common measures of
tangible assets, namely the book value of PPE in Panel A and the book value of PPE plus
inventory in Panel B. For the amount of asset-based debt analyzed in columns (1) and
(2), our measure provides information beyond the traditional book values. For interest
rates analyzed in columns (3) and (4), we find that asset-based debt has lower interest
rates when the firm has higher liquidation values. On the other hand, interest rates
on asset-based debt are weakly increasing in the traditional book value measures. One
possible explanation for this result is that book values may also reflect credit demand,
whereas our measure of liquidation value is better at capturing the credit supply for
asset-based debt (i.e., lenders' willingness to lend against discrete assets).

D. Asset-Based Debt and Monitoring
   So far we have assumed that asset-based debt is not much involved in monitoring
firm performance. As shown above, their recovery rates in default depend primarily on


                                             28
the liquidation value of discrete assets, rather than the value of the firm as an operating
business. They also set interest rates with a stronger focus on the former.
   One may wonder if some lenders of asset-based debt, such as asset-based revolvers,
may also be involved in monitoring firms' operating performance and managerial com-
petence. Asset-based revolvers are revolving lines of credit mainly backed by working
capital (i.e., inventory and receivable), which allow firms to borrow up to the liquida-
tion value of working capital (the borrowing base). There are two reasons why lenders
of these revolvers might be involved in monitoring. First, the revolvers can be part
of a loan package that also includes cash flow-based term loans. The lead lender of
the asset-based revolver may overlap with the lead lender of the cash flow-based term
loan. One might think that in these cases the revolver could be used to strengthen the
bargaining power of the term loan lender in enforcing monitoring. Second, if the firm
borrows from the revolver more than what is allowed by the borrowing base, the firm
has to either reduce its borrowing from the revolver or post more collateral. Otherwise,
the firm violates the borrowing base requirement and incurs a technical default (just
like violations of financial covenants), which could give the lender control rights. We
investigate both of these possibilities in Internet Appendix Figures IA2 and IA3.
   In Figure IA2, we use DealScan data and plot the frequency of having the same
lead lenders for a cash flow-based loan and an asset-based loan in a loan package, as a
function of firm leverage (Panel A) and firm size (Panel B), for firms with low vs. high
liquidation values. The main takeaway is that the frequency of having overlaps in the
lead lenders is significantly higher for firms with low liquidation values. This seems
consistent with our main observation that firms with low liquidation values rely more
on lending relations with more intensive monitoring.
   To evaluate the relevance of the second channel, ideally we want to have a measure
of the frequency of violating the borrowing base requirement. Unfortunately, DealScan
only has data at loan issuance (not subsequent borrowing amounts), while CapitalIQ
does not have data on the borrowing base requirement associated with revolvers. Ac-
cordingly, we approximate the maximum borrowing base using the liquidation value of
working capital (inventory plus receivable). We construct a dummy variable that is equal
to one if the firm's borrowing through revolvers backed by working capital is more than
the estimated liquidation value of its working capital. We plot the frequency of such
occurrence in Figure IA3. For most levels of leverage, the probability of borrowing from
asset-based revolvers more than the liquidation value of working capital (i.e., our proxy
for borrowing more than the borrowing base) is low. It is slightly higher for firms with
lower liquidation values. The results indicate that the incidence of asset-based lenders
being able to exercise control rights appears relatively infrequent. Correspondingly, the

                                            29
incidence of asset-based lenders having to worry about the firm value, beyond the liq-
uidation value of the particular assets pledged them, is also low. Furthermore, even if
some asset-based loans do get involved in monitoring firms' financial performance, this
seems more likely to happen for firms with lower liquidation values.


3.4   Total Leverage
    The analyses in Section 3.1 investigate firms' debt composition. Another important
question is the extent to which liquidation values affect total borrowing. In Figure 9,
we find that firms' liquidation values have a positive relationship with total leverage
for small firms and firms with negative earnings, consistent with the observations of
Rampini and Viswanathan (2013). Meanwhile, liquidation values do not have a strong
association with total leverage for large firms and firms with positive earnings. Table 7
presents the results in regressions, which shows similar findings.
    Overall, the evidence is consistent with observations in Lian and Ma (2020). Small
public firms, which have negative earnings more than half of the time and are more
likely to be liquidated, rely primarily on asset-based debt. Their total debt capacity
depends significantly on liquidation values. On the other hand, large firms, which
generally have positive earnings (for more than 90% firm-years in terms of EBITDA) and
a low probability of liquidation, rely substantially on cash flow-based debt. Their total
debt capacity is not necessarily dependent on liquidation values, but is instead typically
tied to the level of earnings which serves as a verifiable proxy for firms' going-concern
values. Outside Compustat, Jang (2020) documents that small firms backed by private
equity (PE) have high earnings and behave like large Compustat firms: they primarily
borrow cash flow-based debt and their total leverage is not dependent on liquidation
values. Our model in Section 4 also illustrates that when it is feasible to enforce control
rights based on verifiable signals and firm going-concern values, liquidation values can
affect debt composition but may not drive total debt capacity.


4     Model
    We now present a model that analyzes the connections between firm attributes and
debt characteristics. It shows that monitoring would be more intensive when liquida-
tion values are low and leverage is high. The model also delivers multi-dimensional
priority rules under the optimal arrangement. It demonstrates that monitoring would
be undertaken by creditors who have high priority against the firm's business value
in success and in restructuring, but not against the liquidation value. In addition, the


                                            30
model shows that debt with strict monitoring provides broader benefits and helps firms
borrow beyond the liquidation value. Finally and importantly, the model aims to follow,
as closely as possible, the features of US bankruptcy laws and debt contracts in practice.


4.1    Setup
   We consider a model with three agents: an entrepreneur, an informed investor, and
an uninformed investor. The entrepreneur has access to an investment that requires one
unit of funding. The entrepreneur's total wealth is w < 1, and therefore the rest of
the project needs to be financed using external funds from uninformed and informed
investors. The investment outcome can be high ( R) or low ( L). The good outcome rep-
resents payoffs from successful operations. The bad outcome can represent business fail-
ure and liquidation. The probability of success ( p) is determined by the entrepreneur's
                1
effort, at cost 2  p2 to the entrepreneur. All agents also have access to a storage technol-
ogy with return 1. The entrepreneur's effort p is privately known and not contractible,
but the firm's performance is a noisy signal of p and it is contractible. The informed
investor has access to a technology that enables her to investigate and find out about
p, but this technology costs c per incidence of monitoring. Accordingly, we separate
investors into informed and uninformed to examine the mechanisms and functions of
creditor monitoring.
   The model has three periods. The sequence of events is also illustrated in the dia-
gram below. At t = 0, the entrepreneur offers take-it or leave-it contracts to investors.
If accepted, the investment decisions are made. It is also assumed that the informed
investor pays the expected cost of monitoring in advance (i.e., at t = 0) and the en-
trepreneur chooses effort (or the probability of success p) after observing whether the
informed investor has paid the expected monitoring cost or not.24
   At t = 1, a publicly available noisy signal of effort s = p +  is observed by investors,
where   N (0, ). The signal can be thought of as the firm's financial performance
(such as earnings). The signal is verifiable and contractible. The contract specifies a
threshold s , below which the informed investor has the control right to decide whether
the project should continue or stop. This contractual provision can be thought of as
a financial covenant, which is based on observable financial performance of the firm.
Upon a low realization of the signal (i.e., s < s ), the informed investor can observe
the true value of p through the costly monitoring technology, and she then decides
whether to continue or stop the project. If the project is stopped, the return will be Q
  24 There  are several ways to think about this assumption that monitoring costs are paid in advance. For
instance, the teams and employees of informed lenders need to be formed in advance. Legal, diligence,
and contractual work also need to be performed in advance.


                                                   31
( L < Q < 1). We interpret this intervention as a restructuring, e.g., through Chapter
11, and Q can represent the going-concern value in Chapter 11 restructuring. On the
other hand, if the project continues, at t = 2 the final outcome is realized, which is R
(success) with probability p and L (failure) with probability 1 - p. If the signal is high
(i.e., s  s ), then the project continues automatically.

                  = 0                                = 1          = 2
                                                                        :  ,  , 

                                                                        
                                                              
            ,  ,                         =  + 
                                                                  1 - 

                                                              :  ,         :  , 

                                      Timing of the Model

   The contract C specifies the investment of the informed investor and the uninformed
investor (ii , iu ), as well as the allocation of payments among the informed and unin-
formed investors, when the project continues and the outcome is high ( Ri , Ru ), when
the outcome is low ( Li , Lu ), and when the project is stopped ( Qi , Qu ). Finally, the con-
tract also specifies the threshold s below which the informed investor has the control
right. Given the resource constraint, payments to the entrepreneur in different states of
the world are Re = R - Ri - Ru , Le = L - Li - Lu , and Qe = Q - Qi - Qu .
                                ( R - L )2
Assumption 1. L < Q < 1 <           2        + L.

   This assumption ensures that the project has positive net present value for some
level of effort. In addition, the value of the project with restructuring is higher than the
liquidation value, but less than the initial investment.


4.2   First Best
   Before characterizing the optimal financial contract, we study the first best. The first
best maximizes the total surplus:

                                                    1
                                max pR + (1 - p) L -  p2 ,
                                 p                  2

which gives us
                                                      R-L
                                             p FB =       .
                                                       
Therefore, the optimal level of effort is increasing in the difference between the high
outcome and the low outcome ( R - L), and decreasing in the cost of effort .

                                                     32
4.3     Optimal Financial Contract
   We now consider the optimal financial contract when the firm is financed without
the informed investor, as well as the case when the informed investor is required.

Assumption 2. Contracts are restricted to those with Li  Qi  p FB Ri + (1 - p FB ) Li and
Lu  Qu  p FB Ru + (1 - p FB ) Lu .

   This ensures that the financial contract is consistent with US bankruptcy laws where
investors in Chapter 11 (restructuring) should receive no less than what they would oth-
erwise receive in Chapter 7 (liquidation). In addition, investors cannot use bankruptcy
as a way for rent extraction.


4.3.1    Without Informed Investor
   We first consider the case with no informed investor. Here the entrepreneur's prob-
lem is to maximize profits given the uninformed investor's participation constraint:

                                                             1
                        max p( R - Ru ) + (1 - p)( L - Lu ) -  p2 ,
                       p, R u , L u                          2
                                 s.t. pRu + (1 - p) Lu  iu .

Proposition 1. For w  [1 - L, 1], the first best can be achieved without any informed investor
and Ru = Lu = iu = 1 - w.

   This is simply because as long as Ru = Lu , the marginal incentive of the entrepreneur
is not affected by the presence of an outside investor. However, if w < 1 - L (or iu > L),
the first best cannot be achieved without an informed investor. This is because if iu > L,
the participation constraint of the uninformed investor requires Ru > L and therefore
                          ^ = ( R - Ru )/ will be less than p FB .
the entrepreneur's effort p


4.3.2    With Informed Investor
   We now consider the case when w < 1 - L and therefore the first best level of effort
cannot be achieved without the informed investor. In this case, we investigate how the
presence of the informed investor with costly monitoring technology can alleviate the
moral hazard problem of the entrepreneur.
   Define p as the threshold effort level of the entrepreneur, below which the informed
investor will stop the project if she has the right to do so. Then the optimal contract
with the informed investor consists of the optimal choice of s and p , as well as the
contribution of investors (ii , iu ) and payments to them in different states of the world

                                             33
{( Ri , Ru ), ( Qi , Qu ), ( Li , Lu )}, such that the total output net of the entrepreneur's effort
cost and the monitoring cost is maximized subject to incentive compatibility and par-
ticipation constraints of all agents. Since we are only considering the cases where the
entrepreneur's total borrowing is more than L (i.e., w < 1 - L), it is straightforward to
see that in the optimal contract Le = 0.
   Therefore the optimal contract can be characterized as:

                                          1
                 max  p  R + (1 - p  ) L -  p 2 - P [ s < s  | p  ] c , s . t .
                 p ,C
                                          2
            p < p : pRi + (1 - p) Li < Qi ,                                                      (4)
            p  p : pRi + (1 - p) Li  Qi ,                                                        (5)
                                                              1                    1
            p < p : P[s < s | p] Qe + P[s  s | p] pRe -  p2  p Re -  p2 ,                        (6)
                                                              2                    2
                                                
                    P[ s < s | p
                               ~ ] Q i + P[ s  s | p     ~ i + (1 - p
                                                   ~ ] [ pR         ~ ) Li ]  ii ,               (7)
                        p  R i + (1 - p  ) L i - P[ s < s  | p  ] c  i i ,                       (8)
                        p  R u + (1 - p  ) L u  i u .                                            (9)

   Equations (4) and (5) ensure that the informed investor stops the project whenever
she observes a level of effort below p , and allows the project to continue otherwise. The
only choice of ( Ri , Li , Qi ) that satisfies both conditions is:

                                      p  R i + (1 - p  ) L i = Q i .                           (10)

   This condition ensures that the informed investor does not experience any loss in the
event of restructuring. One can think of this condition as the informed lender having
priority with respect to the enterprise value in the event of restructuring. Indeed, it is
exactly this seniority that ensures monitoring is enforceable and stopping the project at
t = 1 when the effort is below p is incentive compatible for the informed investor.
   Equation (6) ensures that conditional on monitoring and the enforcement of the
threat point p by the informed investor, the entrepreneur does not benefit from shirking
and therefore chooses effort level p . In particular, given Equation (10), the informed
investor stops the project when she has the control right (i.e., s < s ) and the effort
level is found to be below p . In that case, the entrepreneur receives Qe . Otherwise, the
project continues and is successful with probability p.
   Equation (7) guarantees that the informed investor has the skin in the game to pay
the expected monitoring cost at t = 0. In particular, if the informed investor does not
pay the monitoring cost, the entrepreneur will choose a level of effort that is below p .
Given Equation (10) this means that the informed investor's best response is to stop

                                                    34
the project whenever she has the control right (i.e., s < s ). Therefore, in that case the
                               ~ is given by:
entrepreneur's level of effort p

                                                                    1
                     ~ = arg max P[s < s | p] Qe + P[s  s | p] pRe -  p2 .
                     p
                              p                                     2

Therefore, Equation (7) ensures that not paying the expected monitoring cost at t = 0
is associated with a negative net return for the informed investor. Equations (8) and (9)
satisfy the participation constraint of the informed and uninformed investors.
                                      ~ , the optimality of s requires that:
    Note that given the definition of p

                                                             1 2           1
                   P[ s < s  | p
                               ~ ] Q e + P[ s  s  | p          ~ = p  R e -  p 2 .
                                                    ~ ] pRe -  p
                                                             2             2

Otherwise, the total cost of monitoring P[s < s | p ]c can be reduced without violating
any of our constraints.
    Finally, among all the possible financial contracts, we choose the contract that re-
quires the minimum amount of investment by informed investors (ii ). This can be
rationalized by assuming the cost of capital for the informed investor is slightly more
than the cost of capital for the uninformed investor. See Internet Appendix Section IA5
for the full characterization of the optimal contract with informed investor.

Proposition 2. For any level of entrepreneur's wealth w  [w, 1 - L], the optimal contract with
minimum investment by the informed investor requires priority of the informed investor with
respect to the project value in restructuring (i.e., Qi = ii + P[s < s | p ]c), and priority of the
uninformed investor with respect to the liquidation value (i.e., Lu = L).25

    The priority of the informed investor in the event of restructuring is a direct conse-
quence of the incentive compatibility of the informed investor at t = 1 (i.e., Equation
(10)) and her participation constraint (i.e., Equation (8)). This ensures that the decision
to stop the project for low levels of effort (i.e., p < p ) is time-consistent. Otherwise,
the informed lender may have incentives to let the project continue to avoid ex post
losses. The optimal financial contract with the minimum level of investment by the in-
formed investor also requires Li = 0 and Lu = L. This is because the ex ante incentive
of the informed investor to pay the expected monitoring cost at t = 0 is a function
of Ri - Li . Intuitively, this is because the informed investor shirking on monitoring is
                                                 ~ which is less than p (the optimal
associated with the entrepreneur choosing effort p
level of effort). Therefore, it is the difference between Ri and Li that incentivizes the
   25 wis the minimum level of wealth for which the project net of effort cost and monitoring cost has
positive NPV. That is, w  arg min| p (w) R + [1 - p (w)] L - 1                              
                                                             2  p ( w ) - P[ s < s ( w ) | p ( w )] c - 1  0.
                                                                       2
                               w


                                                     35
informed lender to pay the monitoring cost. This means that any increase in Li should
be associated with a similar increase in Ri and therefore the same increase in ii .
   Figure 10 shows the variation of covenant tightness (P[s < s | p ]) in Panel A and in-
vestment of informed investor (ii ) in Panel B, as a function of the entrepreneur's wealth.
The solid blue line represents a case with low liquidation values and the dashed red
line represents a case with high liquidation values.26 In the limit of w  1 - L, the
solution to the above equations converges to P[s < s | p ] = 0 and ii = 0. This confirms
the smooth transition from the case without the informed investor to the case with the
informed investor for values of w around 1 - L.
   In the optimal solution, as leverage increases above the liquidation value, the amount
of investment by the informed investor, and the tightness of the covenant increases. An
increase in covenant tightness ensures that despite having lower skin in the game, the
entrepreneur has incentives to exert the optimal level of effort. The increase in the
informed investor's investment ii also ensures that she has the incentive to pay the
monitoring cost. Moreover, for the same level of firm leverage, lower liquidation values
are associated with a higher reliance on the informed investor and tighter covenants.
   So far we have considered the optimal contract with minimum level of investment
by the informed investor. We now ask whether there is any level of leverage for which
the optimal contract cannot be achieved without an uninformed investor.

Proposition 3. For any level of entrepreneur's wealth w  [w, 1 - Q + P[s < s | p ]c), the
optimal contract requires the existence of both the informed investor and the uninformed investor.

   Proof: Enforcement of the threat requires Equation (10) to be satisfied. Also, com-
bining Equation (10) with Equation (8), we have ii = Qi - P[s < s | p ]c. Therefore, the
maximum level of investment that can satisfy the incentive compatibility of the informed
investor is Q - P[s < s | p ]c. This means that any additional amount of borrowing has
to come from low priority debt from the uninformed investor (i.e., Lu = 0).

   This proposition shows the complementarity between the informed investor and the
uninformed investor for high levels of leverage. Basically, the incentive compatibility
condition for the informed investor requires full recovery of the informed investor in
the event of restructuring. However, the total value of the project in the event of restruc-
turing limits the total amount of borrowing from the informed investor.
  26 The choice of parameters for the low liquidation value case is: R = 2, L = 0.25, c = 0.1 and  = 1.9,
and that for the high liquidation value case is: R = 1.75, L = 0.5, c = 0.1 and  = 1.35. This set of
parameters ensures the net present values of the two projects are almost the same. In both cases, we have
 = 2 and Q = 0.8.




                                                   36
4.4    Discussion
   The above model, despite its relative simplicity, sheds light on several key features
in the data. First, consistent with Figure 6, firms rely significantly more on loans with
monitoring for levels of leverage above their liquidation values. Relatedly, consistent
with results in Table 6 and Figure 7, the tightness of covenants increases with leverage
and decreases with liquidation values. Second, the model highlights that monitoring
debt is backed by the firm's business value in success and in Chapter 11 restructuring,
not by the liquidation value of discrete assets. Third, in the model as long as covenants
can be enforced and monitoring costs are reasonably small, liquidation values do not
necessarily determine the total borrowing capacity of the firm, but only the composition
of its debt. This is consistent with the finding in Section 3.4 that total leverage does not
depend on liquidation values among large firms.
   The model is also useful for thinking about the design of firms' capital structure
and debt structure. To begin, the entrepreneur has the least senior claim to the project
which we can think of it as equity. As in Gale and Hellwig (1985), an equity contract
minimizes entrepreneur moral hazard. More importantly, loans with strong control,
despite being a small fraction of the capital structure, can provide a monitoring service
that other investors benefit from. However, the enforcement of monitoring requires both
high priority (full recovery) of the informed investor in the case of restructuring and the
sensitivity of the informed investor to the effort of the entrepreneur. The model shows
that for high levels of leverage, these two conditions cannot be satisfied without the
existence of the uninformed investor. Therefore, the model shows that the interaction
between different types of lenders is key for addressing the time consistency problem of
the informed investor. It ensures that the informed investor does not have incentives to
continue projects with low net present values.27 Moreover, consistent with empirical ev-
idence in Schwert (2020), the model predicts that the interest rate on debt from informed
investors is higher than the interest rate on debt form uninformed investors. The higher
interest rate on debt from informed lenders is not necessarily a sign of market power,
but instead a compensation to informed lenders for the monitoring costs.
   Overall, the model points to the role of control right institutions and property right
institutions in determining firms' borrowing capacity. Better property right institutions
   27 The prediction that seniority of the informed lender makes the monitoring threat credible is similar

to the theoretical results in Park (2000) and Repullo and Suarez (1998). However, these models abstract
from the multifaceted priority rules observed in the data. Our model shows that it is the seniority with
respect to the going-concern value of the firm (not the liquidation value) that helps the informed lender
enforce monitoring. Bolton and Scharfstein (1996) study the holdup problem as another mechanism that
can connect liquidation values with debt structures, which predicts that the number of creditors may
increase with liquidation values.



                                                   37
may help lenders avoid paying monitoring costs. However, given the low level of liqui-
dation values for firms in most industries, the development and effectiveness of control
right institutions that facilitate creditor monitoring of firm performance can be impor-
tant for firms' ultimate debt capacity. Covenants help allocate control rights and enforce
monitoring, consistent with empirical results in previous studies (Chava and Roberts,
2008; Roberts and Sufi, 2009; Nini, Smith, and Sufi, 2012).
   Finally, we note several caveats in interpreting this model. First, the above model
focuses in particular on monitoring debt to illustrate the role of creditor control, and for
simplicity it does not distinguish between asset-based debt and cash flow-based debt
with weak control. We can further decompose the uninformed debt into a part that is
collateralized by the liquidation value of discrete assets and a remaining part. That is,
one can think of iu = i ABL + i B (where i ABL denotes asset-based debt and i B denotes
bonds), and i ABL = R ABL = Q ABL = L ABL  Lu = L. With this additional parti-
tion, asset-based debt (i ABL ) and cash flow-based bonds (i B ) would have the empirical
properties documented in Section 3.1. Practically, in the US corporate credit market,
asset-based debt provides lenders with strong protection of value through the liquida-
tion value of separable assets. They may enjoy slightly lower interest rates (Luck and
Santos, 2020; Benmelech, Kumar, and Rajan, 2020a), and would be more prevalent for
firms with more liquid and generic assets. Indeed, tying payoffs (in default) to the value
of standardized, liquid assets is a primary way to reduce the need for understanding the
firm's business operations. It is also possible that asset-based debt can help solve dy-
namic commitment problems that we are not considering here (Donaldson, Gromb, and
Piacentino, 2019; Demarzo, 2019). Additionally, cash flows are verifiable in our model;
if they are not, asset-based debt would also play a primary role.
   Second, in the current model, restructuring is only an outside option that makes the
threat to enforce high effort credible, but it does not occur in equilibrium. In practice,
restructuring does happen, and the value of the firm in restructuring is an important
determinant of the recovery rate of cash flow-based debt. This feature can be captured
by adding a luck component in the probability of success, which is not under the firm's
control (i.e., p = e +  where e is the entrepreneur effort and  is the luck component).
In that setting, for low realizations of , restructuring can be an optimal outcome and
will happen with some probability.
   Third, the current model does not allow for renegotiation of payments to investors
(e.g., promised payments to the informed investor might change following covenant
violation). Accordingly, while we are concerned with the incentive compatibility of
the informed investor both ex ante and ex post, we do not require the contract to be
renegotiation-proof.

                                            38
5    Conclusion
    In this paper, we collect new data to study the nature of debt enforcement among US
non-financial firms. We first show that the liquidation value of fixed assets and work-
ing capital on average accounts for only 23% of total book assets. We then document
that variations in firms' debt contracts are a function of their liquidation values, going-
concern values, and indebtedness, which reflect that different debt contracts are backed
by different aspects of the firm. Companies with lower liquidation values have more
cash flow-based debt and more intensive creditor monitoring of firm performance. They
also pay higher interest rates only when they borrow through asset-based debt. Overall,
total leverage does not depend on the liquidation value of discrete assets, except among
small public firms and firms with negative earnings. We provide a simple model that
rationalizes the empirical results and demonstrates the role of creditor control rights in
debt enforcement.
    Our findings have several additional implications. First, our data sheds further light
on the long-standing question of firms' borrowing constraints. Our liquidation value
data provides estimates of the maximum borrowing capacity if borrowing constraints
are determined by the liquidation value of discrete assets. Given that non-financial
firms' assets tend to be highly specific, such borrowing constraints would be rather re-
strictive. Indeed, many firms in the data borrow beyond the liquidation value of discrete
assets, and total leverage does not depend on the liquidation value when covenants on
firms' financial performance are not very costly to enforce and the corporate restruc-
turing system is well-developed. Second, our evidence suggests that only having insti-
tutions to enforce property rights (e.g., ability to seize and liquidate hard assets) may
be insufficient. In light of the limited liquidation values of many firms, financial devel-
opment also benefits from institutional structures that enable creditors to monitor firm
performance and enforce control rights to maximize the value of a business as a going
concern. Relatedly, the development of different industries in a country can depend
on the institutional environment: industries with lower liquidation values may be more
difficult to thrive in countries without well-developed control right institutions.




                                            39
References
Acemoglu, Daron, and Simon Johnson, 2005, Unbundling institutions, Journal of Political
 Economy 113, 949­995.
Acharya, Viral V, Yakov Amihud, and Lubomir Litov, 2011, Creditor rights and corporate
 risk-taking, Journal of Financial Economics 102, 150­166.
Aghion, Philippe, and Patrick Bolton, 1992, An incomplete contracts approach to finan-
 cial contracting, Review of Economic Studies 59, 473­494.
Alderson, Michael J, and Brian L Betker, 1995, Liquidation costs and capital structure,
  Journal of Financial Economics 39, 45­69.
Alfaro, Ivan, Nicholas Bloom, and Xiaoji Lin, 2019, The finance uncertainty multiplier,
  Working paper.
Almeida, Heitor, and Murillo Campello, 2007, Financial constraints, asset tangibility,
  and corporate investment, Review of Financial Studies 20, 1429­1460.
Baird, Douglas G, and Thomas H Jackson, 1984, Corporate reorganizations and the treat-
  ment of diverse ownership interests: A comment on adequate protection of secured
  creditors in bankruptcy, U. Chi. L. Rev. 51, 97.
Beck, Thorsten, and Ross Levine, 2005, Legal institutions and financial development, in
  Handbook of New Institutional Economics, 251­278 (Springer).
Becker, Bo, and Victoria Ivashina, 2016, Covenant-light contracts and creditor coordina-
  tion, Working paper.
Becker, Bo, and Jens Josephson, 2016, Insolvency resolution and the missing high-yield
  bond markets, Review of Financial Studies 29, 2814­2849.
Benmelech, Efraim, 2009, Asset salability and debt maturity: Evidence from nineteenth-
  century American railroads, Review of Financial Studies 22, 1545­1584.
Benmelech, Efraim, and Nittai K Bergman, 2008, Liquidation values and the credibility
  of financial contract renegotiation: Evidence from US airlines, Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 123, 1635­1677.
Benmelech, Efraim, and Nittai K Bergman, 2009, Collateral pricing, Journal of Financial
  Economics 91, 339­360.
Benmelech, Efraim, Mark J Garmaise, and Tobias J Moskowitz, 2005, Do liquidation
  values affect financial contracts? Evidence from commercial loan contracts and zoning
  regulation, Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 1121­1154.
Benmelech, Efraim, Nitish Kumar, and Raghuram Rajan, 2020a, The decline of secured
  debt, Working paper.
Benmelech, Efraim, Nitish Kumar, and Raghuram Rajan, 2020b, Secured credit spreads,
  Working paper.
Berger, Allen N, and Gregory F Udell, 1990, Collateral, loan quality and bank risk,
  Journal of Monetary Economics 25, 21­42.



                                          40
Berger, Philip G, Michael Minnis, and Andrew Sutherland, 2017, Commercial lending
  concentration and bank expertise: Evidence from borrower financial statements, Jour-
  nal of Accounting and Economics 64, 253­277.
Berger, Philip G, Eli Ofek, and Itzhak Swary, 1996, Investor valuation of the abandon-
  ment option, Journal of Financial Economics 42, 259­287.
Berlin, Mitchell, and Jan Loeys, 1988, Bond covenants and delegated monitoring, Journal
  of Finance 43, 397­412.
Berlin, Mitchell, Greg Nini, and G Yu Edison, 2020, Concentration of control rights in
  leveraged loan syndicates, Journal of Financial Economics .
Bernstein, Shai, Emanuele Colonnelli, and Benjamin Iverson, 2019, Asset allocation in
  bankruptcy, Journal of Finance 74, 5­53.
Bolton, Patrick, and David S Scharfstein, 1996, Optimal debt structure and the number
  of creditors, Journal of Political Economy 104, 1­25.
Bradley, Michael, and Michael R Roberts, 2015, The structure and pricing of corporate
  debt covenants, Quarterly Journal of Finance 5, 1550001.
Bris, Arturo, Ivo Welch, and Ning Zhu, 2006, The costs of bankruptcy: Chapter 7 liqui-
  dation versus Chapter 11 reorganization, Journal of Finance 61, 1253­1303.
Chaney, Thomas, David Sraer, and David Thesmar, 2012, The collateral channel: How
 real estate shocks affect corporate investment, American Economic Review 102, 2381­
 2409.
Chava, Sudheer, and Michael R Roberts, 2008, How does financing impact investment?
 The role of debt covenants, Journal of Finance 63, 2085­2121.
Christensen, Hans B, and Valeri V Nikolaev, 2012, Capital versus performance covenants
 in debt contracts, Journal of Accounting Research 50, 75­116.
Corbae, Dean, and Pablo D'Erasmo, 2020, Reorganization or liquidation: Bankruptcy
 choice and firm dynamics, Review of Economic Studies Forthcoming.
Crouzet, Nicolas, 2018, Aggregate implications of corporate debt choices, Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies 85, 1635­1682.
Dabas, Ruchira, Mike Simonton, and Mark Oline, 2013, Rating asset-based lending
 (ABL) facilities, Fitch report.
De Fiore, Fiorella, and Harald Uhlig, 2011, Bank finance versus bond finance, Journal of
 Money, Credit and Banking 43, 1399­1421.
De Fiore, Fiorella, and Harald Uhlig, 2015, Corporate debt structure and the financial
 crisis, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 47, 1571­1598.
Demarzo, Peter M, 2019, Presidential address: Collateral and commitment, Journal of
 Finance 74, 1587­1619.
Demerjian, Peter R, 2011, Accounting standards and debt covenants: Has the "balance
 sheet approach" led to a decline in the use of balance sheet covenants?, Journal of
 Accounting and Economics 52, 178­202.


                                          41
Denis, David J, and Vassil T Mihov, 2003, The choice among bank debt, non-bank private
 debt, and public debt: Evidence from new corporate borrowings, Journal of Financial
 Economics 70, 3­28.
Dewatripont, Mathias, and Jean Tirole, 1994, A theory of debt and equity: Diversity
 of securities and manager-shareholder congruence, Quarterly Journal of Economics 109,
 1027­1054.
Diamond, Douglas, Yunzhi Hu, and Raghuram Rajan, 2019, Liquidity and the structure
  of intermediation, Working paper.
Diamond, Douglas W, 1984, Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring, Review
  of Economic Studies 51, 393­414.
Diamond, Douglas W, 1991, Monitoring and reputation: The choice between bank loans
  and directly placed debt, Journal of Political Economy 99, 689­721.
Diamond, Douglas W, Yunzhi Hu, and Raghuram G Rajan, 2020, Pledgeability, industry
  liquidity, and financing cycles, Journal of Finance 75, 419­461.
Djankov, Simeon, Oliver Hart, Caralee McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer, 2008, Debt enforce-
  ment around the world, Journal of Political Economy 116, 1105­1149.
Djankov, Simeon, Caralee McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer, 2007, Private credit in 129 coun-
  tries, Journal of Financial Economics 84, 299­329.
Donaldson, Jason Roderick, Denis Gromb, and Giorgia Piacentino, 2019, The paradox of
 pledgeability, Journal of Financial Economics .
Donaldson, Jason Roderick, Denis Gromb, and Giorgia Piacentino, 2020, Conflicting
 priorities: A theory of covenants and collateral, Working paper.
Eisfeldt, Andrea L, and Adriano A Rampini, 2009, Leasing, ability to repossess, and
  debt capacity, Review of Financial Studies 22, 1621­1657.
Gale, Douglas, and Martin Hellwig, 1985, Incentive-compatible debt contracts: The one-
 period problem, Review of Economic Studies 52, 647­663.
Gan, Jie, 2007, Collateral, debt capacity, and corporate investment: Evidence from a
 natural experiment, Journal of Financial Economics 85, 709­734.
Gertner, Robert, and David Scharfstein, 1991, A theory of workouts and the effects of
 reorganization law, Journal of Finance 46, 1189­1222.
Gilson, Stuart C, Edith S Hotchkiss, and Richard S Ruback, 2000, Valuation of bankrupt
  firms, Review of Financial Studies 13, 43­74.
Gopal, Manasa, 2019, How collateral affects small business lending: The role of lender
 specialization, Working paper.
Green, Daniel, 2018, Corporate refinancing, covenants, and the agency cost of debt,
  Working paper.
Hart, Oliver, and John Moore, 1994, A theory of debt based on the inalienability of
 human capital, Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 841­879.
Hart, Oliver, and John Moore, 1998, Default and renegotiation: A dynamic model of
 debt, Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, 1­41.

                                          42
Haselmann, Rainer, Katharina Pistor, and Vikrant Vig, 2010, How law affects lending,
 Review of Financial Studies 23, 549­580.
Holmstrom, Bengt, and Jean Tirole, 1997, Financial intermediation, loanable funds, and
 the real sector, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 663­691.
Ivashina, Victoria, Luc Laeven, and Enrique Moral-Benito, 2020, Loan types and the
  bank lending channel, Working paper.
Iverson, Benjamin, 2018, Get in line: Chapter 11 restructuring in crowded bankruptcy
  courts, Management Science 64, 5370­5394.
Iverson, Benjamin Charles, Joshua Madsen, Wei Wang, and Qiping Xu, 2020, Financial
  costs of judicial inexperience, Working paper.
Jang, Young Soo, 2020, Five facts about direct lending to middle-market buyouts, Work-
  ing paper.
                             ¨
Kaplan, Steven N, and Per Stromberg, 2003, Financial contracting theory meets the real
  world: An empirical analysis of venture capital contracts, Review of Economic Studies
  70, 281­315.
Kermani, Amir, and Yueran Ma, 2020, Asset specificity of non-financial firms, Working
  paper.
Kim, Hyunseob, and Howard Kung, 2017, The asset redeployability channel: How un-
  certainty affects corporate investment, Review of Financial Studies 30, 245­280.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore, 1997, Credit cycles, Journal of Political Economy 105,
  211­248.
Lian, Chen, and Yueran Ma, 2020, Anatomy of corporate borrowing constraints, Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics Forthcoming.
Luck, Stephan, and Jo~
                     ao AC Santos, 2020, The valuation of collateral in bank lending,
  Working paper.
Ma, Yueran, and Jose Scheinkman, 2020, Going-concern debt of financial intermediaries,
 Working paper.
Maksimovic, Vojislav, and Gordon Phillips, 2001, The market for corporate assets: Who
 engages in mergers and asset sales and are there efficiency gains?, Journal of Finance
 56, 2019­2065.
Matvos, Gregor, 2013, Estimating the benefits of contractual completeness, Review of
 Financial Studies 26, 2798­2844.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi, 2011, House prices, home equity-based borrowing, and the
 us household leverage crisis, American Economic Review 101, 2132­56.
Murfin, Justin, 2012, The supply-side determinants of loan contract strictness, Journal of
 Finance 67, 1565­1601.
Murfin, Justin, and Ryan Pratt, 2019, Who finances durable goods and why it matters:
 Captive finance and the Coase conjecture, Journal of Finance 74, 755­793.
Nini, Greg, David C Smith, and Amir Sufi, 2012, Creditor control rights, corporate
  governance, and firm value, Review of Financial Studies 25, 1713­1761.

                                           43
Park, Cheol, 2000, Monitoring and structure of debt contracts, Journal of Finance 55,
  2157­2195.
Ponticelli, Jacopo, and Leonardo S Alencar, 2016, Court enforcement, bank loans, and
  firm investment: Evidence from a bankruptcy reform in Brazil, Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 131, 1365­1413.
Porta, Rafael La, Florencio Lopez-de Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W Vishny,
  1998, Law and finance, Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113­1155.
Rajan, Raghuram G, and Luigi Zingales, 1995, What do we know about capital structure?
  Some evidence from international data, Journal of Finance 50, 1421­1460.
Ramey, Valerie A, and Matthew D Shapiro, 2001, Displaced capital: A study of aerospace
  plant closings, Journal of Political Economy 109, 958­992.
Rampini, Adriano A, and S Viswanathan, 2010, Collateral, risk management, and the
  distribution of debt capacity, Journal of Finance 65, 2293­2322.
Rampini, Adriano A, and S Viswanathan, 2013, Collateral and capital structure, Journal
  of Financial Economics 109, 466­492.
Rampini, Adriano A, and S Viswanathan, 2020, Collateral and secured debt, Working
  paper.
Rauch, James E, 1999, Networks versus markets in international trade, Journal of Interna-
  tional Economics 48, 7­35.
Rauh, Joshua D, and Amir Sufi, 2010, Capital structure and debt structure, Review of
  Financial Studies 23, 4242­4280.
Repullo, Rafael, and Javier Suarez, 1998, Monitoring, liquidation, and security design,
  Review of Financial Studies 11, 163­187.
Roberts, Michael R, and Amir Sufi, 2009, Control rights and capital structure: An em-
  pirical investigation, Journal of Finance 64, 1657­1695.
Schwert, Michael, 2020, Does borrowing from banks cost more than borrowing from the
  market?, Journal of Finance 75, 905­947.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W Vishny, 1992, Liquidation values and debt capacity: A
  market equilibrium approach, Journal of Finance 47, 1343­1366.
Smith, Clifford W, and Jerold B Warner, 1979, On financial contracting: An analysis of
  bond covenants, Journal of Financial Economics 7, 117­161.
   ¨
Stromberg, Per, 2000, Conflicts of interest and market illiquidity in bankruptcy auctions:
  Theory and tests, Journal of Finance 55, 2641­2692.
Townsend, Robert M, 1979, Optimal contracts and competitive markets with costly state
  verification, Journal of Economic Theory 21, 265­293.
Vig, Vikrant, 2013, Access to collateral and corporate debt structure: Evidence from a
  natural experiment, Journal of Finance 68, 881­928.




                                           44
Main Figures and Tables

             Figure 1: Examples of Summary Tables in Liquidation Analysis
This figure shows two examples of summary tables from the liquidation analysis. Panel A shows the
example of a chemical company Lyondell (case number 09-10023). Panel B shows the example of a
communications product company Sorenson Communications (case number 14-10454).

                                       Panel A. Lyondell




                              Panel B. Sorenson Communications




                                               45
            Figure 2: Liquidation Values and Chapter 11 Going-Concern Values
The pie chart in Panel A shows the composition of liquidation values for the average non-financial firm
in Compustat. It includes the value of cash, as well as the liquidation value of working capital (receivable
and inventory) and property, plant, and equipment (PPE). The figure in Panel B shows the distributions
of non-financial firms' liquidation values, both excluding and including cash, along with the distribution
of industry-average Chapter 11 going-concern values based on the two-digit SIC of each firm.

                                    Panel A. Average Liquidation Values




                                                                                9.3%



                                                                             4.7%


                                                                         8.5%




                                        Cash               Receivables                    Inventory
                                        PPE                Unaccounted



                Panel B. Liquidation Values vs. Chapter 11 Going-Concern Values
                      2.5




                                                                      Liq. Value w/o Cash (PPE, working capital)
                                                                      Liq. Value w/Cash
                                                                      Industry-average Ch11 GC Value
                      2  1.5
                  Density
                      1
                      .5
                      0




                               0   .2          .4        .6       .8       1           1.2        1.4
                                                    Liquidation Value/Book Assets




                                                             46
                                                           Figure 3: Borrowing Relative to Liquidation Values
Panel A shows the cumulative density function (CDF) of the ratio of total debt relative to the liquidation
value of fixed assets and working capital, for non-financial firms in Compustat. Panel B shows the CDF of
the ratio of total liabilities relative to the cash plus the liquidation value of fixed assets and working capital
(solid red curve), and the ratio of total liabilities relative to the industry-average Chapter 11 going-concern
value (dashed blue curve).

                                                                   Panel A. Total Debt/Liquidation Value

                                                     1



                                                     .8
                  Cumulative Distribution Function




                                                     .6



                                                     .4



                                                     .2



                                                     0
                                                            0       1         2          3         4        5                   6              7
                                                                        Debt/Liquidation Value (PPE+Working Capital)



                                                           Panel B. Total Liabilities/Liquidation Value (with Cash)
                                                     1.8
                       Cumulative Distribution Function
                                            .6




                                                                                            Total Liabilities/Liquidation Value w.Cash
                                                                                            Total Liabilities/Industry Average Ch11 GC Value
                      .2        .4                   0




                                                            0       1         2         3            4             5             6             7




                                                                                         47
                                                       Figure 4: Asset-Based Debt
The figure in Panel A provides a binned scatterplot of asset-based debt as a share of total debt against
book leverage in twenty equal-sized bins for firms with high and low liquidation value. The figure in
Panel B provides a binned scatterplot of asset-based debt as a share of total assets against book leverage
in twenty equal-sized bins for firms with high and low liquidation values. The high (low) liquidation
value group includes firms in the top (bottom) tercile of liquidation value each year. Year fixed effects are
included. We restrict to firms with book leverage between zero and one. Sample is based on Compustat
and CapitalIQ and sample period is 2003 (beginning of CapitalIQ data for constructing debt composition)
to 2016.

                                                        Panel A. Share in Total Debt
                                .7
                  Asset-Based Debt/Total Debt
                  .3      .4    .2.5       .6




                                                  0      .2              .4              .6            .8
                                                                     Book Leverage

                                                      Low Liquidation Value   High Liquidation Value




                                                      Panel B. Divide by Total Assets
                                .4
                  Asset-Based Debt/Total Assets
                     .1        .2
                                0         .3




                                                  0      .2              .4              .6            .8
                                                                     Book Leverage

                                                      Low Liquidation Value   High Liquidation Value




                                                                        48
                Figure 5: Cash Flow-Based Debt with Weak Control (Bonds)
The figure in Panel A provides a binned scatterplot of cash flow-based bonds as a share of total debt
against book leverage in twenty equal-sized bins for firms with high and low liquidation value. The
figure in Panel B provides a binned scatterplot of cash flow-based bonds as a share of total assets against
book leverage in twenty equal-sized bins for firms with high and low liquidation values. The high (low)
liquidation value group includes firms in the top (bottom) tercile of liquidation value each year. Year fixed
effects are included. We restrict to firms with book leverage between zero and one. Sample is based on
Compustat and CapitalIQ and sample period is 2003 (beginning of CapitalIQ data for constructing debt
composition) to 2016.

                                                              Panel A. Share in Total Debt
                                                   .5
                  Cash Flow-Based Bonds/Total Debt
                      .2       .3  .1    .4




                                                        0      .2              .4              .6            .8
                                                                           Book Leverage

                                                            Low Liquidation Value   High Liquidation Value




                                                            Panel B. Divide by Total Assets
                                   .4
                  Cash Flow-Based Bonds/Total Assets
                        .1       .20       .3




                                                        0      .2              .4              .6            .8
                                                                           Book Leverage

                                                            Low Liquidation Value   High Liquidation Value




                                                                              49
                Figure 6: Cash Flow-Based Debt with Strong Control (Loans)
The figure in Panel A provides a binned scatterplot of cash flow-based loans as a share of total debt
against book leverage in twenty equal-sized bins for firms with high and low liquidation value. The
figure in Panel B provides a binned scatterplot of cash flow-based loans as a share of total assets against
book leverage in twenty equal-sized bins for firms with high and low liquidation values. The high (low)
liquidation value group includes firms in the top (bottom) tercile of liquidation value each year. Year fixed
effects are included. We restrict to firms with book leverage between zero and one. Sample is based on
Compustat and CapitalIQ and sample period is 2003 (beginning of CapitalIQ data for constructing debt
composition) to 2016.

                                                             Panel A. Share in Total Debt
                                  .25
                  Cash Flow-Based Loans/Total Debt
                       .1       .15
                                  .05      .2




                                                       0      .2              .4              .6            .8
                                                                          Book Leverage

                                                           Low Liquidation Value   High Liquidation Value




                                                           Panel B. Divide by Total Assets
                                  .15
                  Cash Flow-Based Loans/Total Assets
                           .05    0      .1




                                                       0       .2              .4              .6            .8
                                                                          Book Leverage

                                                           Low Liquidation Value   High Liquidation Value




                                                                             50
                                                Figure 7: Strictness of Performance Covenants
The figure provides a binned scatterplot of the tightness of performance covenants (probability of violat-
ing at least one covenant, in %) against book leverage in twenty equal-sized bins for firms with high and
low liquidation value. The loan covenant tightness measure is constructed using loan covenant thresh-
olds data from Dealscan and firm balance sheet data from Compustat, following the procedure of Murfin
(2012). Performance covenants include financial covenants on EBITDA, debt to EBITDA, senior debt to
EBITDA, interest coverage, fixed charge coverage, cash interest coverage, and debt service coverage. Firms
in the top tercile of liquidation values in Compustat each year are categorized within the high liquidation
value group, and firms in the bottom tercile are categorized within the low liquidation value group. Year
fixed effects and loan size controls are included. We restrict to firms with book leverage between zero
and one. Sample period is 1996 to 2016.
                            60
                 Loan Covenant Strictness
                 30        40
                            20         50




                                            0               .2               .4              .6          .8
                                                                       Book Leverage

                                                        Low Liquidation Value   High Liquidation Value




                                                                          51
                                          Figure 8: Interest Rates
The figure provides a binned scatterplot of interest rates against book leverage in twenty equal-sized
bins for firms with high and low liquidation values. Interest rate data comes from CapitalIQ. Firms in
the top tercile of liquidation values in Compustat each year are categorized within the high liquidation
value group, and firms in the bottom tercile are categorized within the low liquidation value group. Year-
quarter fixed effects are included. We restrict to firms with book leverage between zero and one. Sample
period is 2003 (beginning of CapitalIQ data) to 2016.

                                         Panel A. Asset-Based Debt
                       7.5
                       7
                 Interest Rate
                       6.5
                       6
                       5.5




                                  0       .2               .4               .6               .8
                                                      Book Leverage

                                      Low liquidation Value    High Liquadation Value




                                      Panel B. Cash Flow-Based Debt
                        9
                        8
                  Interest Rate
                        7
                        6
                        5




                                  0       .2              .4               .6           .8
                                                      Book Leverage

                                      Low liquidation Value    High Liquadation Value




                                                         52
                                        Figure 9: Liquidation Values and Total Leverage
Panels A and B provide binned scatterplots of book leverage against liquidation values in twenty equal-
sized bins for firms with high and low total assets and positive and negative EBITDA (earnings before
interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization), respectively. Firms with assets above Compustat median
in each year are categorized within the "Large Firms" group, and firms with assets below Compustat
median are categorized within the "Small Firms" group. Year fixed effects are included. We restrict to
firms with book leverage between zero and one. Sample is based on Compustat and sample period is
1996 to 2016.

                                                 Panel A. Large vs. Small Firms
                          .4       .3
                 Total Debt/Assets
                         .2
                          .1
                          0




                                        0         .1              .2             .3          .4   .5
                                                                  Liquidation Value

                                                            Large Firms       Small Firms




                                        Panel B. Firms with Positive vs. Negative Earnings
                          .4       .3
                 Total Debt/Assets
                         .2
                          .1
                          0




                                        0        .1               .2             .3          .4   .5
                                                                  Liquidation Value

                                                       Positive Earnings     Negative Earnings




                                                                     53
                                    Figure 10: Model Solutions
Panel A plots covenant tightness (probability of violation) as a function of book leverage (one minus
the entrepreneur's wealth) for firms with low liquidation value (solid line) and high liquidation value
(dashed line). Panel B shows investment of the informed investor as a function of book leverage for firms
with low liquidation value (solid line) and high liquidation value (dashed line).

                             Panel A. Covenant Tightness P[s < s | p]




                            Panel B. Investment by Informed Investor ii




                                                   54
                                    Table 1: Summary Statistics
Panel A shows industry-average (two-digit SICs) liquidation recovery rates of PPE, inventory, and receiv-
able, as well as firm-level liquidation value estimates. The baseline firm-level liquidation value estimate
includes the liquidation value of PPE, inventory, and receivable, and is normalized by book assets. It
is calculated by combining the industry-average liquidation recovery rate and the book value of each
type of asset. The value including cash adds all cash holdings. Chapter 11 going-concern value is the
industry-average Chapter 11 value (normalized by total assets at filing) matched to the firm. Panel B
shows statistics of total debt and debt composition. The baseline sample period for firm-level Compustat
data is 1996 to 2016, except for CapitalIQ debt composition data which is available since 2003 (so the debt
statistics in Panel B cover 2003 to 2016).

                                       Panel A. Asset Attributes

               Industry-level liquidation recovery rate   mean        sd        p25     p50     p75
               PPE                                        35.34      16.69      24      33      44
               Inventory                                  44.26      15.66      34      44      56
               Receivable                                 61.60      13.64      55      63      71
               Firm-level                                 mean        sd        p25     p50     p75
               Baseline liquidation value                 22.93      13.36      12      23      33
               Liquidation value including cash           43.59      19.91      30      41       54
               Ch 11 going-concern value                  80.52      25.48      68      78      100


                                      Panel B. Debt Composition

                                                             mean          sd    p25     p50      p75
            Total debt / Assets                               0.28     0.22      0.10    0.25     0.40
            Asset-based debt / Total debt                     0.45     0.43      0.00    0.32     0.99
            Cash flow-based debt / Total debt                 0.49     0.43      0.00    0.51     0.97
                Cash flow-based loans / Total debt            0.14     0.29      0.00    0.00     0.09
                Cash flow-based bonds / Total debt            0.35     0.40      0.00    0.09     0.76
            Secured cash flow-based debt / Total debt         0.10     0.25      0.00    0.00     0.00
            Unsecured cash flow-based debt / Total debt       0.39     0.42      0.00    0.20     0.88




                                                    55
                                     Table 2: Asset-Based Debt
This table reports firm-level annual regressions where the outcome variable is asset-based debt as a share
of total debt in columns (1) and (2), and asset-based debt in total assets in columns (3) and (4). Liquidation
value includes PPE and working capital, and is normalized by the firm's total book assets. In columns
(2) and (4), both liquidation value and book leverage are demeaned using sample means. Ch 11 recovery
rate is industry-average Chapter 11 values normalized by book assets at Chapter 11 filings. Market value
of assets is book value of assets minus book value of equity plus market value of equity. EBITDA is
normalized by lagged total assets, and cash holdings are normalized by total assets. Year fixed effects
are included. Standard errors are double-clustered by firm and year and reported in parentheses, and
asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%). Sample is based on Compustat and CapitalIQ
and sample period is 2003 to 2016.


                                                    Share of Total Debt     Share of Total Asset
                                                      (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)
             Liquidation value                       0.310***    0.449***   0.132***    0.224***
                                                      (0.051)     (0.059)    (0.019)     (0.029)
             Book leverage                          -0.280***   -0.288***   0.358***    0.353***
                                                      (0.024)     (0.023)    (0.014)     (0.014)
             Liquidation value × Book leverage                   1.315***               0.810***
                                                                  (0.183)                (0.094)
             Ch 11 recovery rate                    -0.098***   -0.088***   -0.034***   -0.028***
                                                      (0.020)     (0.019)    (0.007)     (0.007)
             Market/book value of assets            -0.025***   -0.024***   -0.007***   -0.006***
                                                      (0.004)     (0.004)    (0.001)     (0.001)
             EBITDA                                  0.051***    0.061***     0.001        0.007
                                                      (0.016)     (0.016)    (0.005)     (0.005)
             Past 12m equity return vol                -0.010      -0.014     -0.001      -0.004
                                                      (0.010)     (0.011)    (0.004)     (0.004)
             Cash                                      0.027       -0.001   -0.049***   -0.067***
                                                      (0.031)     (0.029)    (0.011)     (0.010)
             Log(assets)                            -0.092***   -0.093***   -0.023***   -0.023***
                                                      (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.001)     (0.001)
             Observations                             29923      29923       31015       31015
             Within R2                                 .228       .234        .273        .288
             Time fixed effects                         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes




                                                     56
                Table 3: Cash Flow-Based Debt with Weak Control (Bonds)
This table reports firm-level annual regressions where the outcome variable is cash flow-based bonds as a
share of total debt in columns (1) and (2), and cash flow-based bonds in total assets in columns (3) and (4).
Liquidation value includes PPE and working capital, and is normalized by the firm's total book assets.
In columns (2) and (4), both liquidation value and book leverage are demeaned using sample means. Ch
11 recovery rate is industry-average Chapter 11 values normalized by book assets at Chapter 11 filings.
Market value of assets is book value of assets minus book value of equity plus market value of equity.
EBITDA is normalized by lagged total assets, and cash holdings are normalized by total assets. Year fixed
effects are included. Standard errors are double-clustered by firm and year and reported in parentheses,
and asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%). Sample is based on Compustat and
CapitalIQ and sample period is 2003 to 2016.


                                                    Share of Total Debt     Share of Total Asset
                                                      (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)
             Liquidation value                        -0.042       -0.113     0.005        -0.048
                                                     (0.055)      (0.070)    (0.021)      (0.034)
             Book leverage                          0.262***     0.267***   0.420***     0.424***
                                                     (0.035)      (0.035)    (0.022)      (0.023)
             Liquidation value × Book leverage                  -0.668***               -0.472***
                                                                 (0.210)                  (0.121)
             Ch 11 recovery rate                     0.056**     0.051**     0.014**      0.011*
                                                      (0.020)     (0.020)     (0.006)     (0.006)
             Market/book value of assets             0.011***    0.010**     0.005***    0.004***
                                                      (0.003)     (0.004)     (0.001)     (0.001)
             EBITDA                                 -0.106***   -0.111***   -0.021***   -0.025***
                                                      (0.017)     (0.017)     (0.005)     (0.005)
             Past 12m equity return vol              0.033**     0.036**       0.001        0.002
                                                      (0.014)     (0.015)     (0.005)     (0.006)
             Cash                                    0.192***    0.206***    0.102***    0.112***
                                                      (0.030)     (0.030)     (0.010)     (0.010)
             Log(assets)                             0.108***    0.109***    0.026***    0.026***
                                                      (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.002)     (0.002)
             Observations                            29906       29906       31005       31005
             Within R2                                .276        .278        .435        .441
             Time fixed effects                        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes




                                                     57
                Table 4: Cash Flow-Based Debt with Strong Control (Loans)
This table reports firm-level annual regressions where the outcome variable is cash flow-based loans as a
share of total debt in columns (1) and (2), and cash flow-based loans in total assets in columns (3) and (4).
Liquidation value includes PPE and working capital, and is normalized by the firm's total book assets.
In columns (2) and (4), both liquidation value and book leverage are demeaned using sample means. Ch
11 recovery rate is industry-average Chapter 11 values normalized by book assets at Chapter 11 filings.
Market value of assets is book value of assets minus book value of equity plus market value of equity.
EBITDA is normalized by lagged total assets, and cash holdings are normalized by total assets. Year fixed
effects are included. Standard errors are double-clustered by firm and year and reported in parentheses,
and asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%). Sample is based on Compustat and
CapitalIQ and sample period is 2003 to 2016.


                                                    Share of Total Debt     Share of Total Asset
                                                      (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)
             Liquidation value                      -0.270***   -0.347***   -0.106***   -0.131***
                                                      (0.041)     (0.046)     (0.014)     (0.020)
             Book leverage                           0.081***    0.086***    0.128***    0.130***
                                                      (0.021)     (0.020)     (0.016)     (0.016)
             Liquidation value × Book leverage                  -0.722***               -0.213***
                                                                  (0.145)                 (0.061)
             Ch 11 recovery rate                     0.047***    0.041**     0.015***     0.013**
                                                      (0.015)     (0.015)     (0.004)     (0.004)
             Market/book value of assets              0.009**     0.009**      0.001       0.001
                                                      (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.001)     (0.001)
             EBITDA                                  0.067***    0.062***    0.016***    0.014***
                                                      (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.003)     (0.003)
             Past 12m equity return vol              -0.040**    -0.037**    -0.008**    -0.007**
                                                      (0.014)     (0.013)     (0.003)     (0.003)
             Cash                                   -0.199***   -0.184***   -0.066***   -0.062***
                                                      (0.025)     (0.024)     (0.006)     (0.006)
             Log(assets)                            -0.012***   -0.012***   -0.003***   -0.002***
                                                      (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.001)     (0.001)
             Observations                            29923       29923       30679       30679
             Within R2                                .027        .031        .112        .115
             Time fixed effects                        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes




                                                     58
                            Table 5: Secured Cash Flow-Based Debt
This table reports firm-level annual regressions where the outcome variable is secured cash flow-based
debt as a share of total debt in columns (1) and (2), and secured cash flow-based debt in total assets in
columns (3) and (4). Liquidation value includes PPE and working capital, and is normalized by the firm's
total book assets. In columns (2) and (4), both liquidation value and book leverage are demeaned using
sample means. Ch 11 recovery rate is industry-average Chapter 11 values normalized by book assets
at Chapter 11 filings. Market value of assets is book value of assets minus book value of equity plus
market value of equity. EBITDA is normalized by lagged total assets, and cash holdings are normalized
by total assets. Year fixed effects are included. Standard errors are double-clustered by firm and year and
reported in parentheses, and asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%). Sample is based
on Compustat and CapitalIQ and sample period is 2003 to 2016.


                                                   Share of Total Debt     Share of Total Asset
                                                     (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)
            Liquidation value                      -0.300***   -0.365***   -0.116***   -0.147***
                                                     (0.038)     (0.044)     (0.015)     (0.021)
            Book leverage                           0.258***    0.262***    0.162***    0.165***
                                                     (0.022)     (0.022)     (0.017)     (0.017)
            Liquidation value × Book leverage                  -0.607***               -0.269***
                                                                (0.113)                  (0.065)
            Ch 11 recovery rate                     0.027**      0.022*     0.014***    0.012**
                                                     (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.005)     (0.005)
            Market/book value of assets               -0.004    -0.005*     -0.002*     -0.002*
                                                     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.001)     (0.001)
            EBITDA                                    0.006       0.001     0.007**     0.005**
                                                     (0.008)     (0.007)     (0.003)     (0.002)
            Past 12m equity return vol              0.029***    0.031***    0.010**     0.011**
                                                     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.004)     (0.004)
            Cash                                   -0.125***   -0.112***   -0.046***   -0.040***
                                                     (0.017)     (0.017)     (0.006)     (0.006)
            Log(assets)                            -0.012***   -0.012***   -0.004***   -0.004***
                                                     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.001)     (0.001)
            Observations                            29813       29813       30809       30809
            Within R2                                .076        .079        .147        .152
            Time fixed effects                        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes




                                                    59
                                Table 6: Loan Covenant Tightness
This table reports regressions of loan covenant tightness at loan issuance. The loan covenant tightness
measures are constructed using loan covenant thresholds data from Dealscan and firm balance sheet
data from Compustat following the procedure of Murfin (2012). It captures the probability (in %) of
violating at least one covenant. Performance covenants in columns (1) and (2) include EBITDA, debt to
EBITDA, senior debt to EBITDA, interest coverage, fixed charge coverage, cash interest coverage, and debt
service coverage covenants. Other financial covenants in columns (3) and (4) include debt to equity, debt
to net worth, debt to tangible net worth, current ratio, quick ratio, and capital expenditure covenants.
In columns (2) and (4), both liquidation value and book leverage are demeaned using sample means.
Year fixed effects are included. Standard errors are double-clustered by firm and year and reported in
parentheses, and asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%). Sample period is 1996 to
2016.

                                                Performance Covenant        Other Covenant
                                                   (1)        (2)            (3)       (4)
          Liquidation value                     -14.567***   -15.687***     5.339        5.358
                                                  (2.366)       (2.361)    (3.388)      (3.422)
          Book leverage                          24.461***    24.294***   9.781***     9.780***
                                                  (1.416)       (1.397)    (2.665)      (2.662)
          Liquidation value × Book leverage                    -16.292                   0.291
                                                                (9.850)                (18.111)
          Ch 11 recovery rate                      1.433*       1.402*        1.819      1.821
                                                   (0.783)      (0.779)     (1.391)     (1.391)
          Market/book value of assets             -1.053**     -1.058**    -1.175**    -1.175**
                                                   (0.374)      (0.379)     (0.421)     (0.427)
          EBITDA                                -14.283***   -14.370***      -1.893     -1.893
                                                   (3.360)      (3.402)     (2.773)     (2.773)
          Past 12m equity return vol                -1.456       -1.418    4.934***    4.934***
                                                   (1.246)      (1.240)     (1.380)     (1.382)
          Cash                                   -9.437***    -9.048***   -11.918**   -11.926**
                                                   (2.030)      (2.037)     (4.621)     (4.680)
          Log(loan amount)                        1.609***     1.601***       0.609      0.609
                                                   (0.223)      (0.224)     (0.386)     (0.385)
          Log(assets)                            -1.856***    -1.842***   -2.651***   -2.651***
                                                   (0.219)      (0.220)     (0.525)     (0.525)
          Observations                             6394        6394         3585        3585
          Within R2                                .208        .209         .071        .071
          Time fixed effects                        Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes




                                                   60
                             Table 7: Liquidation Values and Total Leverage
The table reports firm-level annual regressions on the relationship between liquidation value and total book lever-
age. Small firms are firms with total assets below Compustat median in each year. Industry-average liquidation
value is the average of firm-level liquidation value (including PPE and working capital) in each two-digit SIC in
the sample period. Standard errors are double-clustered by firm and time and are reported in parentheses, and
asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%). Sample is based on Compustat and sample period is
1996 to 2016.

                                                                             Book Leverage
                                                   (1)            (2)        (3)       (4)            (5)         (6)
 Liquidation value                                -0.037         -0.001    -0.049*
                                                 (0.031)        (0.022)    (0.028)
 Industry-avg. liq. value                                                                0.037     0.155***      0.039
                                                                                        (0.042)     (0.039)     (0.043)
 Small × Liquidation val                         0.267***                  0.200***
                                                  (0.034)                   (0.043)
 Negative EBITDA × Liquidation val                             0.333***    0.208***
                                                                (0.028)     (0.041)
 Small firm × Ind-avg liquidation val                                                  0.254***                 0.212***
                                                                                        (0.047)                  (0.054)
 Negative EBITDA × Ind-avg liquidation val                                                         0.170***       0.088
                                                                                                    (0.051)      (0.054)
 Small firm                                     -0.140***                  -0.128***   -0.130***               -0.122***
                                                 (0.011)                     (0.014)    (0.012)                  (0.014)
 Negative EBITDA                                               -0.111***    -0.036**               -0.074***      -0.018
                                                                (0.011)      (0.017)                (0.013)      (0.015)
 Observations                                     82615         77111       77111       86931       81060       81060
 Within R2                                         .04           .02         .045        .033        .013        .035
 Time fixed effects                                Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes




                                                          61
                                             Table 8: Interest Rates
This table shows the relationship between liquidation values and interest rates. The sample for columns (1) to
(4) is debt records in CapitalIQ, which include all types of debt firms have. We use the initial observation (i.e.,
observation around issuance) for each debt. The sample for column (5) is DealScan loan issuance. Liquidation
value is the liquidation value of PPE and working capital of the issuer firm. Control variables are the same as
those in Tables 2 to 4. We include firm-year fixed effects and interest rate type-year fixed effects (interest rate types
include fixed rate and floating rate with different benchmarks). Standard errors are double-clustered by firm and
time and reported in parentheses, and asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%). Sample period
is 2003 to 2016 for CapitalIQ, and 1996 to 2016 for DealScan.


                                                                          CapitalIQ                            Dealscan
                                              Loans & Bonds                        Loans                        Loans
                                                                    All      Low leverage    High leverage
                                                     (1)            (2)           (3)              (4)            (5)
 Asset-based debt=1 × Liquidation value           -1.507**        -1.429**      -1.140**         -1.949*       -0.966***
                                                   (0.522)         (0.581)       (0.507)         (1.071)        (0.303)
 Asset-based debt=1                                 0.050         0.480***      0.590***         0.376**       -0.404***
                                                   (0.072)         (0.089)       (0.083)         (0.132)        (0.039)
 Bond=1                                           0.790***
                                                   (0.099)
 Note=1                                            0.288**
                                                   (0.131)
 Observations                                       46573          23035         12527            10508          12429
 Within R2                                           .02            .018          .024             .013           .042
 Controls                                            Yes             Yes           Yes              Yes            Yes
 Interest rate type-year fixed effects               Yes             Yes           Yes              Yes            Yes
 Firm-year fixed effects                             Yes             Yes           Yes              Yes            Yes




                                                             62
                                          Table 9: Creditor Recovery Rates in Default
This table shows the relationship between firm characteristics and default recovery rates for different types of debt. Each
observation is a debt instrument in default. Columns (1), (3), and (5) use industry-level variables and controls. Columns
(2), (4), and (6) use firm-level variables and controls for the subsample of observations in Moody's default recovery rate
data that we can match with Compustat firms. Firm-level liquidation value is the liquidation value of the firm (from PPE
and working capital) prior to default. Industry-level liquidation value is the industry average of firm-level liquidation
value using all Compustat firms in each industry. Ch 11 recovery rate is Chapter 11 value estimate for the firm if we
can find match the firm with a case in our bankruptcy dataset (normalized by book assets at filing), and otherwise the
industry-average Chapter 11 recovery rate. Market value of assets is calculated as the book value of assets minus the
book value of equity plus the market value of equity. Log amount is log of the debt claim's face value. Firm-level
controls in columns (2), (4), and (6) include EBITDA (normalized by lagged assets), market value/book value of assets,
past 12 months stock returns, and cash holdings (normalized by assets), prior to default. Default year fixed effects are
included. Standard errors are double-clustered by industry and time and reported in parentheses, and asterisks denote
significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%). Sample period is 1996 to 2016.

                                                              Asset-Based Debt                                     Cash Flow-Based Debt

                                                  (1)          (2)              (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)
 Industry-level liquidation value               39.468**                      49.929**                 -0.251                    17.696
                                                (16.522)                      (17.957)                (20.881)                  (22.332)
 Liquidation value                                          34.360**                     33.495**                   5.115                     0.301
                                                            (12.705)                     (12.735)                  (23.780)                  (24.815)
 Industry-level Ch 11 recovery rate             -12.814*                                                -7.531
                                                 (7.119)                                               (7.638)
 Ch 11 recovery rate                                          3.560                                                25.132***
                                                             (8.653)                                                (8.364)
 25% market/book value of assets in industry                                 5.853          7.265                                36.357**     33.025**
                                                                           (10.195)       (18.273)                               (16.283)      (13.731)
 % of debt claims more senior                  -65.587***   -49.524***    -68.135***     -49.322***   -41.739***   -42.064***   -43.107***   -38.299***
                                                (10.508)     (15.415)      (10.376)       (16.119)      (5.722)       (3.302)     (5.611)       (5.179)
 Bond=1                                        -26.962***   -24.356***    -26.291***     -24.595***   -16.237***   -16.354***   -15.361***   -19.273***
                                                 (8.279)      (6.998)       (8.396)        (7.371)      (5.415)       (4.831)     (5.341)       (4.925)
 Log(debt amount)                                 2.042       3.247*         2.086         3.342*        -2.706     -5.600***      -2.471     -5.375***
                                                 (1.710)      (1.857)       (1.736)        (1.851)      (2.037)       (0.854)     (2.009)       (1.109)
 Pre-filing log(assets)                                        -1.398                       -1.480                   6.723***                   5.944**
                                                              (1.528)                      (1.485)                    (1.734)                   (2.124)
 Pre-filing EBITDA                                             8.785                        8.281                      6.904                     2.307
                                                             (13.371)                     (12.150)                    (6.529)                   (7.422)
 Pre-filing market/book value of assets                        -2.751                       -2.547                    -5.664*                    -4.967
                                                              (2.644)                      (2.733)                    (3.026)                   (3.236)
 Pre-filing past 12m equity return vol                         2.617                        2.542                      1.665                     2.515
                                                              (6.040)                      (5.852)                    (6.866)                   (7.236)
 Pre-filing cash                                               8.469                        9.551                      -5.565                   -10.332
                                                             (23.718)                     (23.152)                   (19.622)                  (25.338)
 Observations                                     955         387               952        392          2237         1023         2224         1033
 Within R2                                        .321        .407              .314       .405         .209         .277         .222         .242
 Time fixed effects                                Yes         Yes               Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes




                                                                         63
Internet Appendix
IA1       Additional Figures and Tables

                                                              Figure IA1: Secured Cash Flow-Based Debt
The figure in Panel A provides a binned scatterplot of secured cash flow-based debt as a share of total
debt against book leverage in twenty equal-sized bins for firms with high and low liquidation values. The
figure in Panel B provides a binned scatterplot of secured cash flow-based debt as a share of total assets
against book leverage in twenty equal-sized bins for firms with high and low liquidation value. The high
(low) liquidation value group includes firms in the top (bottom) tercile of liquidation value each year. Year
fixed effects are included. We restrict to firms with book leverage between zero and one. Sample is based
on Compustat and CapitalIQ and sample period is 2003 (beginning of CapitalIQ data for constructing
debt composition) to 2016.

                                                                      Panel A. Share in Total Debt
                                                      .25
                    Secured Cash Flow Debt/Total Debt
                       .05     .1     .15
                                       0       .2




                                                              0         .2              .4              .6            .8
                                                                                    Book Leverage

                                                                     Low Liquidation Value   High Liquidation Value



                                                                    Panel B. Divide by Total Assets
                                                        .15
                    Secured Cash Flow Debt/Total Assets
                              .05      0    .1




                                                              0          .2              .4              .6            .8
                                                                                    Book Leverage

                                                                     Low Liquidation Value   High Liquidation Value




                                                                                       64
                                                   Figure IA2: Frequency of Having Same Lead Lenders
                                                     in Asset-Based Loans and Cash Flow-Based Loans
The figure provides a binned scatterplot of the share of DealScan loan packages where the same lender
is a lead lender for an asset-based revolver and a cash flow-based term loan, against book leverage in
Panel A and firm size (log total assets) in Panel B, in twenty equal-sized bins for firms with high and low
liquidation values. Loan lender data comes from Dealscan. Firms in the top tercile of liquidation values
in Compustat each year are categorized within the high liquidation value group, and firms in the bottom
tercile are categorized within the low liquidation value group. Year fixed effects are included. We restrict
to firms with book leverage between zero and one. Sample period is 1996 to 2016.

                                                                            Panel A. By Book Leverage
                                                             .6
                 Lender is a lead both in ABL and in Term Loan
                 0              .2             .4




                                                                     0      .2              .4                    .6             .8
                                                                                           Leverage

                                                                         Low Liquidation Value          High Liquidation Value




                                                                                  Panel B. By Firm Size
                                                                .6
                    Lender is a lead both in ABL and in Term Loan
                     .2          .3         .4        .5




                                                                     2        4                   6                    8              10
                                                                                                 Size

                                                                         Low Liquidation Value          High Liquidation Value




                                                                                           65
                                                  Figure IA3: Probability of Borrowing Base Violations
The figure provides a binned scatterplot of the share of firms where asset-based debt against working
capital is greater than the estimated liquidation values of working capital assets, as a function of book
leverage in twenty equal-sized bins, for firms with high and low liquidation values. The amount of debt
against working capital is constructed using debt-level data from CapitalIQ. Firms in the top tercile of
liquidation values in Compustat each year are categorized within the high liquidation value group, and
firms in the bottom tercile are categorized within the low liquidation value group. Year fixed effects are
included. We restrict to firms with book leverage between zero and one. Sample period is 2003 (beginning
of CapitalIQ data) to 2016.
                 Working Capital ABL> Liq Val Working Capital
                 0     .05       .1     .15     .2      .25




                                                                0      .2             .4              .6             .8
                                                                                   Book Leverage

                                                                    Low Liquidation Value   High Liquidation Value




                                                                                      66
                                     Table IA1: Industry List
The table shows the number of cases in each two-digit SIC industry for which we can find liquidation
recovery rates of receivable, inventory, or PPE. The cases are from the list of public Chapter 11 filings
between 2000 and 2016 from BankruptcyData.com. We exclude financial firms (SIC between 6000 and
6999) and public administration (SIC greater than 9000).

      2-digit SIC                                   Industry                                   N
      9             Fishing/Hunting/Trapping                                                  1
      10            Metal Mining                                                              5
      12            Bituminous Coal and Lignite Mining                                        6
      13            Oil/Gas Extraction                                                        48
      14            Mining/Quarrying-Nonmetals                                                2
      15            Building Constr. Gen. Contractors/Op. Builders                            3
      17            Constr. Special Trade Contractors                                         1
      20            Food/Kindred Products                                                     9
      22            Textile Mill Products                                                     4
      23            Apparel & Similar Materials                                               4
      24            Lumber/wood Products                                                      2
      25            Furniture & Fixtures                                                      3
      26            Paper & Allied Products                                                   11
      27            Printing, Publishing & Allied Industries                                  19
      28            Chemicals & Allied Products                                               24
      30            Rubber & Miscellaneous Plastics Products                                  11
      32            Stone, Clay, Glass, & Concrete Products                                   3
      33            Primary Metal Industries                                                  10
      34            Fabricated Metal Products                                                 7
      35            Industrial & Commercial Machinery & Computer Equip                        7
      36            Electronic Equip, except Computer Equip                                   21
      37            Transportation Equip                                                      19
      38            Measuring/Analyzing/Controlling Instruments                               4
      39            Misc. Manufacturing Industries                                            6
      41            Local/Suburban Transit & Interurban Highway Transportation                2
      42            Motor Freight Transportation & Warehousing                                2
      44            Water Transportation                                                      8
      45            Transportation by Air                                                     9
      47            Transportation Services                                                   3
      48            Communications                                                            26
      49            Electric, Gas & Sanitary Services                                         7
      50            Wholesale Trade-Durable Goods                                             2
      51            Wholesale Trade-Nondurable Goods                                          5
      52            Building Materials, Hardware, Garden Supply, & Mobile Home Dealers        1
      53            General Merchandise Stores                                                3
      54            Food Stores                                                               3
      55            Automotive Dealers & Gas Service Stations                                 2
      56            Apparel & Accessory Stores                                                6
      57            Home Furniture, Furnishings, & Equip Stores                               3
      58            Eating/Drinking Places                                                    9
      59            Misc. Retail                                                              7
      70            Hotels, Rooming Houses, Camps, & other Lodging                            7
      72            Personal Services                                                         2
      73            Business Services                                                         29
      78            Motion Pictures                                                           8
      79            Amusement & Recreation Services                                           5
      80            Health Services                                                           7
      82            Educational Services                                                      1
      Total                                                                                   387




                                                   67
               Table IA2: Cross Check with Chapter 7 Liquidation Proceeds
The table compares the total estimated liquidation value in Chapter 11 cases with the liquidation value in
Chapter 7 cases. Panel A reports the average total liquidation value, normalized by total assets at filing.
Column (1) uses the gross liquidation receipts from the trustee report. Columns (2) and (3) sum the gross
liquidation receipts from the trustee report with 50% of asset-based debt and secured debt, respectively.
Columns (4) and (5) sum the gross liquidation receipts from the trustee report with 100% of asset-based
debt and secured debt, respectively. Panel B reports regression coefficients of total liquidation value of
each case (normalized by total assets at filing) on a Chapter 7 dummy. Year and industry fixed effects are
included. Standard errors clustered by year are reported in parentheses, and asterisks denote significance
levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).

                                         Panel A. Raw Statistics

                                                      Total Liquidation Value/Total Assets
        Assumptions                       Basic      Medium v1 Medium v2 High v1 High v2
                                           (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)     (5)
        Chapter 7 average                   0.12         0.33          0.32        0.48       0.49
        Chapter 11 estimated average        0.31


                                    Panel B. Regression Comparisons

                                                   Total Liquidation Value/Total Assets
                                      Basic        Medium v1 Medium v2 High v1            High v2
                                       (1)              (2)           (3)         (4)       (5)
           Chapter 7 case=1         -0.170***        -0.077*       -0.084**    -0.018     -0.023
                                     (0.024)         (0.033)        (0.028)    (0.043)    (0.036)
           Time fixed effects         Yes              Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes
           Industry fixed effects     Yes              Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes




                                                        68
                      Table IA3: Industry-Level Variations in Liquidation Values
This table reports firm-level annual regressions where the outcome is asset-based debt in columns (1) and (4),
cash flow-based bonds in columns (2) and (5), and cash flow-based loans in columns (3) to (6). Columns (1)
and (3) use shares in total debt and columns (4) to (6) use shares in total asset. The dependent variable uses
industry-level liquidation value (PPE and working capital, normalized by book assets), and its interaction with
firm leverage. Book leverage and industry-average liquidation value are demeaned. The firm-level control
variables are the same as those in Tables 2 to 4. Year fixed effects are included. Standard errors are double-
clustered by firm and year and reported in parentheses, and asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%,
*=10%). Sample is based on Compustat and CapitalIQ and sample period is 2003 to 2016.

                                            Share of Total Debt                     Share of Total Asset
                                   Asset-Based    CF Bonds     CF Loans    Asset-Based    CF Bonds    CF Loans
                                       (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)
 Ind-avg liq val                      0.178**        0.154     -0.358***     0.146***        0.054     -0.125***
                                      (0.078)       (0.092)     (0.057)       (0.039)       (0.044)      (0.027)
 Ind-avg liq val × Book leverage     1.784***      -0.694*     -1.097***     0.763***        -0.189     -0.277**
                                      (0.289)       (0.327)     (0.231)       (0.141)       (0.177)      (0.098)
 Book leverage                       -0.272***     0.256***    0.078***      0.366***      0.417***    0.129***
                                      (0.023)       (0.033)     (0.022)       (0.014)       (0.021)      (0.016)
 Ch 11 recovery rate                 -0.113***     0.080***     0.036**      -0.036***     0.023***      0.012**
                                      (0.020)       (0.021)     (0.016)       (0.007)       (0.006)      (0.005)
 Observations                          31348        31331         31348       32467         32457          32110
 Within R2                              .228         .280          .026        .277          .434           .103
 Controls                                Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes
 Time fixed effects                      Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes




                                                      69
                        Table IA4: Within-Firm Variations in Debt Composition
This table reports firm-level annual regressions where the outcome variable is asset-based debt (as a share of
total debt) in columns (1) and (2), cash flow-based bonds in columns (3) and (4), and cash flow-based loans in
columns (5) and (6). Book leverage and industry-average liquidation value are demeaned. Firm and year fixed
effects are included. Standard errors are double-clustered by firm and year and reported in parentheses, and
asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%). Sample is based on Compustat and CapitalIQ and
sample period is 2003 to 2016.

                                             Asset-Based Debt        CF-Based Bonds         CF-Based Loans
                                              (1)        (2)          (3)      (4)           (5)       (6)
   Book leverage                            -0.366***    -0.359***   0.334***   0.333***   0.086***     0.084***
                                             (0.032)      (0.034)     (0.032)    (0.032)   (0.021)       (0.021)
   Industry-avg liq value × Book leverage                 1.063***                -0.370                -0.540**
                                                          (0.339)                (0.320)                 (0.243)
   Market/book value of assets                -0.005       -0.006     -0.005      -0.005    0.006**     0.006**
                                             (0.004)      (0.004)     (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)
   EBITDA                                     0.019        0.025     -0.032*    -0.036**     0.015*       0.014
                                             (0.018)      (0.019)     (0.016)    (0.017)     (0.008)     (0.008)
   Past 12m equity return vol                 -0.000       -0.000     -0.008      -0.008      -0.000      0.001
                                             (0.008)      (0.008)     (0.007)    (0.007)     (0.005)     (0.005)
   Cash                                     -0.108***    -0.118***   0.232***   0.236***   -0.122***   -0.115***
                                             (0.033)      (0.034)     (0.033)    (0.034)     (0.026)     (0.027)
   Log(assets)                              -0.078***    -0.081***   0.063***   0.066***    0.022***    0.023***
                                             (0.007)      (0.007)     (0.008)    (0.008)     (0.006)     (0.006)
   Observations                               32398          30693    32380      30676      32398       30693
   Within R2                                   .036           .039     .039       .041       .007        .008
   Time fixed effects                           Yes            Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
   Firm fixed effects                           Yes            Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes




                                                        70
                          Table IA5: Liquidation Values by Type of Asset
This table reports firm-level annual regressions where the outcome variable is debt against working capital
(inventory and receivable) or PPE, normalized by total asset-based debt in columns (1) and (2), and
normalized by total assets in columns (3) and (4). All regressions include liquidation values of working
capital and of PPE. All the firm-level control variables are the same as those in Tables 2 to 4. Year fixed
effects are included. Standard errors are double-clustered by firm and year and reported in parentheses,
and asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%). Sample is based on Compustat and
CapitalIQ and sample period is 2003 to 2016.

                                           Share of Asset-Based Debt           Share of Assets
                                          Working Capital       PPE       Working Capital      PPE
                                                (1)              (2)            (3)             (4)
     Working capital liquidation value         0.586***          -0.040       0.134***         -0.003
                                               (0.061)          (0.038)       (0.015)         (0.005)
     PPE liquidation value                      -0.087         0.343***        0.045*        0.061***
                                               (0.095)          (0.048)       (0.021)         (0.008)
     Ch 11 recovery rate                       0.059**         -0.048**       -0.010*       -0.010***
                                               (0.023)          (0.018)       (0.005)         (0.002)
     Market/book value of assets                -0.008        -0.010***      -0.004***      -0.001***
                                               (0.005)          (0.003)       (0.001)         (0.000)
     EBITDA                                      0.031         -0.030**        0.006*       -0.006***
                                               (0.019)          (0.013)       (0.003)         (0.001)
     Past 12m equity return vol                 -0.005         -0.029**        0.002        -0.004***
                                               (0.014)          (0.013)       (0.003)         (0.001)
     Cash                                     -0.560***        0.118***      -0.073***         0.000
                                               (0.033)          (0.026)       (0.006)         (0.002)
     Log(assets)                              -0.024***          0.002       -0.010***        -0.000
                                               (0.004)          (0.003)       (0.001)         (0.000)
     Book leverage                               0.035        -0.051***      0.069***        0.005***
                                               (0.028)          (0.014)       (0.006)         (0.002)
     Observations                               23510          23408          31288           31201
     Within R2                                   .108           .027           .121            .054
     Time fixed effects                           Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes




                                                    71
                   Table IA6: Comparison with Book Value of "Tangible Assets"
This table reports firm-level annual regressions in columns (1) and (2) where the outcome variables are asset-
based debt normalized by total assets in column (1) and asset-based debt as a share in total debt in column (2),
and debt-level regressions in columns (3) and (4) where the outcome variable is the interest rate. The regressions
compare our liquidation value measure with the book value of tangible assets using PPE (normalized by total
book assets) in Panel A and PPE plus inventory in Panel B. Column (3) uses interest rates (from CapitalIQ) on
asset-based debt, and column (4) uses interest rates on all debt. Regressions in both panels control for Chapter
11 going-concern values, market value of assets, EBITDA, past 12 months equity volatility, cash holdings, and
book leverage. Regressions in columns (1) and (2) also control for log firm assets, and regressions in columns
(3) and (4) also control for bond and loan indicators and log debt amount. Standard errors are double-clustered
by firm and year and reported in parentheses, and asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).
Sample is based on Compustat and CapitalIQ and sample period is 2003 to 2016.

                                       Panel A. PPE as Tangible Assets

                                                  Asset-Based Debt as Share of        Interest Rates on
                                                  Assets          Debt             Asset-Based       All
                                                     (1)             (2)                (3)          (4)
      Liquidation value                           0.114***         0.250***          -1.954***
                                                   (0.021)          (0.054)           (0.345)
      PPE                                         0.025**          0.083***           0.479**
                                                   (0.011)          (0.027)           (0.193)
      Asset-based debt=1 × Liquidation value                                                      -1.782***
                                                                                                   (0.524)
      Asset-based debt=1 × PPE                                                                      0.306
                                                                                                   (0.271)
      Asset-based debt=1                                                                           0.375*
                                                                                                   (0.179)
      Book leverage                               0.352***        -0.299***
                                                   (0.014)         (0.024)
      Observations                                 31015            29923             21943         46573
      Within R2                                     .274             .23               .085          .02
      Controls                                       Yes             Yes                Yes          Yes
      Time fixed effects                             Yes             Yes                Yes          Yes
      Firm-year fixed effects                        No              No                 No           Yes

                                Panel B. PPE and Inventory as Tangible Assets

                                                    Asset-Based Debt as Share of      Interest Rates on
                                                    Assets          Debt            Asset-Based      All
                                                      (1)              (2)               (3)          (4)
      Liquidation value                             0.100***        0.200***          -2.073***
                                                     (0.024)         (0.061)           (0.390)
      PPE plus inventory                            0.027**         0.090***            0.330
                                                     (0.011)         (0.029)           (0.228)
      Asset-based debt=1 × Liquidation value                                                       -1.541**
                                                                                                    (0.670)
      Asset-based debt=1 × PPE plus inventory                                                        0.026
                                                                                                    (0.444)
      Asset-based debt=1                                                                            0.422**
                                                                                                    (0.191)
      Book leverage                                 0.354***        -0.293***
                                                     (0.014)         (0.024)
      Observations                                   31015           29923              21943       46573
      Within R2                                       .274            .23                .084        .02
      Controls                                         Yes            Yes                 Yes        Yes
      Time fixed effects                               Yes            Yes                 Yes        Yes
      Firm-year fixed effects                          No             No                  No         Yes

                                                       72
IA2      Data on Liquidation Recovery Rates and Going-Concern
         Values
IA2.1     Liquidation Recovery Rate Details
    Below we show excerpts of detailed discussions for the summary liquidation value
estimates shown in the example of Lyondell Chemical in Figure 1. They explain the
procedures for the liquidation recovery rate estimates of different types of assets.

     Figure IA4: Lyondell Chemical Example: Plant-Level Information for All PPE
This figure shows excerpt of the discussion about PPE liquidation value estimates in the liquidation
analysis of Lyondell (Panel A) and excerpt of the plant-level estimate in the accompanying appendix
(Panel B).

                  Panel A. Excerpt of PPE Discussion in Liquidation Analysis




          Panel B. Excerpt of Plant-Level Estimate in Liquidation Analysis Appendix




                                                73
Figure IA4: Lyondell Chemical Example: Plant-Level Information for All PPE (Cont.)




                                       74
                   Figure IA5: Lyondell Chemical Example: Other Assets
This figure shows excerpt of the discussion about inventory, receivable, and cash liquidation value esti-
mates in the liquidation analysis of Lyondell.

                Panel A. Excerpt of Inventory Discussion in Liquidation Analysis




          Panel B. Excerpt of Cash and Receivable Discussion in Liquidation Analysis




                                                   75
IA2.2    Chapter 11 Going-Concern Values: Market-Based vs. Plan-Based
    As explained in Section 2.1, for Chapter 11 going-concern values, we use firm value
estimates from post-emergence market trading information as well as the valuation anal-
ysis in Chapter 11 plans. In particular, we use market value-based estimates when they
are available (market value of equity plus book value of debt if the firm emerged as a
public company, or acquisition value if the firm is acquired), and plan-based estimates
otherwise. We normalize the going-concern value by total book assets at filing. Fig-
ure IA6, Panel A, shows the distribution of the market-value based estimates and the
distribution of the plan-based estimates, which look similar.
    For 108 cases where both estimates are available, we also find that they are quite
similar on average, consistent with prior findings of Gilson, Hotchkiss, and Ruback
(2000). The median difference of market value-based estimate minus plan-based esti-
mate is about 0.08 (inter-quartile range -0.08 to 0.26). The median ratio of these two
values is about 1.14 (inter-quartile range 0.86 to 1.6). Figure IA6, Panel B, shows the
distribution of the difference between the two estimates, which has most of its mass
around zero. Overall, the data suggests that the Chapter 11 going-concern values are
reasonably reliable.




                                          76
         Figure IA6: Distributions of Chapter 11 Going-Concern Recovery Rates
Panel A shows the distribution of Chapter 11 going-concern values using post-emergence market values
(market value of equity plus book value of debt, or acquisition value) in the solid blue line, and the
distribution of Chapter 11 going-concern values using plan estimates in the dashed red line. Both values
are normalized by total book assets at filing. Panel B shows the distribution of market value estimates
minus plan estimates. Each observation is a Chapter 11 case.

                                       Panel A. Market and Plan Values
                 1.5
                 1
                 .5
                 0




                         0                     1                       2                 3
                                             Ch11 Value/Book Asset at Filing

                                           Market Value-Based              Plan-Based




                             Panel B. Differences between Market and Plan Values
                       2
                       1.5
                 Density
                   1   .5
                       0




                               -1            0                1                2         3
                                     Ch11 Recovery Rate: Market-Based minus Plan-Based




                                                         77
IA3         Additional Results Incorporating Operating Leases
    One may also view operating leases as akin to asset-based debt, in the sense that the
lessor can repossess the asset under an operating lease when the lease terminates (Eis-
feldt and Rampini, 2009). In this section, we perform robustness checks which include
estimates of the value of operating leases as asset-based debt. In this case, the estimated
present value of future rental payments would be both the operating lease liability and
the operating lease asset. We assume liquidation recovery rate of 100% if the lessor were
to repossess the asset.28
    We estimate the value of operating leases using two methods. The first method
follows Rampini and Viswanathan (2013) and multiplies firms' annual rental expenses
by ten. The second method utilizes the value of operating leases provided by firms,
which became available in 2019 after changes in accounting rules, as discussed in Section
2.1.1. We obtain firms' estimates of operating leases in 2019 from Compustat Snapshot
and CapitalIQ. For each firm, we calculate the ratio of operating leases relative to owned
assets. We take the average ratio in each two-digit SIC industry, and use this ratio to
estimate the value of operating leases for pre-2019 firm-years in our sample (i.e., we
multiply owned assets by this ratio to estimate operating leases in prior years).
    We add operating leases to asset-based debt, total debt, and total assets. We then
compute total leverage including operating leases, as well as debt composition (relative
to total debt and total assets). We also add operating leases to liquidation values (and
normalize the liquidation value using the new total assets). Indeed, since operating
leases by design are directly included in both the liquidation value and the amount
of asset-based debt, this can contribute to a mechanical positive association between
asset-based debt (including operating leases) and liquidation values (including operat-
ing leases).
    The results are presented in Table IA7 below. The regression specifications follow
those in columns (3) and (4) of Tables 2 to 4, and the left hand side is different types of
debt normalized by assets. The only difference here is we include capitalized operating
leases in liquidation values, total assets, total leverage, and asset-based debt. The results
are similar to those in Tables 2 to 4, if not stronger (by design) as explained above. Asset-
based debt increases strongly with liquidation values, while cash flow-based bonds and
loans decrease with liquidation values.




  28 The   results are robust to assuming an alternative liquidation recovery rate of 70%.


                                                     78
                            Table IA7: Results including Operating Leases
In this table, we include the capitalized value of operating leases in liquidation values, asset-based debt, total
leverage, and total assets. We use two methods to estimate the value of operating leases as described above.
The dependent variables are asset-based debt in columns (1) and (2), cash flow-based bonds in columns (3) and
(4), and cash flow-based loans in columns (5) and (6), all normalized by total assets (including operating leases).
The firm-level control variables are the same as those in Tables 2 to 4. Year fixed effects are included. Standard
errors are double-clustered by firm and year and reported in parentheses, and asterisks denote significance
levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%). Sample is based on Compustat and CapitalIQ and sample period is 2003 to 2016.

                                              Panel A. Method 1

                                              Asset-Based Debt          CF-Based Bonds            CF-Based Loans
                                                (1)       (2)            (3)       (4)             (5)       (6)
   Liquidation value                          0.518***    0.500***     -0.140***    -0.138***    -0.315***    -0.301***
                                               (0.015)     (0.015)       (0.015)      (0.014)      (0.021)      (0.021)
   Book leverage                              0.473***    0.466***      0.119***     0.120***     0.330***     0.336***
                                               (0.012)     (0.012)       (0.015)      (0.015)      (0.019)      (0.021)
   Liquidation value × Leverage w/ lease                  0.890***                  -0.134***                 -0.682***
                                                           (0.036)                    (0.026)                  (0.040)
   Ch 11 recovery rate                         -0.012       -0.007     0.014***      0.013***     -0.003        -0.007
                                               (0.007)     (0.006)      (0.004)       (0.004)     (0.006)       (0.006)
   Observations                                31015       31015        30679        30679        31005        31005
   Within R2                                    .601        .626         .115         .118         .39          .418
   Controls                                      Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes
   Time fixed effects                            Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes


                                               Panel B. Method 2

                                               Asset-Based Debt          CF-Based Bonds            CF-Based Loans
                                                (1)        (2)            (3)       (4)             (5)       (6)
  Liquidation value                           0.269***      0.374***    -0.112***    -0.188***    -0.113***    -0.132***
                                               (0.019)       (0.027)      (0.022)      (0.032)      (0.015)      (0.018)
  Book leverage                               0.402***      0.390***     0.384***     0.393***     0.124***     0.127***
                                               (0.014)       (0.013)      (0.022)      (0.023)      (0.015)      (0.016)
  Liquidation value × Leverage w/ lease                     1.133***                 -0.817***                 -0.188***
                                                             (0.097)                  (0.122)                   (0.058)
  Ch 11 recovery rate                         -0.037***    -0.026***     0.017**        0.009     0.015***      0.013***
                                               (0.007)       (0.007)     (0.006)       (0.006)     (0.004)       (0.004)
  Observations                                 31018           31018     31008        31008        30682        30682
  Within R2                                     .328            .354      .405         .421         .11          .112
  Controls                                       Yes             Yes       Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes
  Time fixed effects                             Yes             Yes       Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes




                                                          79
IA4        Estimating Financial Covenant Tightness
    We construct covenant tightness measures following Murfin (2012).29 The main idea
is to compare covenant threshold values from Dealscan with firms' financial ratios
around the time of the issuance, to calculate the slack of the loan covenant (i.e., dis-
tance between the covenant threshold and the actual financial ratio at issuance). Using
these slack values along with an industry-year-specific covariance matrix of changes in
log firm financial ratios, we can calculate the probability of covenant violations, which
we use as the measure of covenant tightness.
    First, we construct a firm-quarter dataset with calculates the logs of the relevant fi-
nancial ratios using Compustat balance sheet data.30 For the tightness of performance
covenants, we include cash interest coverage, debt to EBITDA, debt service coverage,
EBITDA, fixed charge coverage, interest coverage, and senior debt to EBITDA covenants.
For the tightness of other financial covenants, we include debt to equity, debt to tangible
net worth, net worth, current ratio, quick ratio, and capital expenditure covenants. We
take the log of the actual financial ratios, and calculate changes in firms' log financial
ratios. We then create a positive-definite covariance matrix of changes in the log of fi-
nancial ratios. Following Murfin (2012), we calculate the covariance matrices for each
one-digit SIC industry and backwards-rolling ten-year period combination. In addi-
tion, prior to creating each covariance matrix, observations with missing values for the
changes in log financial ratios are dropped. Finally, the changes in log of financial ratios
are winsorized at the 1% level.
    We merge loan covenant thresholds from Dealscan with firms' financial ratios one
quarter prior to the start date of each loan. For covenants with maximum thresholds, we
calculate the slack between the log of the covenant threshold and the log of the financial
ratio. For covenants with minimum thresholds, we calculate the slack between the log
of the covenant threshold's inverse and the log of the financial ratio's inverse.
    The final step is to calculate the multivariate normal probability of covenant vio-
lations. First, we remove loan observations that do not have covenants relevant for the
measure of covenant tightness, or those that violate covenants prior to the start date (i.e.,
have a negative slack value). Using the covariance matrices of changes in financial ratios,
we calculate each loan's multivariate normal probability of the relevant slack variable
being greater than or equal to zero, for each one-digit SIC industry-year combination.
The covenant tightness measure, which captures the probability of violating at least one
covenant, is one minus the calculated multivariate normal probability.




  29 We   thank Justin Murfin for sharing his code.
  30 For  the thresholds that require a minimum ratio, such as minimum EBIDTA, we take the inverse of
the financial value, which allows the slack between the covenant threshold and the financial ratio to be
positive.


                                                  80
IA5       Solution to the Model
   The optimal contract can be characterized as the solution to:


                                          1 2
               max  p  R + ( 1 - p  ) L -    p - P[ s < s  | p  ] c, s.t.
               p ,C                       2
                     pRi + (1 - p) Li = Qi ,                                                     (IA1)
                                                                 1 2              1
                     P[ s < s  | p
                                 ~ ] Q e + P[ s  s  | p   ~ e - p
                                                      ~ ] pR          ~ = p  R e -  p 2 ,        (IA2)
                                                                 2                2
                                                   
                     P[s < s | p] Qi + P[s  s | p] [ pRi + (1 - p) Li ] = ii ,
                                 ~                    ~    ~             ~                       (IA3)
                     p  R i + (1 - p  ) L i - P[ s < s  | p  ] c = i i ,                         (IA4)
                     p  R u + (1 - p  ) L u = i u ,                                              (IA5)

and
                                                                   1
                    ~ = arg max P[s < s | p] Qe + P[s  s | p] pRe -  p2 .
                    p
                             p                                     2
   Combining Equations (IA1), (IA3), and (IA4), we have:

                                              P[ s < s  | p  ] c
                                  Ri - Li =                          .
                                              P[ s  s  | p ~ ] p - p
                                                                   ~

    Also, taking the first order condition of the above system of equations, ( p , p
                                                                                   ~ , s , Re , Qe )
is the solution to this system of equations:

                         R-L   c 
                  p =        -    
                                   P[ s < s  | p  ],
                                p
                                                            1 2                1
                  P[ s  s  | p    ~ e + P[ s < s  | p
                              ~ ] pR                ~ ] Qe -  p ~ = p  R e -  p 2 ,
                                                            2                  2
                  p  ( R - R e ) + (1 - p  ) L = (1 - w ) + P[ s < s  | p  ] c,
                          
                  p ~=       [P[ s  s  | p   ~ e + P[ s < s  | p
                                         ~ ] pR                ~ ] Qe ] ,
                         p ~
                  Qe = max (0, Q - (1 - w) - P[s < s | p ]c) .

And the rest of the parameters of the contract can be written as a function of ( p , p    ~ , s , Re , Qe ).
    For the contract with minimum investment from the informed investor, we have:
                P[ s < s  | p  ] c
                                     ~ , Qi = p Ri , and ii = p Ri - P[ s < s | p ] c. Finally, for
Li = 0, Ri = P[ss | p                                                         
                             ~ ] p - p
the uninformed investor we have: iu = 1 - w - ii , Lu = L, Ru = (iu - L)/ p + L, and
Q u = Q - Q e - Qi .




                                                  81
