                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     HOW GLOBAL IS YOUR MUTUAL FUND?
            INTERNATIONAL DIVERSIFICATION FROM MULTINATIONALS

                                          Irem Demirci
                                        Miguel A. Ferreira
                                          Pedro Matos
                                         Clemens Sialm

                                       Working Paper 27648
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27648


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020




We thank Ines Chaieb, Rich Evans, Hao Jiang, Wei Jiang, David Moreno, Pedro Saffi, Mikhail
Simutin, Dragon Tang, Sheridan Titman, and seminar participants at the 2019 China International
Conference in Finance, the 2019 Finance Forum, the 2019 Lubrafin Conference, and the 2019
SUNY Albany Symposium on International Investing for helpful comments. We gratefully
acknowledge financial support from Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia (FCT) and the
Richard A. Mayo Center for Asset Management at the Darden School of Business. Clemens
Sialm is an independent contractor with AQR Capital Management. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27648.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Irem Demirci, Miguel A. Ferreira, Pedro Matos, and Clemens Sialm. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Global is Your Mutual Fund? International Diversification from Multinationals
Irem Demirci, Miguel A. Ferreira, Pedro Matos, and Clemens Sialm
NBER Working Paper No. 27648
August 2020
JEL No. F23,G11,G15,G23

                                         ABSTRACT

We show that mutual funds worldwide provide substantial international exposure through their
domestic holdings of multinationals. An average domestic fund's international exposure increases
by 32 percentage points when we consider international corporate diversification. We find that
funds with higher indirect international exposure perform better in both the cross section and the
time series. This outperformance is more pronounced among small fund families, and funds that
invest in small stocks, growth stocks, and less developed capital markets. Our findings support
the hypothesis that international diversification from multinationals reduces the transaction and
information costs of investing abroad and captures fund manager skill.


Irem Demirci                                    Pedro Matos
Nova School of Business                         University of Virginia
and Economics                                   P.O. Box 6550
R. Holanda n.1                                  Charlottesville, VA 22906-6550
2775-405 Carcavelos                             matosp@darden.virginia.edu
Portugal
irem.demirci@novasbe.pt                         Clemens Sialm
                                                University of Texas at Austin
Miguel A. Ferreira                              McCombs School of Business
Nova School of Business and Economics           2110 Speedway; B6600
Campus Carcavelos                               Austin, TX 78712-1276
Rua Holanda, 1                                  and NBER
Carcavelos                                      clemens.sialm@mccombs.utexas.edu
Portugal
and CEPR and ECGI
miguel.ferreira@novasbe.pt
1. Introduction


       Investors are reluctant to invest in foreign markets despite the risk reduction benefits
of international portfolio diversification. This home bias in investors' portfolios has been
attributed to transaction and information costs of investing in stocks away from home.1
Markets have increasingly integrated in recent decades, but there are still significant barriers
associated with international equity ownership (e.g., Karolyi and Stulz (2003), Stulz (2005),
and Bekaert, Harvey, Kiguel, and Wang (2016)).
       While ownership of foreign companies ­ direct international exposure ­ has received con-
siderable attention in the home bias literature, the exposure to international capital markets
through ownership of domestic stocks that have foreign operations ­ indirect international
exposure ­ has been mostly overlooked. A notable exception is Cai and Warnock (2012)
who use survey data on portfolio holdings of U.S. investors to show that investors obtain
significant international exposure through holdings of domestic stocks. This occurs because
the largest members of major stock indices are frequently multinational companies whose
revenues come to a substantial extent from global operations. For example, the percentage
of foreign sales of S&P 500 companies is about 44% of total sales and the extent of foreign
sales is even higher in other major indices such as the FTSE 100 with 76%.2
       Investors thus can diversify risks internationally either directly through international
portfolio diversification of their holdings of foreign stocks or indirectly through international
corporate diversification of their holdings of domestic stocks. These two types of interna-
tional diversification can differ substantially and have different implications for portfolio
performance. International portfolio diversification enables an investor to hold small minor-
   1
     See, for example, French and Poterba (1991), Tesar and Werner (1995), Dahlquist, Pinkowitz, Stulz, and
Williamson (2003), Ahearne, Griever, and Warnock (2004), and Kho, Stulz, and Warnock (2009). Theoretical
work on home bias also notes that investors underweight foreign securities (e.g., Van Nieuwerburgh and
Veldkamp (2009)). See also Cooper, Sercu, and Vanp´   ee (2013) for a survey.
   2
     S&P Dow Jones Indices (2018) "S&P 500 2017: Global Sales - Year in Review", and FTSE (2017) "The
Global Sales Ratio, Global and Domestic Firms".



                                                    1
ity positions in a relatively large number of foreign stocks. These positions can be acquired
and liquidated fairly easily in financial markets. However, there may be foreign markets with
low liquidity, limited information availability, and constrained monitoring opportunities due
to dispersed ownership, geographic distance, and cultural differences.
       Alternatively, international corporate diversification allows a domestic firm to diversify
internationally by operating in other countries. Through foreign direct investment (FDI), a
corporation has control over these foreign operations and often establishes a significant phys-
ical presence of employees and capital. International corporate diversification can enhance
shareholder value by exploiting firm-specific assets, by increasing operating flexibility, and
by meeting investors' diversification preferences. Investors may be willing to pay a premium
if corporations can reduce the costs of diversification for them, all else equal. On the other
hand, international corporate diversification can destroy value through the complexity of
managing multinational firms and inefficient cross-subsidization of less profitable business
units. Overall, there is mixed evidence regarding the valuation of multinational firms.3
       Using a comprehensive sample of open-end equity mutual funds domiciled in 29 countries
over the 2005-2015 period, we find that indirect international exposure constitutes a signifi-
cant fraction of a fund's total exposure to stock markets. This suggests that funds diversify
not only through direct ownership of international stocks but also through investing in do-
mestic firms that source part of their revenues abroad. While international stocks represent
only 48% of an average mutual fund's portfolio, international exposure increases to 67%
when we take into account the fraction of foreign sales of domestic companies. In the case of
domestic funds, international stocks represent only 9% of a funds' portfolio, but international
exposure increases to about 41% when we take into account the fraction of foreign sales. We
conclude that home bias is not as severe as previously documented in the literature when we
   3
     Brewer (1981) and Fatemi (1984) find no statistical difference in risk-adjusted performance between
multinationals and purely domestic firms. Denis, Denis, and Yost (2002) find that globally diversified firms
trade at a discount relative to a portfolio of single-segment domestic firms operating in the same industries.
There is also evidence consistent with a global diversification premium reflecting the value of operating
flexibility (Chang, Kogut, and Yang (2016)) and financial flexibility (Jang (2017)) during the 2007-2008
financial crisis.

                                                      2
take into account the exposure to international markets from multinationals located in the
fund's country of domicile.
   Given the potential cost-reduction and diversification benefits of the indirect international
exposure, we test whether this exposure is associated with fund performance. We find that
indirect international exposure has a positive effect on fund risk-adjusted performance in the
cross section of domestic funds. On average, a one standard deviation increase in indirect
international exposure (0.156) is associated with an 7.5 basis points increase in monthly
four-factor alphas in the sample of domestic funds. On the other hand, the results are mixed
for direct international exposure, which has an ambiguous impact on fund performance. The
tests control for benchmark-, country-, and time-fixed effects, and a comprehensive set of
determinants of fund performance. The results are robust when we use a larger sample that
includes both domestic and international funds. The results also hold across funds domiciled
in different regions of the world.
   The empirical results show that indirect international exposure continues to have a pos-
itive and significant effect on fund performance when we include fund-fixed effects. Thus,
the estimated outperformance is significant in the time series, which indicates that perfor-
mance improves after a fund increases its indirect international exposure. We find that a
one (within-fund) standard deviation increase in indirect international exposure (0.041) is
associated with a 4.6 basis points increase in monthly four-factor alphas in the sample of
domestic funds. We conclude that indirect international exposure has a positive effect on
fund performance in both the cross section and the time series.
   We also employ a characteristic-based adjustment to the returns of the stocks in a fund's
portfolio. We adjust the returns based not only on the market capitalization and the book-
to-market ratio, but also on the fraction of foreign sales of the firms that funds invest into.
Our results suggest that outperformance is not an artifact of funds investing in multination-
als but rather reflects the fund managers' ability to invest in companies that successfully
geographically diversify their operations.


                                               3
   The results are robust when we use alternative measures of fund performance such as
benchmark-adjusted returns, excess returns (over the risk-free rate), gross returns, the Sharpe
ratio, the information ratio, and alphas based on world factors, regional factors, and country-
specific factors. Importantly, the results do not hold for passive funds and are more pro-
nounced among the most active funds, which suggest that the outperformance is not a
mechanical effect but rather is generated by managerial skill.
   We next examine the heterogeneity in the relation between fund performance and in-
direct international exposure. International investments carry significant transaction and
information costs. Some of these costs are fixed and therefore they may be higher among
small fund families and funds with lower assets under management. We also expect such
costs to depend on the types of stocks that funds invest in. For instance, small-cap stocks
are typically less liquid and information asymmetries are more pronounced. These costs may
also change according to the characteristics of the stock markets and we hypothesize that
such costs may be higher in less developed capital markets. Consistent with our hypotheses,
we find that the performance benefits of indirect international exposure are larger in small
fund families. In addition, we find that the benefits are more pronounced when funds invest
in small-cap and growth stocks. The level of development of capital markets to which the
funds are exposed also matters. The performance benefits are more significant for countries
with smaller and less liquid stock markets, and with greater barriers to foreign investment.
   To study whether indirect international exposure exhausts the international diversifica-
tion benefits for mutual fund investors by region of the world, we perform spanning tests
following Huberman and Kandel (1987), DeSantis (1994), Bekaert and Urias (1996), Errunza,
Hogan, and Hung (1999), and Bae, Elkamhi, and Simutin (2019). We find that returns of
U.S. mutual funds investing in international stocks are spanned by U.S. domestic funds with
differential indirect international exposure. In contrast to the U.S., international mutual
funds domiciled elsewhere in the world are not spanned by their domestic counterparts with
above- and below-median indirect international exposure. The differential results between


                                              4
these regions may be due to the dominating role of the U.S. stock market. Whereas it is
important for foreign investors to obtain direct exposure to the U.S. market, it is less impor-
tant for U.S. investors to obtain direct exposure to foreign markets, as U.S. multinationals
already provide fairly large diversification benefits.
      We contribute to the extensive literature on mutual funds by proposing a new and eco-
nomically important determinant of fund performance ­ indirect international exposure ­
acquired by investing in local firms that are internationally diversified. We provide evidence
that stock-specific characteristics (i.e., percentage of foreign revenues), apart from fund-
specific characteristics, play a role in explaining fund performance.4 Specifically, we show
that international corporate diversification is related to portfolio performance.
      We also contribute to the home bias literature. This literature shows that most investors
hold local stocks in excess of the country weights on the world market portfolio, but has
mostly overlooked the role of multinationals in providing international diversification ben-
efits. Errunza et al. (1999) examine whether U.S. investors can replicate the benefits of
international diversification by simply investing in U.S. stocks. They find that international
diversification does not provide significant gains beyond those attainable with foreign market
mimicking portfolios, formed based on domestically traded securities in the U.S. Bae et al.
(2019) show that investing in developed market firms that trade with an emerging market
provides diversification benefits not attainable by investing directly in emerging stock mar-
kets. Moshirian, Pham, Tian, and Wu (2018) show that after a firm makes a cross-border
acquisition, it attracts investment from the destination-country funds. This mechanism is
different from ours as it studies direct investments in foreign companies, while we investi-
gate investments in domestic firms that provide economic exposures to foreign markets. Our
study offers new insights to the home bias literature. First, we show that the degree of home
bias in mutual fund holdings worldwide is smaller than previously documented after we ad-
  4
    This vast literature includes, for example, Carhart (1997), Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers
(1997), Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2005), Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2008), Cremers and Petajisto
(2009), Schultz (2010), Amihud and Goyenko (2013), Doshi, Elkamhi, and Simutin (2015), and Cremers,
Ferreira, Matos, and Starks (2016).

                                                  5
just for the international exposure of the firms that funds invest in. Second, we show that
this indirect international exposure can play an important role in reducing the transaction
and information costs of investing internationally.



2. Data and Variable Definitions


       In this section, we describe the data sources and variables, and report summary statistics.



2.1. Data

       Data on the performance of equity mutual funds over the 2005-2015 period come from the
Lipper survivorship bias-free database, which covers many countries worldwide.5 Although
multiple share classes are listed as separate observations in Lipper, they have the same
holdings and the same returns before expenses. We therefore use the primary share class
as our unit of observation and aggregate fund-level variables across different share classes
using total net assets (TNA) weights. We exclude offshore funds (e.g., funds domiciled in
Luxembourg or Dublin), funds of funds, and closed-end funds. Our main sample consists of
actively-managed equity mutual funds but we also examine passive funds (index funds and
exchange-traded funds) in placebo tests.
       We obtain information on each fund's portfolio holdings from the FactSet Ownership
database, which cover the portfolio holdings of mutual funds worldwide.6 Specifically, we
match each Lipper fund with the fund's portfolio holdings data in FactSet using ISIN and
CUSIP fund identifiers as well as management company and fund names. We focus our
analysis on the sample of domestic funds because they can provide more indirect international
   5
     See Ferreira, Keswani, Miguel, and Ramos (2013), Cremers et al. (2016), and Ferreira, Matos, and Pires
(2018) for a detailed description of Lipper's worldwide data coverage. Lipper's worldwide data coverage is
comprehensive compared to aggregate statistics from the Investment Company Institute (2015).
   6
     Ferreira and Matos (2008) provide a detailed description of this database.




                                                    6
exposure than international funds.7 International funds are restricted to invest in local stocks
by their mandates. Our baseline sample of domestic funds includes 3,569 open-end equity
funds in 29 countries that managed $4 trillion as of December 2015. We also examine
the sample of both domestic and international funds (including foreign, regional, and global
funds), which includes 7,265 open-end equity funds in 29 countries that managed $6.3 trillion
as of December 2015. Table IA.1 in the Internet Appendix reports the distribution of funds
by country and year. The U.S., the U.K., and Canada are the three countries with the
highest number of fund-year observations.
       We use the FactSet Fundamentals database to measure the percentage of sales that
come from sources other than the country of domicile (based on the headquarter location).
Under both U.S. GAAP and IFRS accounting standards, companies are required to disclose
revenues not only in their country of domicile but also in foreign countries. In additional
tests, we make use of the FactSet Revere Geographic Exposure database that provides firms'
sales to each individual country worldwide as reported in 10-K and other corporate filings,
and sales estimated based on country GDP weights.8



2.2. Variable Definitions

       Let f  F denote a mutual fund, c  C a country, and cf the domicile country of fund
f . Firms are denoted by i  I with some key subsets: Ic is the set of stocks domiciled in
country c, If is the set of stocks in fund f 's portfolio, and Icf represents the set of fund
f 's holdings in the fund's domicile country. Vif is the market value of fund f 's holdings of
firm i and i is the fraction of foreign sales in firm i's total sales.9 Our indirect exposure
measures are computed at the quarterly frequency based on quarterly fund holdings data
and annual foreign revenues of the firms in the fund's portfolio; the time index is suppressed
   7
     A domestic fund is a fund whose geographic focus is the same as its country of domicile.
   8
     FactSet Research Systems (2014), "FactSet Geographic Revenue Exposure (GeoRev): Data and Method-
ology Guide."
   9
     If there are different share classes of the same firm in a fund's portfolio, we aggregate them to calculate
the firm's overall portfolio weight.

                                                       7
for simplicity.10
       We measure a fund's direct ownership of international stocks without any adjustment for
international sales:

                                                                           iIcf     Vi,f
                       Direct International Exposuref = 1 -                                .              (1)
                                                                              iIf   Vi,f

We also measure the Indirect International Exposure of fund f defined as the (portfolio)
weighted-average of international sales (as a fraction of the firm's total sales) of all domestic
firms in its portfolio:

                                                                       iIcf   i × Vi,f
                      Indirect International Exposuref =                                       .          (2)
                                                                          iIf   Vi,f

The Indirect International Exposure variable captures the bias in total international exposure
that results from failing to adjust for foreign sales generated by multinational companies
based on the fund's domicile country.11 The total international exposure is the sum of Direct
International Exposure and Indirect International Exposure. Since domestic funds mostly
invest in domestic stocks, they can rely more extensively on indirect international exposure
than international funds. International funds can only rely on indirect international exposure
to the extent that they invest in stocks of the country of fund domicile (i.e., domestic stocks).
While regional funds (only those whose investment region includes the country of domicile)
and global funds may be able to invest in domestic stocks and thus have some indirect
exposure, foreign funds should have very low indirect international exposure. For these
reasons, we focus on the sample of domestic funds in which fund managers can actively
choose whether to gain indirect exposure or not.
       We use three main performance measures. Our first performance measure uses risk-
  10
    We use the most recent foreign sales prior to the beginning of the quarter in which holdings are reported.
  11
    Our measures ignore the revenues of foreign companies generated in the fund's domicile country. For
example, a U.S. mutual fund holds a German multinational firm that generates some of its revenues in the
U.S. This feedback effect reduces the direct international exposure of international funds.



                                                      8
adjusted returns (alphas) calculated based on the Carhart (1997) four-factor model. Fol-
lowing Bekaert, Hodrick, and Zhang (2009), we estimate four-factor alphas using regional
factors based on a fund's investment region in the case of domestic, foreign, and regional
funds. We use global factors in the case of global funds and emerging market funds.12 For
each fund-month, we estimate factor loadings using the previous 36 months of return data
(we require a minimum of 24 months of return data),


                Ri,t = i + 1 M KTi,t + 2 SM Bi,t + 3 HM Li,t + 4 M OMi,t + i,t ,                       (3)


where Ri,t is the return net of fees in U.S. dollars of fund i in month t in excess of the
one-month U.S. Treasury bill rate; M KTi,t is the excess return in the fund's investment
region in month t; SM Bi,t is the average return on the small-capitalization stock portfolio
minus the average return on the large-capitalization stock portfolio in the fund's investment
region; HM Li,t is the difference between the return on the portfolio with high book-to-
market stocks and the return on the portfolio with low book-to-market stocks in the fund's
investment region; and M OMi,t is the difference between the return on the portfolio with the
past 12-month stock winners and the return on the portfolio with the past 12-month stock
losers in the fund's investment region, excluding the immediately preceding month. Using
the estimated factor loadings over the prior 36 months, we subtract the expected return from
the realized fund return to obtain the fund's abnormal return in each month.
       The second measure is a characteristic-adjusted return based on the Daniel et al. (1997)
approach. Besides the market capitalization and the book-to-market ratio, we also adjust
for the level of foreign sales as the performance of funds with high indirect international
exposure may be driven by the foreign sales of the firms they invest in. In order to calculate
the characteristic-adjusted returns, in every firm domicile region we first form five market
capitalization sorted portfolios and then further split each of these five portfolios based on
  12
   The fund's investment regions (based on the geographical focus) are North America, Europe, Asia Pacific,
Emerging, Global (ex-U.S.) and Global.


                                                    9
book-to-market quintiles.13 Finally, we group these 25 portfolio into two based on whether
foreign revenues exceed 25% of total revenues or not.
       The third measure is the benchmark-adjusted return, which is defined as the difference
between the fund's return and the return on its benchmark based on the Lipper classification.
In robustness tests, we use alternative performance measures, such as the excess returns (over
the risk-free rate), the Sharpe ratio (i.e., the ratio of the excess return to the total risk), and
the information ratio (i.e., the ratio of the alpha to the idiosyncratic risk). In addition, we
consider alternative factor models that include country-specific, regional and world factors.



2.3. Summary Statistics

       Our baseline sample includes actively-managed domestic equity mutual funds between
2005 and 2015. Panel A of Table 1 shows summary statistics for the sample of domestic funds,
and Panel B shows summary statistics for the sample of all funds. Panel A reports that the
average indirect international exposure is 32.3% in the sample of domestic funds. Domestic
funds mostly invest in domestic stocks with only 8.6% direct international exposure. After
we account for foreign sales of domestic firms in which funds invest into, the international
exposure increases to 40.9%. Panel B presents summary statistics for the sample of all
funds, which show that direct international exposure is 47.7% on average. The average
indirect international exposure for this sample is 19.3%, which is lower than that for the
domestic sample. Figure 1 shows the average of the international exposure measures over
time for both samples. There is a slight upward trend in international exposure during our
sample period.
       The average fund has a monthly four-factor alpha of -0.042% and -0.114% per month in
the sample of domestic funds and the sample of all funds, respectively. The average fund
age is 14.5 years in the sample of domestic funds. Domestic funds have an average TNA
of $917 million and a fund family TNA of about $40 billion. The average TNA and fund
  13
       The regions are North America, Europe, Asia Pacific, and emerging markets.

                                                     10
family TNA of international funds are smaller than those of their domestic counterparts.
The variable definitions are provided in Table A.1 in the Appendix.
   Table IA.2 in the Internet Appendix reports the country averages of our international
exposure measures and other fund characteristics. The indirect international exposure is
the highest in Switzerland, Austria, and Sweden, and the lowest in Indonesia, China, and
Poland in the sample of domestic funds. Table IA.3 reports the averages of the home bias
measures before and after adjusting for funds' indirect international exposures. This table
also reports the average share of each country in the world market portfolio. U.S. equity
funds overall invest 68.5% of their holdings in domestic stocks, although U.S. stocks account
for only 32.5% of world market capitalization. After their indirect international exposure is
taken into consideration, the U.S. funds' exposure to purely domestic markets decreases from
68.5% to 46.1%. Table IA.4 reports the correlation coefficients between fund characteristics
and international exposure measures. The correlation between direct international exposure
and indirect international exposure is -0.135. This correlation is negative because direct
international holdings do not exhibit indirect international exposure by construction.



3. Main Results


   In this section, we investigate the fund performance implications of indirect international
exposure using both a portfolio and a regression approach.



3.1. Portfolio Results

   To examine the performance of funds with different levels of international exposure, we
sort funds into five portfolios at the beginning of each month according to their level of
indirect or direct international exposure. For each quintile portfolio, we compute the equal-
weighted average excess return in each month using four-factor alphas based on a fund's


                                             11
investment region.
   The first two columns of Table 2 present the results for the sample of domestic funds.
While funds in the lowest indirect exposure quintile (i.e., Quintile 1) exhibit an alpha of
-10.3 basis points per month, funds in the highest indirect exposure quintile (i.e., Quintile
5) exhibit an alpha of 8.6 basis points per month. The difference in performance of 18.9 ba-
sis points per month is economically and statistically significant. In contrast, there are less
significant performance differences among domestic funds with different levels of direct inter-
national exposure. Funds with a high direct international exposure underperform funds with
a low direct international exposure by 4.8 basis points per month, although this difference
is not statistically significant.
   The last two columns present the results for the sample of all funds. The impact of
indirect international exposure on fund performance is similar to that of domestic funds.
Funds in the top quintile of indirect international exposure outperform funds in the bottom
quintile by 21 basis points per month, which is statistically significant at the 1% level. Funds
with a high direct international exposure underperform funds with a low direct international
exposure by 14.9 basis points per month. The evidence suggests that there are performance
benefits associated with indirect international exposure, while the costs seem to outweigh
the benefits for the case of the direct international exposure.



3.2. Baseline Regression Results

   In this section, we study the relation between indirect international exposure and fund
performance using multivariate regressions, which allow us to control for fixed effects and
several fund characteristics that are important determinants of fund performance.
   Table 3 presents the estimates where the dependent variables are either the monthly
four-factor alpha calculated based on a fund's investment region, characteristic-adjusted
returns, or benchmark-adjusted returns. The main explanatory variable is the lagged indirect


                                              12
international exposure calculated based on a firm's foreign sales from the previous fiscal year
relative to the quarter in which fund holdings are measured. The regressions include the
lagged direct international exposure and other fund characteristics, fund domicile country-
fixed effects, fund benchmark-fixed effects, and time (month-year)-fixed effects. Standard
errors are clustered at the fund level. Columns (1), (3) and (5) present the results without
fund-fixed effects, and columns (2), (4) and (6) present the results with fund-fixed effects.
   Panel A presents the results for the sample of domestic funds. Consistent with the
portfolio results, we find that the indirect international exposure is positively related to
fund performance. A one-standard-deviation increase in the indirect international exposure
(0.156) results in an increase in the four-factor alpha of 7.5 basis points per month using the
estimate in column (1). The direct international exposure coefficient is negative, but both
economically and statistically weaker than the indirect exposure coefficient.
   In order to capture the time-series relation between international exposure and fund
performance, we also run the regressions with fund-fixed effects, which absorb country- and
benchmark-fixed effects. Consistent with the cross-sectional regression results, column (2)
shows that the indirect international exposure coefficient is positive and significant. These
results are also economically significant: a one (within-fund) standard deviation increase in
the indirect international exposure (0.041) is associated with a 4.6 basis points increase in the
four-factor alpha. In the fund-fixed effects specification, we find that the direct international
exposure is not significantly associated with fund performance.
   We also employ a characteristic-based adjustment to the returns of the stocks in a fund's
portfolio based on Daniel et al. (1997). Besides the market capitalization and the book-to-
market ratio, we also adjust for the level of foreign sales as the outperformance of funds with
high indirect international exposure might be driven by the foreign sales of the firms that
they invest into. Column (3) presents the results. We find that outperformance is not an
artifact of funds investing in multinationals but rather reflects the funds' ability to invest in
companies that successfully diversify their foreign operations. The estimate in column (3)


                                               13
using characteristic-adjusted returns is lower than the estimate in column (1) using alphas,
but funds with high indirect international exposures continue to significantly outperform
their peers. Column (4) shows that the indirect international exposure coefficient remains
positive and significant when we use characteristic-adjusted returns in the fund-fixed effects
specification. We analyze the robustness of our results using benchmark-adjusted returns.
The estimates using benchmark-adjusted returns in columns (5) and (6) are similar to those
using characteristic-adjusted returns
   The coefficients on the control variables are in line with prior studies that find that
performance is negatively related to fund size and expenses but positively related to family
size (e.g., Chen, Hong, Huang, and Kubik (2004), Gil-Bazo and Ruiz-Verd´
                                                                       u (2009), P´
                                                                                  astor,
Stambaugh, and Taylor (2015), Cremers et al. (2016), and Ferreira et al. (2018)).
   Panel B presents the results for the sample of all funds. The economic magnitude and
the statistical significance of the results for the indirect international exposure are similar
to those in Panel A. The estimate in column (1) indicate that a one standard deviation
(i.e., 0.187) increase in indirect international exposure is associated with a 7 basis points
increase in four-factor alpha. We also find similar estimates when we include fund fixed
effects in columns (2), (4) and (6). The estimate in column (2) indicates that a one standard
deviation (i.e., 0.032) increase in indirect international exposure is associated with a 3.6 basis
points increase in four-factor alpha. The results using characteristic-adjusted returns and
benchmark-adjusted returns in columns (3) and (4) are also similar to those in Panel A.



3.3. Alternative Factor Models

   The results in Table 3 use factors based on the the fund's focus region. Table 4 instead
computes the alphas based on alternative global and country factors. Columns (1) and (2)
in Panel A report the results using four-factor alphas calculated using four global factors.
The table also reports the results from an eight-factor model based on both the factors of a


                                               14
fund's investment region and global factors in columns (3) and (4). This is a more stringent
specification than our baseline model as it captures not only the region-specific risks but also
global risks. Our results are robust to these alternative measures of fund performance.
   Panel B of Table 4 reports the results using country-specific factors based on a fund's
investment country as well as the results from an eight-factor model using both country-
specific and regional factors. The indirect international exposure coefficients remain positive
and significant, albeit at lower magnitudes. This may be due to measurement error in
country-specific factors in countries with relatively low numbers of stocks.



3.4. Future Returns

   We investigate whether the impact of changes in indirect international exposure can
predict future alphas for horizons longer than one month. In order to test the persistence
of the relation between performance and indirect exposure, we first calculate the quarterly
average of the monthly alpha for each of the next four quarters. Then, we run our baseline
tests using the average alpha for each of the next four quarters as dependent variables. Table
IA.5 in the Internet Appendix reports the results, which indicate that the effect remains
statistically significant during the next four quarters, although the effect declines with the
horizon.



4. Cross-Sectional Heterogeneity


   In this section, we examine the heterogeneity of the relation between fund performance
and indirect international exposure using fund and country characteristics.




                                              15
4.1. Fund Characteristics

    We first investigate the heterogeneity of the relation between performance and indirect
international exposure using several fund characteristics: TNA measured both at the fund
and the family level, and fund style based on the characteristics of the fund's stock hold-
ings. Small fund families and small funds are likely to face relatively higher transaction
and information costs when investing abroad. Thus, they may benefit more from investing
internationally using home-based multinationals with economic exposure to other countries.
In each month and country, we sort funds into terciles based on their lagged fund family
TNA or fund TNA. We then interact our indirect international exposure measure with the
indicator variables for fund family size terciles and fund size terciles. All regressions include
separate indicator variables for the direct effects of fund size tercile indicators as well as their
interactions with direct international exposure.
    Table 5 presents the regression results for the sample of domestic funds. Columns (1) and
(2) show that the relation between performance and indirect international exposure is more
pronounced among funds that belong to small fund families. The relation is significantly
weaker among funds that belong to families in the top tercile of fund family TNA. Columns
(3) and (4) report the results for fund size terciles, which suggest that the relation between
indirect international exposure and fund performance is not significantly affected by fund
size.
    We next study the role of fund style in the relation between performance and indirect
international exposure. We expect transaction and information costs to be higher for funds
investing in small and growth stocks, as discussed by Schultz (2010). Thus, these funds would
benefit more from indirect international exposure. We use the Lipper fund classification into
12 fund styles based on the market capitalizations (large, multi, mid, or small) and book-to-
market ratios (value, core, or growth), which is only available for about half of our sample.
We then construct a Large indicator variable that takes a value of one for large-cap funds


                                                16
and zero for multi, mid, and small cap funds. Similarly, we define a V alue indicator variable
that takes a value of one for funds investing in value stocks and zero for funds investing in
core and growth stocks.
      Columns (5) and (6) show the differential impact of indirect international exposure on
the performance of large-cap funds. The estimates of the indirect international exposure
coefficients are positive and statistically significant for the benchmark group of funds that
is composed of all funds other than large cap funds. The negative and significant coefficient
on the interaction term between the indirect international exposure and the large cap fund
indicator variable suggests that the positive impact of indirect international exposure is more
pronounced for funds investing in small- and mid-cap stocks.
      Next, we interact our direct and indirect international exposure measures with an in-
dicator variable for funds investing in value stocks. The cross-sectional and times-series
regression results in columns (7) and (8) suggest that the relation between indirect inter-
national exposure and fund performance is positive and significant for funds investing in
growth stocks. In contrast, the coefficient estimates for the interaction term for value stocks
are negative, although not statistically significant without fund fixed effects. The sum of the
coefficients is not significantly different from zero. Thus, funds that focus on value stocks
exhibit an insignificiant effect of indirect international exposure on performance.14



4.2. Country Characteristics

      We examine the relation between performance and indirect international exposure for
domestic funds based on the fund's investment region: North America, Asia-Pacific, Europe,
and emerging markets. These regions differ in capital market development, fund industry
development, as well as regulatory environment. Table 6 reports the estimates separately for
each region. We find that the impact of indirect international exposure on fund performance
is pervasive across regions. The effect is more pronounced for funds whose investment regions
 14
      Table IA.6 in the Internet Appendix reports the results for the sample of all funds.

                                                      17
are in Asia-Pacific or emerging markets. Funds investing in these regions may potentially
benefit more from indirect international exposure because the fund industry is less developed
than in other regions. Alternatively, our indirect exposure measure might be capturing funds'
exposure to successful firms with a large amount of sales abroad.15
       Our indirect international exposure variable is constructed based on the firm's total for-
eign revenues. The FactSet Revere data allow us to observe foreign revenues of each stock at
the country level and calculate separately a fund's exposure to different countries. We use
this granular data to exploit the cross-country variation in the performance-indirect interna-
tional exposure relation. We require funds to have non-missing foreign revenue information
for at least 75% of their portfolio holdings.
       We hypothesize that the positive impact of indirect international exposure on fund per-
formance is less pronounced when funds invest in stock markets with lower asymmetric
information and high liquidity, which arguably corresponds to more developed capital mar-
kets. In order to test this prediction, we first calculate the average exposure of each stock
to developed markets. We use several measures to proxy for the exposure to developed
markets: stock market capitalization-to-GDP, stock market turnover (i.e., ratio of the value
of total shares traded to the average market capitalization), financial openness (proxied by
the index of Chinn and Ito (2006), which measures a country's degree of capital account
openness), MSCI developed market index membership, and legal enforcement (La Porta,
Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998)).16
       In order to calculate a fund's indirect exposure to developed markets, we first estimate
the exposure of each domestic stock in the fund's portfolio to developed markets. Each year,
we split countries into two groups based on the sample median of our developed market
proxies and generate a indicator variable for developed markets that takes a value of one for
  15
    Table IA.7 provides the results for the sample of all funds.
  16
    Legal enforcement is based on the following five variables: the efficiency of the judicial system, the
rule of law, the corruption level, the expropriation (outright confiscation and forced nationalization by the
government), and the likelihood of contract repudiation by the government; the variables are rescaled to
range between zero and ten, and higher values correspond to superior levels of legal enforcement.



                                                     18
countries above the median of the distribution of each proxy, and zero for countries below
the median. Then, we take the revenue-weighted average of this indicator variable to obtain
an exposure measure at the stock level. Thus, the stock-level exposure to developed markets
is the average proportion of revenues generated in developed markets. A fund's exposure
to developed markets is the portfolio-weighted average of firm-level exposures to developed
markets.
   Table 7 presents the estimates of the indirect international exposure variable and the
indirect international exposure to developed markets variable. In all specifications, the co-
efficient estimates of the indirect international exposure are positive and significant, which
indicates that indirect exposure is associated with higher fund performance in less developed
markets. The negative and significant coefficients of the indirect exposure to developed mar-
kets indicate that the impact of indirect exposure is attenuated for funds with more indirect
exposure to developed markets. This result holds across all our measures of capital mar-
ket development. However, the coefficients on the indirect exposure to developed markets
are not statistically significant for the the MSCI membership and legal enforcement mea-
sures. We conclude that indirect international exposure generates more benefits in terms of
performance when a fund is more exposed to less developed markets.



5. Fund Risk and Diversification


   In this section, we discuss the effect of indirect international exposure on fund risk and
diversification.



5.1. Risk-Return Trade-Off

   Our baseline tests focus on fund performance measured by fund alpha, characteristic-
adjusted returns, and benchmark-adjusted returns, which adjust for common risk factors and


                                             19
style but not for portfolio risk. If indirect international exposure helps funds to diversify their
portfolios, then this benefit can impact fund return volatility or the fund risk-return trade-
off. Given the wide coverage of our sample of funds with different investment objectives, it
is important to control for the volatility in returns.
   We estimate regressions using the Sharpe ratio and the information ratio as dependent
variables. The Sharpe ratio is calculated as the annualized excess return over the U.S. risk-
free rate divided by the annualized standard deviation of the fund return (i.e., total risk)
using a 12-month window. The information ratio is defined as the ratio of the annualized
four-factor alpha to the annualized standard deviation of the residuals from the four-factor
model (i.e., idiosyncratic risk) using a 12-month window. Columns (1)-(4) of Table 8 report
the estimates. We find that the indirect international exposure coefficients are positive and
significant. Funds with higher indirect international exposure provide higher Sharpe and
information ratios to investors in both the cross section and time series.
   Table 8 also provides the relation between indirect international exposure and the total
and idiosyncratic risk levels. We find that the indirect international exposure is associated
with significantly lower idiosyncratic risk and with lower total risk in the specifications with
fund fixed effects . Table IA.8 in the Internet Appendix shows that the results are similar in
the sample of all funds. Table IA.9 provides additional results on the risk-return trade-off.
We find that the indirect international exposure is associated with significantly higher excess
returns relative to the risk-free rate in both the cross section and time series, and significantly
lower tracking error (i.e., standard deviation of the benchmark-adjusted returns). Overall,
our findings suggest a negative relationship between indirect international exposure and
portfolio risk. This is consistent with indirect international exposure providing international
diversification gains to fund investors.




                                                20
5.2. Spanning Tests

   To study whether indirect international exposure exhausts the international diversifi-
cation benefits for mutual fund investors, we perform portfolio spanning tests following
Huberman and Kandel (1987), DeSantis (1994), Bekaert and Urias (1996), Errunza et al.
(1999), and Bae et al. (2019). We regress the returns (value weighted) of all international
funds in a region (i.e., U.S., Europe or Asia-Pacific) on the returns of domestic funds with
below- and above-median indirect international exposure in the same region. The portfolio
of international funds is spanned by the two portfolios of domestic funds with differential
exposure to multinational firms if the intercept of the regression is zero (i.e.,  = 0) and if
the sum of the loadings on the two domestic returns is equal to one (i.e., 1 + 2 = 1).
   Column (1) of Table 9 shows the results for the sample of U.S. funds. The alpha of the
regression is close to zero indicating that international U.S. funds do not provide significantly
different risk-adjusted performance than domestic funds with different exposures to U.S.
multinationals. Furthermore, the exposure of international funds to domestic funds with
above-median indirect exposure (i.e., 2 = 0.684) is larger than the exposure to domestic
funds with below-median indirect exposure (i.e., 1 = 0.377). Finally, the sum of the two
loadings is not significantly different from one (i.e., 1 + 2 = 0.377 + 0.684 = 1.061). Finally,
the joint hypothesis that the alpha equals zero and that the sum of the two betas equals one
cannot be rejected at a conventional significance level (i.e., p = 0.269). Thus, returns of U.S.
funds investing in international stocks are spanned by U.S. domestic funds with different
indirect international exposure.
   In contrast to the U.S., international funds domiciled in Europe and Asia-Pacific are not
spanned by their domestic counterparts with above- and below-median indirect exposure, as
reported in columns (2) and (3). The rejection of the spanning hypotheses for these regions
is due to the fact that their betas do not add up to one. However, their alphas are not
statistically different from zero. The different results between these regions may be due to


                                               21
the dominating role of U.S. stock market in the world. Whereas it is important for foreign
investors to obtain direct exposure to the U.S. market, it is less important for U.S. investors
to obtain direct exposure to foreign markets, as U.S. multinationals already provide fairly
large diversification benefits.



6. Alternative Sources of Performance


       In this section, we conduct several tests to better understand the sources of the superior
performance of funds that provide more indirect international exposure.



6.1. Expense Ratio

       Our results so far indicate a positive relation between indirect international exposure
and fund performance particularly for funds that belong to small fund families and focus on
small and growth stocks. We argue that holding the level of total international diversification
constant, indirect international diversification should be associated with lower fund fees.
       We examine this hypothesis by estimating regressions in which the dependent variable
is the monthly total expense ratio. Table 10 presents the results. Consistent with our hy-
pothesis, we find a smaller coefficient on the indirect international exposure than the direct
exposure, which suggests that diversifying through investments in home-based multination-
als is associated with significantly lower expense ratios for the funds. However, the economic
magnitude of the indirect international exposure is small. The estimate in column (2) indi-
cates that a one (average within-fund) standard deviation (i.e., 0.041) increase in indirect
international exposure is associated with a 0.06 basis point decrease in the monthly expense
ratio. This effect is small relative to the overall performance effect of 4.6 basis points in Table
3.17 We conclude that most of the outperformance is due to differences in gross performance
  17
       Table IA.10 reports similar results for the sample of all funds.



                                                        22
and not due to fees.



6.2. Fund Activeness

       Our baseline results could be driven by the differential performance of multinational
firms. The results based on characteristic-adjusted returns do not support this idea but
rather that the outperformance of funds with high indirect international exposure is driven
by fund manager skill. To further address this issue, we estimate the impact of indirect
exposure on the performance of passive funds (i.e., index funds and exchange-traded funds)
whose tracking error is less than 0.01. We estimate the effect using alphas, characteristic-
adjusted returns, and benchmark-adjusted returns as measures of performance. Table 11
shows that the estimated coefficients on the indirect international exposure are statistically
insignificant in the sample of passive funds. These results suggest that the baseline findings
for active funds can be attributed to managerial skill rather than to the passive exposure to
multinationals.18
       In an alternative analysis, we use the active share from Cremers and Petajisto (2009) as a
measure of fund activeness. Specifically, we sort funds in our main sample of domestic active
funds into terciles based on their active share and then interact our indirect international
exposure measure with indicator variables for these terciles. Table 12 reports the results.
We find that the effect of indirect international exposure is more pronounced for funds in
the middle and top terciles of active share than for funds in the bottom tercile. This finding
supports the notion that our results are driven by fund manager skill.
  18
    In Table IA.11 of the Internet Appendix, we continue to find an insignificant relation between indirect
international exposure and fund returns in the sample of all funds.




                                                    23
6.3. Pseudo Fund Returns

   To further control for the performance of foreign portfolio investment, we calculate pseudo
fund returns based on a hypothetical portfolio that is invested directly in local firms in the
countries where the sales are originated. The pseudo fund return is the monthly raw fund
return calculated based on local firms in the same industry as the firms in a fund's portfolio.
We first calculate industry returns by simply taking the equal-weighted average of the returns
of all firms in the same industry and country in a given month. Next, in order to calculate a
pseudo return at the firm level, we take the foreign sales-weighted average of these industry
returns in the country where the firm's sales are generated. Finally, we take the portfolio-
weighted average of the firm-level pseudo returns in order to calculate the fund-level pseudo
returns.
   Table IA.12 in the Internet Appendix presents the baseline regressions of fund alphas on
indirect international exposure in which we control for pseudo fund returns. In columns (1)
and (2) we include the contemporaneous pseudo fund return and in columns (3) and (4) we
control for the one-month lagged pseudo fund return. In all specifications, the indirect in-
ternational exposure coefficient remains positive and statistically significant, which suggests
that the performance effect of indirect exposure cannot be explained by direct portfolio in-
vestment. We conclude that FDI has different implications than foreign portfolio investment
in terms of performance. The alphas are highly positively correlated with contemporaneous
pseudo returns (with coefficients of about 0.7) and slightly negatively correlated with lagged
pseudo returns (with coefficients of about -0.04).



6.4. Complicated Firms

   Firms with foreign revenues may be more complicated than purely domestic firms, which
may explain our results. We extend the notion of complicated firms in Cohen and Lou (2012)
to an international setting. Complicated firms are defined alternatively using three measures.

                                              24
The first measure is an indicator variable that takes a value of one for firms operating in
more than one four-digit NAIC industry, and zero otherwise. The second measure is the
average of the number of distinct four-digit NAICS industries in which a firm operates. The
third measure is an indicator variable that takes a value of one if the firm's entity structure
is a holding company, and zero otherwise.19 All three firm-level measures are obtained from
Factset and are aggregated at the fund-level by taking their portfolio-weighted averages.
Table IA.13 in the Internet Appendix reports the results of our baseline regression when
we control for the exposure to domestic complicated firms. The coefficient on the indirect
international exposure remains positive and significant.



6.5. International Investment Treaties

       We also employ an alternative measure of cross-country heterogeneity based on interna-
tional investment agreements that can take the form of bilateral and multilateral investment
treaties and free trade agreements following Bhagwat, Brogaard, and Julio (2020). The
international investment agreements data is obtained from the United Nation's Investment
Policy Hub website.20 We collect bilateral investment treaties (BITs) between country pairs
over the period 1991-2015. Then, we construct an indicator variable that takes a value of
one if the firm's headquarter country has a BIT with the country in which the revenues
are generated. We carry this indicator variable forward starting with the year in which the
treaty is signed. We calculate the firm-level exposure to foreign markets by simply taking
the revenue-weighed average of this indicator variable. Similarly, a fund's indirect interna-
tional exposure to investment treaties is calculated as the weighted average of the firm-level
exposure measures based on portfolio holdings lagged by one year relative to the quarter in
which fund performance is measured.
  19
     In our sample, 61% of the firm-year observations are associated with more than one four-digit NAIC
industry and only 1% of the observations belong to a holding company. The median number of distinct
four-digit NAIC industries is two.
  20
     https://investmentpolicyhubold.unctad.org.


                                                  25
   Table IA.14 in the Internet Appendix reports the estimates of the regression of fund alpha
on the exposure to BITs. The results show that the coefficient estimates on the exposure
to BITs are positive and significant. Thus, funds more exposed to BITs tend to have better
performance. Both the economic and statistical significance of the estimate is higher in the
fund-fixed effects regressions.



7. Robustness


   We present several robustness tests of our primary findings in the Internet Appendix.
   We first check the robustness of our findings from the baseline analysis in Table 3 using
an alternative definition of indirect international exposure based on foreign assets rather
than foreign revenues. Columns (1)-(4) of Table IA.15 report the results. We continue to
find a positive and significant effect of indirect international exposure on fund performance.
We also check the robustness of our findings using firms' sales in each country rather than
their total foreign sales. Data come from FactSet Revere. Columns (5)-(8) of Table IA.15
show that the estimates using individual country sales are similar to those in Table 3.
   In our baseline specifications we winsorize the explanatory variables as well as the depen-
dent variables at the top and bottom 1%, but we do not winsorize our international exposure
variables since these are bounded between zero and one. In Table IA.16 we repeat our base-
line regressions with international exposure variables winsorized at the top and bottom 1%
of the distribution. Our results remain qualitatively unchanged.
   In Table IA.17, we check the robustness of our results to alternative methods to cluster
the standard errors. Our results are robust when we cluster the standard errors at the fund
family level and at the fund and year (two way) level. Table IA.17 also presents the results
using the Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional regression approach. The results are also robust to
this alternative estimation method.
   The data used in this study allow us to begin our sample period in 2000 but the earlier

                                             26
years of the sample are dominated by U.S. funds. In order to obtain a more balanced
distribution of countries, our baseline regressions focus on the 2005-2015 period. Table IA.18
shows that the results are robust when we use the extended sample period, 2000-2015. We
also check the robustness of our results in two subperiods: 2005-2010 and 2011-2015. Table
IA.18 reports the results, which suggest that our findings are not specific to a particular time
period.
   The regional subsample analysis in Table 6 shows that our indirect international exposure
measure is positively associated with fund performance regardless of the fund's geographic
focus. We also restrict our sample to mutual funds domiciled in the U.S. to check if our
results continue to hold in this sample, which is often the sample used in the mutual fund
literature. Table IA.19 reports the results for the samples of U.S. funds and non-U.S. funds.
Our baseline results hold in the non-U.S. sample both with and without fund-fixed effects.
Similarly, indirect international exposure is positively correlated with fund performance in
the sample of U.S. funds, but the relation is statistically insignificant in the cross section.



8. Conclusion


   We show that mutual funds worldwide have a large indirect exposure to international
stock markets through their holdings of home-based firms with foreign operations. We show
that the home bias in mutual fund portfolios is less severe when we take into account that
firms source revenues from foreign operations.
   We find that indirect international exposure improves future fund performance. This ef-
fect seems to be driven by fund manager skill, rather than the performance of multinationals.
The positive effect of indirect international exposure on fund performance is concentrated
in funds with higher transaction and information costs such as funds that belong to small
families, funds that invest in small stocks and growth stocks, and funds more exposed to less
developed capital markets. These findings are consistent with the hypothesis that transac-

                                               27
tion and information costs impair international portfolio diversification and help to explain
the home bias phenomenon.
   Our results provide a new link between international portfolio diversification and inter-
national corporate diversification. We conclude that international corporate diversification
can play an important role in overcoming barriers to investing overseas and reducing home
bias beyond the effect of international portfolio diversification.




                                               28
References


Ahearne, Alan, William Griever, and Francis Warnock, 2004, Information costs and home
  bias: An analysis of US holdings of foreign equities, Journal of International Economics
  62, 313­336.

Amihud, Yakov, and Ruslan Goyenko, 2013, Mutual fund's R2 as predictor of performance,
  Review of Financial Studies 26, 667­694.

Bae, Joon Woo, Redouane Elkamhi, and Mikhail Simutin, 2019, The best of both worlds:
  Accessing emerging economies via developed markets, Journal of Finance 74, 2579­2617.

Bekaert, Geert, Campbell Harvey, Andrea Kiguel, and Xiaozheng Wang, 2016, Globalization
  and asset returns, Annual Review of Financial Economics 8, 221­288.

Bekaert, Geert, Robert Hodrick, and Xiaoyan Zhang, 2009, International stock return co-
  movements, The Journal of Finance 64, 2591­2626.

Bekaert, Geert, and Michael Urias, 1996, Diversification, integration and emerging market
  closed-end funds, Journal of Finance 51, 835­869.

Bhagwat, Vineet, Jonathan Brogaard, and Brandon Julio, 2020, A BIT goes a long way:
  Bilateral investment treaties and cross-border mergers, Journal of Financial Economics,
  forthcoming.

Brewer, H. L., 1981, Investor benefits from corporate international diversification, Journal
  of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 16, 113­126.

Cai, Fang, and Francis Warnock, 2012, Foreign exposure through domestic equities, Finance
  Research Letters 9, 8­20.

Carhart, Mark, 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance 52,
  57­82.

                                             29
Chang, Sungyong, Bruce Kogut, and Jae-Suk Yang, 2016, Global diversification discount and
  its discontents: A bit of self-selection makes a world of difference, Strategic Management
  Journal 37, 2254­2274.

Chen, Joseph, Harrison Hong, Ming Huang, and Jeffrey Kubik, 2004, Does fund size erode
  mutual fund performance? The role of liquidity and organization, American Economic
  Review 94, 1276­1302.

Chinn, Menzie, and Hiro Ito, 2006, What matters for financial development? Capital con-
  trols, institutions, and interactions, Journal of Development Economics 81, 163­192.

Cohen, Lauren, and Dong Lou, 2012, Complicated firms, Journal of Financial Economics
  104, 383­400.

Cooper, Ian, Piet Sercu, and Rosanne Vanp´
                                         ee, 2013, The equity home bias puzzle: A survey,
  Foundations and Trends in Finance 7, 289­416.

Cremers, Martijn, Miguel Ferreira, Pedro Matos, and Laura Starks, 2016, Indexing and
  active fund management: International evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 120,
  539­560.

Cremers, Martijn, and Antti Petajisto, 2009, How active is your fund manager? A new
  measure that predicts performance, Review of Financial Studies 22, 3329­3365.

Dahlquist, Magnus, Lee Pinkowitz, Ren´
                                     e Stulz, and Rohan Williamson, 2003, Corporate
  governance and the home bias, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 38, 87­
  110.

Daniel, Kent, Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1997, Measuring mutual
  fund performance with characteristic-based benchmarks, Journal of Finance 52, 1035­
  1058.



                                            30
Denis, David, Diane Denis, and Keven Yost, 2002, Global diversification, industrial diversi-
  fication, and firm value, Journal of Finance 57, 1951­1979.

DeSantis, Giorgio, 1994, Asset pricing and portfolio diversification: Evidence from emerging
  financial markets, in Mike Howell, ed., Investing in Emergine Markets (Euromoney Books,
  London).

Doshi, Hitesh, Redouane Elkamhi, and Mikhail Simutin, 2015, Managerial activeness and
  mutual fund performance, Review of Asset Pricing Studies 5, 156­184.

Errunza, Vihang, Ked Hogan, and Mao-Wei Hung, 1999, Can the gains from international
  diversification be achieved without trading abroad?, Journal of Finance 54, 2075­2107.

Fatemi, Ali, 1984, Shareholder benefits from corporate international diversification, Journal
  of Finance 39, 1325­1344.

Ferreira, Miguel, Aneel Keswani, Ant´
                                    onio Miguel, and Sofia Ramos, 2013, The determinants
  of mutual fund performance: A cross-country study, Review of Finance 17, 483­525.

Ferreira, Miguel, and Pedro Matos, 2008, The colors of investors' money: The role of insti-
  tutional investors around the world, Journal of Financial Economics 88, 499­533.

Ferreira, Miguel, Pedro Matos, and Pedro Pires, 2018, Asset management within commercial
  banking groups: International evidence, Journal of Finance 73, 2181­2227.

French, Kenneth, and James Poterba, 1991, Investor diversification and international equity
  markets, American Economic Review 81, 222­226.

Gil-Bazo, Javier, and Pablo Ruiz-Verd´
                                     u, 2009, The relation between price and performance
  in the mutual fund industry, Journal of Finance 64, 2153­2183.

Huberman, Gur, and Shmuel Kandel, 1987, Mean-variance spanning, Journal of Finance 42,
  873­888.

                                             31
Investment Company Institute, 2015, Investment Company Fact Book. (Washington DC).

Jang, Yeejin, 2017, International corporate diversification and financial flexibility, Review of
  Financial Studies 30, 4133­4178.

Kacperczyk, Marcin, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng, 2005, On the industry concentration of
  actively managed equity mutual funds, Journal of Finance 60, 1983­2011.

Kacperczyk, Marcin, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng, 2008, Unobserved actions of mutual
  funds, The Review of Financial Studies 21, 2379­2416.

Karolyi, G. Andrew, and Ren´
                           e Stulz, 2003, Are financial assets priced locally or globally?,
  Handbook of the Economics of Finance 1, 975­1020.

Kho, Bong-Chan, Ren´
                   e Stulz, and Francis Warnock, 2009, Financial globalization, gover-
  nance, and the evolution of the home bias, Journal of Accounting Research 47, 597­635.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1998, Law
  and finance, Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113­1155.

Moshirian, Fariborz, Peter Pham, Shu Tian, and Eliza Wu, 2018, Foreign ties that bind:
  Cross-border firm expansions and fund portfolio allocation around the world, Working
  Paper, University of New South Wales.

P´
 astor, Lubos, Robert Stambaugh, and Lucian Taylor, 2015, Scale and skill in active man-
  agement, Journal of Financial Economics 116, 23­45.

Schultz, Paul, 2010, Rational cross-sectional differences in market efficiency: Evidence from
  mutual fund returns, Journal of Financial and Quantiative Analysis 45, 847­881.

Stulz, Ren´
          e, 2005, The limits of financial globalization, Journal of Finance 60, 1595­1638.

Tesar, Linda, and Ingrid Werner, 1995, Home bias and high turnover, Journal of Interna-
  tional Money and Finance 14, 467­492.

                                              32
Van Nieuwerburgh, Stijn, and Laura Veldkamp, 2009, Information immobility and the home
  bias puzzle, Journal of Finance 64, 1187­1215.




                                           33
                                             Panel A: Domestic Funds



                   .7
                   .6
                   .5
                   .4
                   .3
                   .2
                   .1
                   0




                    2005q1    2006q3      2008q1        2009q3      2011q1     2012q3       2014q1           2015q3

                                 Indirect International Exposure             Direct International Exposure




                                                   Panel B: All Funds
                  .7
                  .6
                  .5
                  .4
                  .3
                  .2
                  .1
                  0




                    2005q1    2006q3      2008q1        2009q3      2011q1     2012q3       2014q1           2015q3

                                 Indirect International Exposure             Direct International Exposure




Figure 1: International Exposure Measures

This figure shows the average indirect and direct international exposure measures by quarter. Indi-
rect International Exposure is the fraction of the funds holdings invested in domestic stocks weighted by
foreign sales. Direct International Exposure is the fraction of the funds holdings invested in foreign stocks.
The sample in Panel A consists of actively managed domestic equity mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015
period. The sample in Panel B consists of actively managed domestic and international equity mutual funds
over the 2005 to 2015 period.



                                                               34
Table 1: Summary Statistics
This table presents mean, standard deviation, 25th percentile, median, 75th percentile, and number
of observations for each variable. The sample in Panel A consists of actively managed domestic equity
mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015 period. The sample in Panel B consists of actively managed domestic
and international equity mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015 period. Variable definitions are provided in
Table A.1 in the Appendix.

                                             Panel A: Domestic Funds
                                                      Standard     25th              75th        Number of
                                              Mean Deviation Percentile   Median   Percentile   Observations
   Four-Factor Alpha (%)                      -0.042    2.916    -1.325   -0.045     1.241        456,235
   Characteristic-Adjusted Return (%)         0.380     2.798    -1.010   0.358      1.748        456,214
   Benchmark-Adjusted Return (%)              0.003     1.967    -0.913   -0.017     0.901        455,409
   Indirect International Exposure            0.323     0.156    0.221    0.305      0.405        456,235
   Direct International Exposure              0.086     0.121    0.009    0.052      0.111        456,235
   Fund Age                                  14.458    11.127    7.250    11.750    17.833        456,235
   Fund TNA ($ million)                        917      4,205     34       136        547         456,235
   Family TNA ($ million)                    39,908    131,357    724     4,594     23,724        456,235
   Total Expense Ratio (%)                    1.525     0.680    1.073    1.429      1.801        456,235
   Flow (%)                                   -0.311    5.239    -1.681   -0.518     0.615        456,212
   Total Load                                 2.187     2.398    0.000    1.738      3.500        456,235
   Number of Countries of Sale                1.166     0.888    1.000    1.000      1.000        456,235
   Team Managed                               0.510     0.500    0.000    1.000      1.000        456,235
   Four-Factor Alpha (Global)                 -0.026    3.231    -1.669   -0.019     1.612        456,235
   Eight-Factor Alpha (Global + Regional)     -0.011    3.010    -1.370   -0.016     1.333        456,235
   Four-Factor Alpha (Country)                -0.034    2.530    -1.057   -0.044     0.987        456,235
   Eight-Factor Alpha (Country + Regional)    -0.045    2.559    -1.127   -0.062     1.025        456,235
   Sharpe Ratio                               0.398     3.581    -2.009   0.681      2.907        456,230
   Information Ratio                          -0.113    3.975    -2.550   -0.092     2.351        456,235
   Total Risk                                 0.181     0.089    0.115    0.159      0.227        456,230
   Idiosyncratic Risk                         0.082     0.056    0.042    0.064      0.104        456,235
   Active Share                               0.724     0.224    0.588    0.769      0.913        403,233




                                                       35
                                           Panel B: All Funds
                                                 Standard     25th               75th        Number of
                                          Mean Deviation Percentile   Median   Percentile   Observations
Four-Factor Alpha (%)                     -0.114    2.759    -1.352   -0.126     1.113        902,248
Characteristic-Adjusted Return (%)        0.324     2.610    -0.992   0.292      1.607        902,083
Benchmark-Adjusted Return (%)             -0.036    2.016    -0.982   -0.040     0.917        898,356
Indirect International Exposure           0.193     0.187    0.007    0.171      0.320        902,248
Direct International Exposure             0.477     0.431    0.050    0.293      0.984        902,248
Fund Age                                  13.482    9.901    6.917    11.083    16.917        902,248
Fund TNA ($ million)                       726      3,697     31       111        403         902,248
Family TNA ($ million)                    30,410   107,248    847     4,654     21,217        902,248
Total Expense Ratio (%)                   1.616     0.663    1.176    1.550      1.960        902,248
Flow (%)                                  -0.281    5.443    -1.718   -0.481     0.690        902,198
Total Load                                2.609     2.558    0.025    2.000      4.025        902,248
Number of Countries of Sale               1.456     1.575    1.000    1.000      1.000        902,248
Team Managed                              0.482     0.500    0.000    0.000      1.000        902,248
Domestic Fund                             0.506     0.500    0.000    1.000      1.000        902,248
Global Fund                               0.170     0.375    0.000    0.000      0.000        902,248
Regional Fund                             0.248     0.432    0.000    0.000      0.000        902,248
Foreign Fund                              0.077     0.266    0.000    0.000      0.000        902,248
Four-Factor Alpha (Global)                -0.123    3.027    -1.650   -0.125     1.386        902,248
Eight-Factor Alpha (Global + Regional)    -0.098    2.828    -1.383   -0.107     1.178        902,248
Four-Factor Alpha (Country)               -0.105    2.536    -1.192   -0.114     0.973        902,248
Eight-Factor Alpha (Country + Regional)   -0.113    2.568    -1.243   -0.124     1.006        902,248
Sharpe Ratio                              0.347     3.578    -2.038   0.592      2.861        902,242
Information Ratio                         -0.277    3.981    -2.723   -0.270     2.181        902,248
Total Risk                                0.181     0.087    0.115    0.158      0.227        902,242
Idiosyncratic Risk                        0.077     0.051    0.041    0.062      0.096        902,248
Total Expense Ratio                       1.613     0.666    1.163    1.547      1.968        901,976
Active Share                              0.734     0.216    0.604    0.781      0.912        791,994




                                                   36
Table 2: Univariate Sort Results
This table presents average risk-adjusted performance for portfolios of mutual funds. Fund perfor-
mance is the monthly alpha from the four-factor model estimated using regional factors based on a fund's
investment region. In each month, funds are split into five quintiles based on last quarter's indirect and
direct international exposure measures. The Direct International Exposure is the fraction of the funds
holdings invested in foreign stocks. The Indirect International Exposure is the fraction of the funds holdings
invested in domestic stocks weighted by foreign sales. The sample in columns (1) and (2) consists of actively
managed domestic equity mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015 period. The sample in columns (3) and (4)
consists of actively managed domestic and international equity mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015 period.
Variable definitions are provided in Table A.1 in the Appendix. Newey-West standard errors with 12 lags
are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                           Domestic Funds                       All Funds
                                         Indirect      Direct        Indirect      Direct
                                      International International International International
                                        Exposure      Exposure      Exposure      Exposure
                                          (1)              (2)           (3)                (4)
                  Quintile 1             -0.103           -0.038        -0.198          -0.048
                                        (0.013)         (0.013)        (0.007)          (0.008)
                  Quintile 2             -0.079           -0.056        -0.186          -0.022
                                        (0.009)         (0.009)        (0.006)          (0.005)
                  Quintile 3             -0.060           -0.023        -0.119          -0.110
                                        (0.008)         (0.007)        (0.007)          (0.006)
                  Quintile 4             -0.053           -0.007        -0.077          -0.192
                                        (0.008)         (0.007)        (0.006)          (0.005)
                  Quintile 5             0.086            -0.087        0.012           -0.197
                                        (0.009)         (0.009)        (0.006)          (0.007)
                                                                               
            Quintile 5 - Quintile 1     0.189             -0.048       0.210           -0.149
                                        (0.076)         (0.096)        (0.046)          (0.058)




                                                     37
Table 3: Baseline Regression Results
This table presents estimates of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of fund performance. The
dependent variable in columns (1) and (2) is the alpha from the four-factor model estimated using regional
factors based on a fund's investment region in each month. The dependent variable in columns (3) and (4)
is the characteristic-adjusted return, defined as the fund portfolio-weighted average of the individual stock
characteristic-adjusted returns, i.e., the difference between the individual stock return and the return of
the size/book-to-market/foreign revenue portfolio to which a stock belongs in each month. The portfolios
are estimated using five quintiles based on size by five quintiles based on book-to-market ratio. These 25
portfolios are further split into two groups based on whether foreign revenues exceed 25% of total revenues
or not. The dependent variable in columns (5) and (6) is the benchmark-adjusted return, defined as the the
difference between the fund's return and the return on its benchmark in each month. Indirect International
Exposure is the fraction of the funds holdings invested in domestic stocks weighted by foreign sales. All
control variables are lagged by one period. The sample in Panel A consists of actively managed domestic
equity mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015 period. The sample in Panel B consists of actively managed
domestic and international equity mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015 period. Robust t -statistics adjusted
for clustering at the fund level are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                           Panel A: Domestic Funds
                                                                 Characteristic-             Benchmark-
                                              Four-Factor          Adjusted                   Adjusted
                                                 Alpha              Return                     Return
                                             (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)          (6)
                                                                                               
      Indirect International Exposure      0.483       1.118       0.273      0.503       0.141       0.423
                                           (7.467)     (10.727)    (3.467)    (4.238)     (2.605)      (5.386)
                                                                                                   
      Direct International Exposure        -0.151       -0.157      0.022      0.127      -0.097       -0.102
                                           (-2.571)    (-1.373)    (0.312)    (1.105)     (-1.843)    (-1.064)
      log(1+Fund Age)                      -0.005      -0.134      -0.000      -0.099      0.000      0.119
                                           (-0.709)    (-2.655)    (-0.032)   (-1.794)    (0.074)      (3.281)
      log(Fund TNA)                        -0.015      -0.242      -0.022     -0.163      -0.009      -0.163
                                           (-4.935)    (-21.414)   (-5.340)   (-14.928)   (-3.529)    (-22.180)
      log(Family TNA)                      0.016       -0.085      0.017      -0.054      0.022       -0.052
                                           (6.951)     (-5.086)    (4.843)    (-3.099)    (11.413)    (-4.527)
      Total Expense Ratio                  -0.085      -0.124      0.069       -0.041     -0.052       0.037
                                           (-7.170)    (-3.994)    (4.843)    (-1.335)    (-5.110)     (1.773)
      Total Load                           -0.000       -0.013     -0.012      -0.003     -0.004      -0.021
                                           (-0.182)    (-1.147)    (-4.067)   (-0.249)    (-1.985)    (-2.141)
      log(1+Number of Countries of Sale)    0.024      12.478       0.023     4.450       0.043       8.087
                                           (1.379)     (103.011)   (1.189)    (38.149)    (3.063)     (104.673)
      Team Managed                          0.009       -0.177     -0.019     -1.422       0.010       -0.736
                                           (1.066)     (-0.198)    (-1.379)   (-1.972)    (1.314)     (-1.196)
      Benchmark FE                           Yes          No         Yes         No         Yes          No
      Country FE                             Yes          No         Yes         No         Yes          No
      Time FE                                Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
      Fund FE                                No          Yes         No         Yes         No          Yes
      Observations                         456,235     456,235     456,214    456,214     455,409     455,409
      Adjusted R2                           0.039       0.040       0.090      0.103       0.028       0.035




                                                       38
                                        Panel B: All Funds
                                                               Characteristic-         Benchmark-
                                        Four-Factor              Adjusted               Adjusted
                                          Alpha                   Return                 Return
                                       (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)
Indirect International Exposure      0.377      1.137        0.143      0.403       0.215      0.583
                                     (6.843)    (12.279)     (2.168)    (3.834)     (4.531)     (8.125)
Direct International Exposure         0.005     0.252         0.020     0.198        0.050      0.102
                                     (0.124)     (3.322)     (0.445)    (2.443)     (1.554)     (1.553)
log(1+Fund Age)                       0.007     -0.087        0.010     -0.079       0.007      0.061
                                     (1.275)    (-2.406)     (1.402)    (-2.056)    (1.486)     (2.272)
log(Fund TNA)                        -0.017     -0.241      -0.020      -0.142      -0.007     -0.149
                                     (-7.884)   (-30.083)    (-7.047)   (-19.658)   (-3.633)   (-27.056)
log(Family TNA)                      0.016      -0.053       0.015      -0.050      0.020      -0.029
                                     (9.238)    (-4.486)     (5.808)    (-4.177)    (12.688)   (-3.328)
Total Expense Ratio                  -0.071     -0.061       0.057       -0.027     -0.057      -0.004
                                     (-9.639)   (-3.168)     (6.659)    (-1.429)    (-9.000)   (-0.283)
Total Load                           -0.002      -0.009     -0.010       -0.003     -0.004      -0.010
                                     (-1.551)   (-0.987)     (-5.459)   (-0.379)    (-3.046)   (-1.532)
                                                                                         
log(1+Number of Countries of Sale)   0.045      12.640       0.102      4.297       0.052      8.338
                                     (4.757)    (144.853)    (8.359)    (54.092)    (6.713)    (142.522)
                                                                                            
Team Managed                         0.025       -0.511      -0.013      -0.857     0.014       -0.034
                                     (4.073)    (-0.941)     (-1.474)   (-1.828)    (2.544)    (-0.128)
Global Fund                          -0.031                   0.006                  0.040
                                     (-1.115)                (0.191)                (1.574)
Regional Fund                        -0.040                  -0.029                  0.033
                                     (-1.405)                (-0.931)               (1.294)
Foreign Fund                          0.007                   0.020                  -0.011
                                     (0.263)                 (0.594)                (-0.480)
Benchmark FE                           Yes         No          Yes         No         Yes         No
Country FE                             Yes         No          Yes         No         Yes         No
Time FE                                Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes
Fund FE                                No         Yes          No         Yes         No         Yes
Observations                         902,248    902,248      902,083    902,083     898,356    898,356
Adjusted R2                           0.038      0.040        0.100      0.111       0.035      0.040




                                                39
Table 4: Alternative Factor Models
This table presents estimates of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of fund performance. The
dependent variable is the alpha estimated from alternative factor models in each month. Global refers to
the four-factor model estimated using global factors. Global + Regional refers to the eight-factor model
estimated using both global factors and regional factors based on a fund's investment region. Country refers
to the four-factor model estimated using country-specific factors based on a fund's investment country
(or region). Country + Regional refers to the eight-factor model estimated using both country-specific
factors and regional factors. Indirect International Exposure is the fraction of the funds holdings invested
in domestic stocks weighted by foreign sales. All control variables are lagged by one period. The sample
consists of actively managed domestic equity mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015 period. Robust t -statistics
adjusted for clustering at the fund level are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                         Panel A: Global Factors
                                                            Global          Global + Regional
                                                      (1)            (2)      (3)         (4)
                                                                                    
             Indirect International Exposure        0.624       1.285       0.558      1.228
                                                    (9.258)    (12.044)     (7.979)    (11.666)
             Controls                                 Yes            Yes      Yes        Yes
             Benchmark FE                             Yes            No       Yes         No
             Country FE                               Yes            No       Yes         No
             Time FE                                  Yes            Yes      Yes        Yes
             Fund FE                                  No             Yes      No         Yes
             Observations                           456,235     456,235     456,235    456,235
                          2
             Adjusted R                              0.038       0.038       0.037      0.039



                                   Panel B: Country-Specific Factors
                                                          Country          Country + Regional
                                                      (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)
                                                                               
             Indirect International Exposure       0.115       0.463       0.190       0.498
                                                   (2.069)     (5.215)     (3.444)     (5.788)
             Controls                                Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
             Benchmark FE                            Yes         No          Yes         No
             Country (Regional) FE                   Yes         No          Yes         No
             Time FE                                 Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
             Fund FE                                  No         Yes         No         Yes
             Observations                          456,235     456,235     456,235     456,235
                          2
             Adjusted R                             0.049       0.050       0.052       0.054



                                                     40
Table 5: Effect of Fund Characteristics
This table presents estimates of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of fund performance. The
dependent variable is the alpha from the four-factor model estimated using regional factors based on a
fund's investment region in each month. Indirect International Exposure is the fraction of the funds holdings
invested in domestic stocks weighted by foreign sales. Funds are classified into three groups based on their
lagged family TNA and fund TNA in each country of domicile and month. Funds are also classified based
on their style in terms of market capitalization (Large, Mid, Multi or Small) and book-to-market ratio
(Value, Core or Growth) of portfolio holdings. The regressions include interactions of indirect international
exposure with indicator variables for terciles of family TNA, terciles of fund TNA or fund style as well
as their direct effect (coefficients not shown). All control variables are lagged by one period. The sample
consists of actively managed domestic equity mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015 period. Robust t -statistics
adjusted for clustering at the fund level are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                               Fund Family TNA          Fund TNA          Firm Market Cap           Fund Style
                                                 (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
                                                                                                                        
 Indirect International Exposure               0.579      1.165      0.481      1.004     0.232      0.749      0.223      0.779
                                               (7.537)    (8.448)    (6.075)    (7.510)   (2.037)    (5.481)    (2.365)    (6.201)
 Indirect International Exposure × Tercile 2   -0.048      0.117     -0.023      0.062
                                               (-0.644)   (0.770)    (-0.290)   (0.454)
 Indirect International Exposure × Tercile 3   -0.234     -0.307     -0.020      0.207
                                               (-3.276)   (-1.650)   (-0.278)   (1.267)
 Indirect International Exposure × Large                                                  -0.275     -0.478
                                                                                          (-1.940)   (-2.454)
 Indirect International Exposure × Value                                                                        -0.215     -1.047
                                                                                                                (-0.848)   (-3.470)
 Benchmark FE                                    Yes        No         Yes        No        Yes        No         Yes        No
 Country FE                                      Yes        No         Yes        No        Yes        No         Yes        No
 Time FE                                         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
 Fund FE                                         No         Yes        No         Yes       No         Yes        No         Yes
 Observations                                  456,235    456,235    456,235    456,235   254,853    254,853    254,853    254,853
 Adjusted R2                                    0.039      0.040      0.039      0.040     0.066      0.070      0.066      0.070




                                                              41
Table 6: Sample Splits by Fund Investment Region
This table presents estimates of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of fund performance. The
dependent variable is the alpha from the four-factor model estimated using regional factors based on
a fund's investment region in each month. Indirect International Exposure is the fraction of the funds
holdings invested in domestic stocks weighted by foreign sales. The estimates are show separately by fund
investment region. All control variables are lagged by one period. The sample consists of actively managed
domestic equity mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015 period. Robust t -statistics adjusted for clustering at
the fund level are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
level, respectively.

                                    North America         Asia-Pacific               Europe            Emerging
                                     (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)         (6)       (7)       (8)
                                                                                                       
 Indirect International Exposure   0.221      1.235     0.893     1.133      0.618      1.246      1.283     1.959
                                   (2.748)    (6.887)   (2.837)   (2.165)    (4.130)     (6.939)   (7.871)   (10.229)
 Controls                            Yes        Yes       Yes      Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes
 Benchmark FE                        Yes        No        Yes       No         Yes            No     Yes       No
 Country FE                          Yes        No        Yes       No         Yes            No     Yes       No
 Time FE                             Yes        Yes       Yes      Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes
 Fund FE                             No         Yes       No       Yes         No         Yes        No        Yes
 Observations                      262,749    262,749   28,905    28,905     99,859      99,859    64,699    64,699
              2
 Adjusted R                         0.024      0.027     0.179    0.185       0.072       0.073     0.360     0.363




                                                        42
     Table 7: Effect of Investment Country Characteristics

     This table presents estimates of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of fund performance. The dependent variable is the alpha from
     the four-factor model estimated using regional factors based on a fund's investment region in each month. The exposure measures are calculated
     based on FactSet Revere data, which provides a breakdown of foreign revenues by each individual country. Funds are required to have at least 75%
     of their stock holdings value with non-missing total foreign revenues. Indirect International Exposure is the fraction of the funds holdings invested
     in domestic stocks weighted by foreign sales. Indirect International Exposure to Developed Markets is the fraction of foreign revenues generated in
     developed markets and is calculated based on a dummy variable that takes a value of one if the country in which the revenues are generated is
     above-median for each developed market proxy, and zero otherwise. The developed market proxies are stock market capitalization-to-GDP, stock
     market turnover, financial openness, MSCI developed market index membership, and legal enforcement. Stock market turnover is the ratio of
     the value of total shares traded to the average real market capitalization. Financial openness is proxied by the index of Chinn and Ito (2006),
     which measures a country's degree of capital account openness. Legal enforcement is based on the following five variables as defined in La Porta
     et al. (1998): efficiency of the judicial system, rule of law, corruption, risk of expropriation (outright confiscation and forced nationalization by the
     government), and the likelihood of contract repudiation by the government (the variables are rescaled to range between zero to ten and higher values
     correspond to superior levels of legal enforcement). The sample consists of actively managed domestic equity mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015
     period. Variable definitions are provided in Table A.1 in the Appendix. Robust t -statistics adjusted for clustering at the fund level are reported in
     parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
43




                                                               Stock Market           Stock Market            Financial                 MSCI                  Legal
                                                               Capitalization            Turnover             Openness             Membership           Enforcement
                                                               (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)          (8)      (9)           (10)
                                                                                                                                                           
      Indirect International Exposure                        1.261       2.873      0.937      2.355      0.852      2.386      0.675      2.282      0.697      2.263
                                                             (10.213)    (17.205)   (7.564)    (14.223)   (7.074)    (14.598)   (6.034)    (14.397)   (5.923)    (13.969)
                                                                                                                             
      Indirect International Exposure to Developed Markets   -0.634      -0.961     -0.281     -0.247     -0.235     -0.338     -0.055      -0.218    -0.072      -0.159
                                                             (-6.939)    (-8.426)   (-3.236)   (-2.106)   (-2.388)   (-2.412)   (-0.497)   (-1.411)   (-0.709)   (-1.103)
      Controls                                                 Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes      Yes           Yes
      Benchmark FE                                             Yes         No         Yes        No         Yes        No         Yes          No       Yes           No
      Country FE                                               Yes         No         Yes        No         Yes        No         Yes          No       Yes           No
      Time FE                                                  Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes      Yes           Yes
      Fund FE                                                  No          Yes        No         Yes        No         Yes        No           Yes      No            Yes
      Observations                                           372,028     372,024    372,028    372,024    372,028    372,024    372,028    372,024    372,028    372,024
      Adj. R2                                                 0.044       0.047      0.044      0.047      0.044      0.047      0.044      0.047      0.044      0.047
Table 8: Fund Performance and Risk
This table presents estimates of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of fund performance and
risk. The dependent variables are the Sharpe ratio, information ratio, total risk and idiosyncratic risk
in each month. Sharpe Ratio is the ratio of the annualized excess fund return (over the risk free rate)
to the annualized standard deviation of fund return using a 12-month window. Information Ratio is the
ratio of the annualized four-factor alpha to the annualized standard deviation of the residuals from the
four-factor model estimated using regional factors based on a fund's investment region in each month using
a 12-month window. Total Risk is the annualized standard deviation of fund return using a 12-month
window. Idiosyncratic Risk is the annualized standard deviation of residuals from the four-factor model
using a 12-month window. Indirect International Exposure is the fraction of the funds holdings invested
in domestic stocks weighted by foreign sales. All control variables are lagged by one period. The sample
consists of actively managed domestic equity mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015 period. Robust t -statistics
adjusted for clustering at the fund level are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                     Sharpe Ratio       Information Ratio      Total Risk         Idiosyncratic Risk
                                     (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)         (7)        (8)
                                                                                                          
 Indirect International Exposure   0.176      0.408     0.365     1.120      0.007    -0.011      -0.044     -0.038
                                   (3.328)    (4.741)   (4.628)   (9.116)   (1.061)   (-2.267)    (-6.406)   (-9.018)
 Controls                            Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes
 Benchmark FE                        Yes        No        Yes       No       Yes        No          Yes        No
 Country FE                          Yes        No        Yes       No       Yes        No          Yes        No
 Time FE                             Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes
 Fund FE                             No         Yes       No        Yes       No        Yes         No         Yes
 Observations                      456,230    456,230   456,235   456,235   456,230   456,230     456,235    456,235
 Adjusted R2                        0.670      0.671     0.030     0.034     0.764     0.829       0.791      0.921




                                                         44
Table 9: Portfolio Spanning Tests
This table presents estimates of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of returns on a portfolio of
international funds on the returns of two domestic fund portfolios: funds with below-median indirect
international exposure, and funds with above-median indirect international exposure. The fund portfolios
are weighted by TNA. The sample consists of actively managed domestic and international equity funds
over the 2005 to 2015 period. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.



                                                                   U.S.        Europe        Asia-Pacific
                                                                    (1)           (2)             (3)
 Return on Below-Median Domestic Funds (1 )                       0.377        0.139           0.310
                                                                  (1.924)      (2.310)          (3.176)
 Return on Above-Median Domestic Funds (2 )                      0.684         0.785           0.556
                                                                  (3.267)      (13.698)         (5.166)
 Constant ()                                                      -0.001        -0.001           -0.000
                                                                 (-0.737)      (-1.403)        (-0.115)
 Observations                                                       132           132             132
                2
 Adjusted R                                                        0.864         0.969           0.816
 H0 :  = 0
    F -statistic                                                   0.544         1.968           0.013
    p-value                                                       (0.462)      (0.163)          (0.908)
 H0 : 1 + 2 = 1
    F -statistic                                                   2.407      25.247           13.343
    p-value                                                       (0.123)      (0.000)          (0.000)
 H0 :  = 0, 1 + 2 = 1
    F -statistic                                                   1.325      14.555           6.853
    p-value                                                       (0.269)      (0.000)          (0.001)




                                                     45
Table 10: Total Expense Ratio
This table presents estimates of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of the total expense ratio.
The dependent variable is the fund total expense ratio in each month (i.e., annual expense ratio divided
by 12). Indirect International Exposure is the fraction of the funds holdings invested in domestic stocks
weighted by foreign sales. All control variables are lagged by one period. The sample consists of actively
managed domestic equity mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015 period. Variable definitions are provided in
Table A.1 in the Appendix. F -statistic refers to the test of equality between the coefficient estimates for
direct and indirect international exposure. Robust t -statistics adjusted for clustering at the fund level are
reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                                                    (1)         (2)
                       Indirect International Exposure            -0.008     -0.015
                                                                 (-1.495)    (-4.265)
                                                                         
                       Direct International Exposure             0.033         0.000
                                                                 (5.863)      (0.117)
                                                                          
                       Past Performance (%)                      -0.000       -0.000
                                                                 (-5.268)    (-0.311)
                       log(1+Fund Age)                            0.001      0.004
                                                                 (1.139)      (2.784)
                       log(Fund TNA)                             -0.005      -0.004
                                                                (-15.309)    (-13.177)
                                                                          
                       log(Family TNA)                           -0.003      -0.001
                                                                 (-9.480)    (-2.682)
                                                                          
                       Flow (%)                                   -0.000      0.000
                                                                 (-1.831)     (2.429)
                                                                         
                       Total Load                                0.006       0.002
                                                                 (20.309)     (3.426)
                                                                          
                       log(1+Number of Countries of Sale)        0.006       -0.014
                                                                 (2.184)     (-4.740)
                                                                          
                       Team Managed                              -0.005        0.111
                                                                 (-4.406)     (1.575)
                       Benchmark FE                                Yes          No
                       Country FE                                  Yes          No
                       Time FE                                     Yes          Yes
                       Fund FE                                      No          Yes
                       Observations                              456,083     456,079
                                      2
                       Adjusted R                                 0.594        0.931
                                                                         
                       F -statistic                              33.07       14.68
                       p-value                                   (0.000)      (0.000)




                                                     46
Table 11: Passive Funds
This table presents estimates of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of fund performance. The
dependent variable in columns (1) and (2) is the alpha from the four-factor model estimated using regional
factors based on a fund's investment region in each month. The dependent variable in columns (3) and (4)
is the characteristic-adjusted return, defined as the fund portfolio-weighted average of the individual stock
characteristic-adjusted returns, i.e., the difference between the individual stock return and the return of
the size/book-to-market/foreign revenue portfolio to which a stock belongs in each month. The portfolios
are estimated using five quintiles based on size by five quintiles based on book-to-market ratio. These 25
portfolios are further split into two groups based on whether foreign revenues exceed 25% of total revenues
or not. The dependent variable in columns (5) and (6) is the benchmark-adjusted return, defined as the the
difference between the fund's return and the return on its benchmark in each month. Indirect International
Exposure is the fraction of the funds holdings invested in domestic stocks weighted by foreign sales. All
control variables are lagged by one period. The sample consists of passive domestic equity mutual funds
over the 2005 to 2015 period with a maximum tracking error of 0.01. Robust t -statistics adjusted for
clustering at the fund level are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% level, respectively.

                                                                 Characteristic-       Benchmark-
                                              Four-Factor          Adjusted             Adjusted
                                                Alpha               Return               Return
                                              (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)
      Indirect International Exposure       0.928     0.690      0.018     -1.024     0.016     0.021
                                           (0.763)    (0.492)   (0.016)   (-0.891)   (0.581)   (0.729)
      Controls                               Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
      Benchmark FE                           Yes        No        Yes        No        Yes       No
      Country FE                             Yes        No        Yes        No        Yes       No
      Time FE                                Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
      Fund FE                                 No       Yes        No        Yes        No        Yes
      Observations                          15,010    15,009    15,010     15,009    15,010    15,009
                   2
      Adjusted R                            0.151     0.146      0.484     0.484      0.254     0.277




                                                     47
Table 12: Fund Active Share
This table presents estimates of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of fund performance. The
dependent variable in columns (1) and (2) is the alpha from the four-factor model estimated using regional
factors based on a fund's investment region in each month. The dependent variable in columns (3) and (4)
is the characteristic-adjusted return, defined as the fund portfolio-weighted average of the individual stock
characteristic-adjusted returns, i.e., the difference between the individual stock return and the return of
the size/book-to-market/foreign revenue portfolio to which a stock belongs in each month. The portfolios
are estimated using five quintiles based on size by five quintiles based on book-to-market ratio. These 25
portfolios are further split into two groups based on whether foreign revenues exceed 25% of total revenues
or not. The dependent variable in columns (5) and (6) is the benchmark-adjusted return, defined as the the
difference between the fund's return and the return on its benchmark in each month. Indirect International
Exposure is the fraction of the funds holdings invested in domestic stocks weighted by foreign sales. Funds
are classified into three groups based on their lagged active share. The regressions include interactions of
indirect international exposure with indicator variables for terciles of active share as well as their direct
effect (coefficients not shown). All control variables are lagged by one period. The sample consists of
domestic equity mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015 period. Robust t -statistics adjusted for clustering at
the fund level are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
level, respectively.

                                                                        Characteristic-         Benchmark-
                                                  Four-Factor             Adjusted               Adjusted
                                                    Alpha                  Return                 Return
                                                  (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
                                                                                                     
 Indirect International Exposure               0.232        0.479      -0.487     -0.237     0.115      0.358
                                                (2.717)     (3.350)    (-4.679)   (-1.488)   (1.695)    (3.725)
                                                                            
 Indirect International Exposure × Tercile 2    0.194       0.340      0.480       0.104     -0.022     -0.142
                                                (2.259)     (1.890)    (4.245)    (0.514)    (-0.309)   (-1.119)
 Indirect International Exposure × Tercile 3   0.305        1.580      1.095      2.151       0.056     0.365
                                                (2.593)     (6.783)    (7.707)    (8.483)    (0.577)    (2.117)
 Controls                                        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
 Benchmark FE                                    Yes          No         Yes        No         Yes        No
 Country FE                                      Yes          No         Yes        No         Yes        No
 Time FE                                         Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
 Fund FE                                          No          Yes        No         Yes        No         Yes
 Observations                                  423,834      423,834    423,816    423,816    423,399    423,399
              2
 Adjusted R                                      0.038       0.038      0.097      0.110      0.030      0.038




                                                       48
                                                          Table A.1: Variable Definitions

     Variable                          Definition
                                       Alpha from the four-factor model estimated with 36 months of past fund return data and with regional factors based on a
     Four-Factor Alpha
                                       fund's investment region in each month (Lipper).
                                       Fund portfolio-weighted average of the individual stock characteristic-adjusted returns, i.e., the difference between the
     Characteristic-Adjusted Return    individual stock return and the return of the size/book-to-market/foreign revenue portfolio to which a stock belongs in
                                       each month (Lipper).
     Benchmark-Adjusted Return         Difference between the fund's return and the return on its benchmark in each month (Lipper).
                                       Fraction of the funds holdings invested in domestic stocks weighted by foreign sales (FactSet Fundamentals and
     Indirect International Exposure
                                       Ownership).
     Direct International Exposure     Fraction of the funds holdings invested in foreign stocks (FactSet Fundamentals and Ownership)
     Fund Age                          Number of years since the fund launch date (Lipper).
     Fund TNA                          Total net assets in millions of U.S. dollars (Lipper).
                                       Total net assets in millions of U.S. dollars of equity funds in the same management company excluding the own fund's
     Family TNA
                                       TNA (Lipper).
     Total Expense Ratio               Total annual expenses as a fraction of TNA (Lipper).
                                       Percentage growth in TNA in a quarter, net of internal growth (assuming reinvestment of dividends and distributions)
     Flow
                                       (Lipper).
49




     Total Load                        Sum of front- and back-end loads as a fraction of new investments (Lipper).
     Number of Countries of Sale       Number of countries in which the fund is offered for sale (Lipper).
     Team Managed                      Dummy variable that takes a value of one if the fund is managed by a team, and zero otherwise (Lipper).
                                       Ratio of the annualized excess fund return over the risk free rate to the annualized standard deviation of total return
     Sharpe Ratio
                                       estimated using a 12-month window in each month (Lipper).
                                       Ratio of the annualized four-factor alpha to the annualized standard deviation of the residuals from the four-factor model
     Information Ratio
                                       estimated based on regional factors in each month using a 12-month window(Lipper).
     Total risk                        Annualized standard deviation of fund return estimated using a 12-month window (Lipper).
                                       Annualized standard deviation of the residuals from the four-factor model estimated based on regional factors in each
     Idiosyncratic risk
                                       month using a 12-month window (Lipper).
     Active Share                      Fraction of a fund's portfolio holdings that differ from its benchmark index holdings (Factset Ownership).
              Internet Appendix


      How Global is Your Mutual Fund?
International Diversification from Multinationals

                   July 22, 2020
Table IA.1: Sample by Country and Year
This table presents the average number of funds by country and year. The sample in Panel A con-
sists of actively managed domestic equity mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015 period. The sample in Panel B
consists of actively managed domestic and international equity mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015 period.

                                         Panel A: Domestic Funds
 Country         2005     2006    2007     2008    2009    2010    2011    2012    2013    2014    2015
 Australia         9       21      28       32      49      53      57      55      44      41      38
 Austria           6       8        9       11      12      12      12      12      12      12      12
 Belgium           20      18      15       13      11      10      8       8       8        9       9
 Brazil                             1        1      27      62     104     127     117     115      87
 Canada           197     220     228       234    245     257     259     255     229     215      221
 China                                       2      3       4       4       4       4        4       6
 Denmark           12      16      16       15      18      18      16      17      18      17      21
 Finland           15      16      17       17      16      18      19      18      18      19      17
 France            86     100      97       105     98      94      94      91      92      92      97
 Germany           57      57      57       56      51      45      42      43      41      41      40
 Hong Kong         1       1        1        2      3       4       4       4       4        5       6
 India             63      77      85       113    154     188     212     223     234     236      239
 Indonesia                                                          3       9       14      13      13
 Italy             42      42      38       31      29      27      24      19      16      15      14
 Japan            152     162     168       171    177     174     176     181     170     161      161
 Malaysia          29      34      50       73      73      70      73      74      79      82      81
 Netherlands       10      11      10       10      8       9       9       9       9        7       7
 Norway            42      42      41       43      43      45      45      45      44      40      37
 Poland            6       7        9       10      12      17      23      24      25      24      22
 Portugal          15      17      17       17      17      17      17      15      12      12      10
 Singapore         6       6        7        8      9       9       10      10      11      11      13
 South Africa              30      40       52      72      81      83      91      91      91      91
 Spain             61      67      71       73      69      64      60      55      47      45      41
 Sweden            79      88      89       86      83      86      85      76      69      69      65
 Switzerland       41      41      44       49      50      55      61      66      65      67      75
 Taiwan                                             83     147     153     149     143     135      133
 Thailand          11      7       31       75      75      75      33
 U.K.             223     240     252       264    276     290     291     290     273     278      283
 U.S.            1,838   1,841   1,804     1,783   1,773   1,733   1,739   1,707   1,676   1,702   1,742
 Total           3,020   3,169   3,221     3,344   3,537   3,661   3,714   3,677   3,563   3,555   3,581




                                                    1
                                       Panel B: All Funds
Country        2005    2006    2007    2008    2009    2010    2011    2012    2013    2014    2015
Australia       21      43      53      67     101     111     123     124     112     105     100
Austria        120     132     139     145     142     147     160     166     168     167     159
Belgium        173     165     158     138     143     132     120     120     122     125     124
Brazil                          1       1       28      63     104     127     117     115      87
Canada         496     555     577     587     590     630     644     638     580     546     564
China                                   2       3       4       6       6       6       5       9
Denmark        108     131     142     147     152     163     163     161     157     166     182
Finland         62      78      84      92      95     104     106     107     100      92      85
France         351     405     426     459     468     456     458     450     441     445     463
Germany        331     336     328     318     299     285     275     276     267     264     261
Hong Kong       17      22      25      28      31      44      52      52      51      54      56
India           63      77      85     113     154     189     217     232     242     243     245
Indonesia                                                       3       9       14      13      13
Italy          244     235     191     148     137     122     113     100      87      81      78
Japan          197     205     219     222     233     236     251     266     274     267     264
Malaysia        29      34      52      76      82      84      94      97     106     109     108
Netherlands     63      72      73      67      68      66      68      72      70      63      67
Norway         101     101     100     100      99     107     113     115     114     102     100
Poland          8       8       10      11      13      22      33      38      39      39      35
Portugal        43      49      50      53      54      56      59      57      49      48      46
Singapore       65      64      62      63      65      67      67      67      64      60      60
South Africa            33      44      58      80      89      91     100      99      98      99
Spain          228     239     247     249     227     216     208     191     170     165     164
Sweden         213     227     227     223     224     231     230     213     197     199     193
Switzerland    117     121     121     134     150     164     175     182     181     183     200
Taiwan                                         103     209     245     254     268     259     250
Thailand        11      7       31      75      75      75      18      1
U.K.           535     570     592     614     647     686     722     727     699     716     724
U.S.           2,282   2,309   2,294   2,307   2,339   2,341   2,397   2,423   2,402   2,469   2,570
Total          5,878   6,219   6,328   6,496   6,802   7,098   7,312   7,368   7,195   7,199   7,304




                                                2
Table IA.2: Fund Characteristics by Country
This table presents the averages of international exposure measures and other fund characteristics
by country. Indirect International Exposure is the fraction of the funds holdings invested in domestic stocks
weighted by foreign sales. The sample in Panel A consists of actively managed domestic equity mutual
funds over the 2005 to 2015 period. The sample in Panel B consists of actively managed domestic and
international equity mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015 period.

                                     Panel A: Domestic Funds
                          Indirect      Direct
                       International International Fund TNA Family TNA
                         Exposure      Exposure    ($ million) ($ million) Observations
       Australia           0.330            0.041           239            3,353           5,076
       Austria             0.636            0.006           116            1,473           1,415
       Belgium             0.414            0.117           138            5,302           1,550
       Brazil              0.144            0.009           199            6,070           7,689
       Canada              0.317            0.176           458           12,354           30,712
       China               0.060            0.001           1,131          5,165            348
       Denmark             0.562            0.060           161            2,279           2,205
       Finland             0.603            0.073           173            1,968           2,270
       France              0.527            0.078           269            5,732           12,533
       Germany             0.540            0.072           687           16,946           6,369
       Hong Kong           0.306            0.462           268            1,949            400
       India               0.232            0.003           131            1,936           21,873
       Indonesia           0.041            0.000           173             869             614
       Italy               0.338            0.091           231            2,685           3,560
       Japan               0.260            0.002           67.1          15,743           22,225
       Malaysia            0.210            0.032           31.4            419            8,584
       Netherlands         0.605            0.080           407            5,545           1,176
       Norway              0.455            0.212           186            2,191           5,587
       Poland              0.133            0.118           142             501            2,139
       Portugal            0.323            0.037           44.9            316            2,002
       Singapore           0.372            0.099           119             880            1,204
       South Africa        0.188            0.228           199            1,798           8,656
       Spain               0.456            0.048           73.3           1,158           7,832
       Sweden              0.617            0.106           471           15,143           10,494
       Switzerland         0.714            0.011           285           10,796           7,364
       Taiwan              0.426            0.010           59.6           1,259           11,321
       Thailand            0.141            0.007           22.5            310            3,475
       U.K.                0.441            0.145           684           11,573           35,511
       U.S.                0.275            0.087           1,511         70,870          232,051
       Total               0.323            0.086           918           39,908          456,235


                                                     3
                                 Panel B: All Funds
                  Indirect      Direct
               International International Fund TNA Family TNA
                 Exposure      Exposure      ($ million) ($ million) Observations
Australia         0.167         0.502         297         4,171         11,386
Austria           0.061         0.904         84.7        1,566         19,742
Belgium           0.045         0.902         122         9,473         18,257
Brazil            0.144         0.009         199         6,076         7,716
Canada            0.149         0.621         299         13,816        76,865
China             0.055         0.148        1,084        5,431          477
Denmark           0.075         0.873         161         2,671         20,054
Finland           0.146         0.777         134         2,748         12,050
France            0.249         0.573         243         7,974         57,844
Germany           0.159         0.724         387         15,849        38,884
Hong Kong         0.096         0.850         279         4,035         5,189
India             0.230         0.015         129         1,936         22,321
Indonesia         0.041         0.000         173          869           614
Italy             0.082         0.782         252         3,644         18,426
Japan             0.190         0.276         81.1        17,683        31,601
Malaysia          0.179         0.176         28.1         463          10,440
Netherlands       0.109         0.834         344         5,582         8,977
Norway            0.226         0.600         277         3,531         13,814
Poland            0.119         0.216         107          487          3,044
Portugal          0.105         0.689          42          360          6,776
Singapore         0.077         0.817         64.2         869          8,448
South Africa      0.177         0.283         187         1,804         9,468
Spain             0.172         0.645         75.6        1,373         27,641
Sweden            0.284         0.589         421         16,631        28,520
Switzerland       0.279         0.614         191         13,200        20,759
Taiwan            0.273         0.370         61.8        1,329         19,045
Thailand          0.140         0.014         22.3         310          3,498
U.K.              0.209         0.601         559         12,706        86,776
U.S.              0.219         0.278        1,592        70,701       313,616
Total             0.193         0.477         726         30,411       902,248




                                        4
Table IA.3: Home Bias Measures by Country
This table presents averages of domestic exposure and home bias measures by country. World share
is the share of a country's stock market capitalization in the world market portfolio. Domestic exposure is
the fraction of a fund's portfolio invested in domestic stocks. Domestic exposure adjusted is the difference
between the fraction of a fund's portfolio invested in domestic stocks and its indirect exposure to foreign
markets through domestic stocks weighted by foreign sales. The sample in columns (2) and (3) consists of
actively managed domestic equity mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015 period. The sample in columns (4)
and (5) consists of actively managed domestic and international equity mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015
period.

                                              Domestic Funds              All Funds
                                                           Domestic              Domestic
                                    World   Domestic       Exposure   Domestic   Exposure
                                    Share   Exposure       Adjusted   Exposure   Adjusted
                                     (1)      (2)            (3)        (4)        (5)
                     Australia      0.025    0.969          0.592      0.615      0.371
                     Austria        0.003    0.995          0.354      0.116      0.041
                     Belgium        0.007    0.858          0.440      0.104      0.057
                     Brazil         0.020    0.995          0.878      0.995      0.878
                     Canada         0.033    0.820          0.508      0.505      0.311
                     China          0.096    0.999          0.940      0.855      0.803
                     Denmark        0.005    0.936          0.372      0.143      0.060
                     Finland        0.004    0.946          0.327      0.285      0.100
                     France         0.037    0.922          0.348      0.407      0.157
                     Germany        0.030    0.957          0.375      0.358      0.141
                     Hong Kong      0.027    0.565          0.245      0.145      0.055
                     India          0.020    0.996          0.768      0.994      0.767
                     Indonesia      0.007    0.999          0.956      0.999      0.956
                     Italy          0.013    0.888          0.526      0.213      0.126
                     Japan          0.078    0.999          0.742      0.573      0.426
                     Malaysia       0.007    0.970          0.752      0.869      0.676
                     Netherlands    0.016    0.903          0.288      0.177      0.056
                     Norway         0.005    0.820          0.349      0.326      0.140
                     Poland         0.003    0.840          0.718      0.793      0.678
                     Portugal       0.002    0.964          0.637      0.286      0.192
                     Singapore      0.008    0.906          0.521      0.248      0.140
                     South Africa   0.008    0.768          0.572      0.735      0.547
                     Spain          0.014    0.948          0.472      0.359      0.184
                     Sweden         0.011    0.871          0.260      0.498      0.145
                     Switzerland    0.027    0.990          0.265      0.526      0.140
                     Taiwan         0.015    0.991          0.550      0.619      0.354
                     Thailand       0.004    0.994          0.867      0.832      0.725
                     U.K.           0.063    0.843          0.388      0.455      0.208
                     U.S.           0.325    0.891          0.600      0.685      0.461
                     Total          0.032    0.910          0.518      0.484      0.314


                                                       5
Table IA.4: Correlations
This table presents correlation coefficients between the international exposure measures and other
fund characteristics. Indirect International Exposure is the fraction of the funds holdings invested in
domestic stocks weighted by foreign sales. The sample consists of actively managed domestic equity mutual
funds over the 2005 to 2015 period. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively.

                                                              Indirect      Direct
                                                           International International
                                                             Exposure      Exposure
                                                                (1)               (2)
             Direct International Exposure                   -0.135                1
                                                                    
             log(1+ Fund Age)                                 0.164            0.053
             log(Fund TNA)                                    0.029            0.124
             log(Family TNA)                                 -0.042            0.095
             Total Expense Ratio (%)                         -0.015            0.027
             Total Load                                       0.062            0.152
             log(1 + Number of Countries of Sale)             0.183            0.007
             Team Managed                                    -0.102            0.064




                                                   6
Table IA.5: Future Returns
This table presents estimates of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of fund performance over
the next four quarters. The dependent variable is the alpha from the four-factor model estimated using
regional factors based on a fund's investment region in each month. Indirect International Exposure is the
fraction of the funds holdings invested in domestic stocks weighted by foreign sales. All control variables
are lagged by one period. All control variables are lagged by one period. The sample consists of actively
managed domestic equity mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015 period. Robust t -statistics adjusted for
clustering at the fund level are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% level, respectively.

                                       Quarter 1              Quarter 2         Quarter 3           Quarter 4
                                     (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)
                                                                                                     
 Indirect International Exposure   0.495      1.200      0.344     0.861     0.349     0.888     0.173     0.584
                                   (7.538)    (11.529)   (5.308)   (8.222)   (5.265)   (8.486)   (2.589)   (5.031)
 Controls                            Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes
 Benchmark FE                        Yes        No         Yes       No        Yes       No        Yes       No
 Country FE                          Yes        No         Yes       No        Yes       No        Yes       No
 Quarter FE                          Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes
 Fund FE                             No         Yes        No        Yes       No        Yes       No       Yes
 Observations                      153,027    152,931    146,966   146,828   141,018   140,895   135,209   135,064
 Adjusted R2                        0.044      0.043      0.044     0.046     0.045     0.045     0.045     0.043




                                                          7
Table IA.6: Effect of Fund Characteristics - Sample of All Funds
This table presents estimates of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of fund performance. The
dependent variable is the alpha from the four-factor model estimated using regional factors based on a
fund's investment region in each month. Indirect International Exposure is the fraction of the funds holdings
invested in domestic stocks weighted by foreign sales. Funds are classified into three groups based on their
lagged family TNA and fund TNA in each country of domicile and month. Funds are also classified based
on their style in terms of market capitalization (Large, Mid, Multi or Small) and book-to-market ratio
(Value, Core or Growth) of portfolio holdings. The regressions include interactions of indirect international
exposure with indicator variables for terciles of family TNA, terciles of fund TNA or fund style as well
as their direct effect (coefficients not shown). All control variables are lagged by one period. The sample
consists of actively managed domestic and international equity mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015 period.
Robust t -statistics adjusted for clustering at the fund level are reported in parentheses. *, **, and ***
indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                              Fund Family TNA          Fund TNA          Firm Market Cap          Fund Style
                                                (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
                                                                                                                    
Indirect International Exposure               0.492      1.175      0.351      1.013     0.340      0.857      0.346      0.860
                                              (7.603)    (9.771)    (5.033)    (8.248)   (3.701)    (6.671)    (4.446)    (7.558)
Indirect International Exposure × Tercile 2   -0.112      0.052      0.100     0.249
                                              (-1.683)   (0.368)    (1.315)    (1.868)
                                                      
Indirect International Exposure × Tercile 3   -0.260     -0.189     -0.021      0.109
                                              (-4.050)   (-1.057)   (-0.314)   (0.716)
Indirect International Exposure × Large                                                  -0.032     -0.394
                                                                                         (-0.271)   (-2.200)
Indirect International Exposure × Value                                                                        -0.236     -0.656
                                                                                                               (-1.291)   (-2.383)
Benchmark FE                                    Yes        No         Yes        No        Yes        No         Yes        No
Country FE                                      Yes        No         Yes        No        Yes        No         Yes        No
Time FE                                         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Fund FE                                         No         Yes        No         Yes       No         Yes        No         Yes
Observations                                  902,248    902,248    902,248    902,248   497,920    497,920    497,920    497,920
Adjusted R2                                    0.038      0.040      0.039      0.040     0.040      0.044      0.040      0.044




                                                              8
Table IA.7: Sample Splits by Fund Investment Region - Sample of All Funds
This table presents estimates of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of fund performance. The
dependent variable is the alpha from the four-factor model estimated using regional factors based on
a fund's investment region in each month. Indirect International Exposure is the fraction of the funds
holdings invested in domestic stocks weighted by foreign sales. The estimates are show separately by fund
investment region. All control variables are lagged by one period. The sample consists of actively managed
domestic and international equity mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015 period. Robust t -statistics adjusted
for clustering at the fund level are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                    North America         Asia Pacific              Europe            Emerging
                                     (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)         (6)       (7)       (8)
                                                                                                      
 Indirect International Exposure   0.173      1.104     1.276     2.292     0.393      1.022      1.300     2.107
                                   (2.184)    (6.230)   (4.423)   (5.405)   (3.252)     (7.046)   (8.614)   (11.871)
 Controls                           Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes
 Benchmark FE                       Yes         No        Yes       No        Yes            No     Yes       No
 Country FE                         Yes         No        Yes       No        Yes            No     Yes       No
 Time FE                            Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes
 Fund FE                             No         Yes       No        Yes       No         Yes        No        Yes
 Observations                      304,741    304,741   76,027    76,027    209,892     209,892   116,055   116,055
              2
 Adjusted R                         0.022      0.025     0.062     0.069     0.060       0.062     0.324     0.325




                                                         9
Table IA.8: Fund Performance and Risk - Sample of All Funds
This table presents estimates of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of fund performance and
risk. The dependent variables are the Sharpe ratio, information ratio, total risk and idiosyncratic risk
in each month. Sharpe Ratio is the ratio of the annualized excess fund return (over the risk free rate)
to the annualized standard deviation of fund return using a 12-month window. Information Ratio is the
ratio of the annualized four-factor alpha to the annualized standard deviation of the residuals from the
four-factor model estimated using regional factors based on a fund's investment region in each month using
a 12-month window. Total Risk is the annualized standard deviation of fund return using a 12-month
window. Idiosyncratic Risk is the annualized standard deviation of residuals from the four-factor model
using a 12-month window. Indirect International Exposure is the fraction of the funds holdings invested
in domestic stocks weighted by foreign sales. All control variables are lagged by one period. The sample
consists of actively managed domestic and international equity mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015 period.
Robust t -statistics adjusted for clustering at the fund level are reported in parentheses. *, **, and ***
indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                     Sharpe Ratio        Information Ratio       Total Risk        Idiosyncratic Risk
                                     (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)       (6)        (7)        (8)
                                                                                                           
 Indirect International Exposure   0.286      0.925      0.373     1.231      0.016     -0.004     -0.023     -0.031
                                   (6.213)    (11.963)   (5.392)   (11.197)   (2.991)   (-0.904)   (-3.900)   (-7.881)
 Controls                            Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
 Benchmark FE                        Yes        No         Yes       No         Yes       No         Yes        No
 Country FE                          Yes        No         Yes       No         Yes       No         Yes        No
 Time FE                             Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
 Fund FE                             No         Yes        No        Yes        No        Yes        No         Yes
 Observations                      902,242    902,242    902,248   902,248    902,242   902,242    902,248    902,248
 Adjusted R2                        0.699      0.701      0.033     0.039      0.771     0.840      0.749      0.918




                                                          10
Table IA.9: Fund Performance and Risk - Additional Measures
This table presents estimates of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of fund performance and
risk. The dependent variables are the excess return and tracking error in each month. Excess Return is the
fund return in excess of 3-month T-bill (in USD). Tracking Error is the annualized standard deviation of
the benchmark-adjusted return using a 12-month window. Indirect International Exposure is the fraction of
the funds holdings invested in domestic stocks weighted by foreign sales. All control variables are lagged by
one period. The sample consists of actively managed domestic equity mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015
period. Robust t -statistics adjusted for clustering at the fund level are reported in parentheses. *, **, and
*** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                                                                  Tracking
                                                      Excess return                 error
                                                      (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)
                                                                                     
          Indirect International Exposure          0.466       1.004       -0.047        -0.016
                                                    (5.446)     (7.545)     (-6.381)     (-5.073)
          Controls                                    Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes
          Benchmark FE                                Yes         No          Yes           No
          Fund country FE                             Yes         No          Yes           No
          Time FE                                     Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes
          Fund FE                                     No          Yes          No           Yes
          Observations                             456,235     456,235      454,630      454,630
                        2
          Adjusted R                                 0.678       0.679       0.506         0.866




                                                     11
Table IA.10: Total Expense Ratio - Sample of All Funds
This table presents estimates of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of the total expense ratio.
The dependent variable is the fund total expense ratio in each month (i.e., annual expense ratio divided
by 12). Indirect International Exposure is the fraction of the funds holdings invested in domestic stocks
weighted by foreign sales. All control variables are lagged by one period. The sample consists of actively
managed domestic and international equity mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015 period. Variable definitions
are provided in Table A.1 in the Appendix. F -statistic refers to the test of equality between the coefficient
estimates for direct and indirect international exposure. Robust t -statistics adjusted for clustering at the
fund level are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively.

                                                                     (1)           (2)
                   Indirect International Exposure                 -0.005      -0.017
                                                                  (-1.097)      (-5.576)
                   Direct International Exposure                  0.015          -0.002
                                                                   (5.066)      (-0.715)
                   Past Performance                               -0.000         0.000
                                                                  (-7.527)      (0.869)
                   log(1+Fund Age)                                0.003         0.004
                                                                   (4.785)      (3.696)
                   log(Fund TNA)                                  -0.006       -0.004
                                                                  (-21.524)    (-16.346)
                   log(Family TNA)                                -0.003       -0.002
                                                                  (-10.935)     (-4.736)
                   Flow                                             0.000       0.000
                                                                   (0.287)      (4.727)
                   Total Load                                     0.005         0.003
                                                                  (21.738)      (7.493)
                   log(1+Number of Countries of Sale)             0.011        -0.015
                                                                   (8.085)      (-6.362)
                                                                           
                   Team Managed                                   -0.003         0.043
                                                                  (-3.491)      (1.735)
                   Benchmark FE                                      Yes           No
                   Country FE                                        Yes           No
                   Time FE                                           Yes          Yes
                   Fund FE                                           No           Yes
                   Observations                                   901,927       901,920
                   Adjusted R2                                      0.557        0.922


                                                     12
Table IA.11: Passive Funds - Sample of All Funds
This table presents estimates of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of fund performance. The
dependent variable in columns (1) and (2) is the alpha from the four-factor model estimated using regional
factors based on a fund's investment region in each month. The dependent variable in columns (3) and (4)
is the characteristic-adjusted return, defined as the fund portfolio-weighted average of the individual stock
characteristic-adjusted returns, i.e., the difference between the individual stock return and the return of
the size/book-to-market/foreign revenue portfolio to which a stock belongs in each month. The portfolios
are estimated using five quintiles based on size by five quintiles based on book-to-market ratio. These 25
portfolios are further split into two groups based on whether foreign revenues exceed 25% of total revenues
or not. The dependent variable in columns (5) and (6) is the benchmark-adjusted return, defined as the the
difference between the fund's return and the return on its benchmark in each month. Indirect International
Exposure is the fraction of the funds holdings invested in domestic stocks weighted by foreign sales. All
control variables are lagged by one period. The sample consists of passive domestic and international equity
mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015 period with a maximum tracking error of 0.01. Robust t -statistics
adjusted for clustering at the fund level are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively

                                                                  Characteristic-          Benchmark-
                                             Four-factor            adjusted                adjusted
                                               alpha                 return                  return
                                            (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)
 Indirect International Exposure           0.737      0.656      -0.512      -0.867       0.027      0.033
                                          (0.731)    (0.513)    (-0.459)    (-0.626)    (0.599)     (1.054)
 Controls                                   Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
 Benchmark FE                               Yes        No          Yes         No          Yes        No
 Country FE                                 Yes        No          Yes         No          Yes        No
 Time FE                                    Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
 Fund FE                                    No         Yes         No          Yes         No         Yes
 Observations                             18,305     18,304      18,305      18,304      18,305     18,304
 Adjusted R2                               0.121      0.116       0.452       0.451       0.202      0.269




                                                     13
Table IA.12: Controlling for Pseudo Fund Return
This table presents estimates of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of fund performance con-
trolling for pseudo fund return. The dependent variable is the alpha from the four-factor model estimated
using regional factors based on a fund's investment region in each month. Indirect International Exposure
is the fraction of the funds holdings invested in domestic stocks weighted by foreign sales. Pseudo Fund
Return is the monthly fund return calculated based on pure play firms in the same industry as the firms
in a fund's portfolio. We first calculate an average industry return by simply taking the equally-weighted
average of the returns of all firms in the same industry and country in a given month. Next, in order to
calculate a pseudo return at the firm level, we take the foreign sales-weighted average of these industry
returns in the country where the sales are generated. Finally, we take the portfolio-weighted average of
the firm-level pseudo returns to calculate the fund-level pseudo returns. All control variables are lagged by
one period. The sample consists of actively managed domestic equity mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015
period. Robust t -statistics adjusted for clustering at the fund level are reported in parentheses. *, **, and
*** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                                            (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)
    Indirect International Exposure                       0.283      0.671        0.472        1.117
                                                          (4.548)    (7.294)      (7.436)      (10.643)
    Pseudo Fund Return (contemporaneous)                  0.696      0.698
                                                          (85.726)   (85.747)
    Pseudo Fund Return (lagged)                                                  -0.039       -0.042
                                                                                  (-8.052)     (-8.601)
    Controls                                                Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes
    Benchmark FE                                            Yes         No          Yes           No
    Country FE                                              Yes         No          Yes           No
    Time FE                                                 Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes
    Fund FE                                                 No         Yes           No          Yes
    Observations                                          447,795    447,793      447,795      447,793
    Adjusted R2                                            0.204      0.206        0.039        0.040




                                                     14
Table IA.13: Controlling for Complicated Firms
This table presents estimates of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of fund performance con-
trolling for the exposure to domestic complicated firms in a fund's portfolio. The dependent variable is the
alpha from the four-factor model estimated using regional factors based on a fund's investment region in
each month. Indirect International Exposure is the fraction of the funds holdings invested in domestic stocks
weighted by foreign sales. Exposure to Complicated Firms is the exposure of fund's portfolio to domestic
complicate firms. Complicated firms are defined alternatively using three measures. In columns (1) and
(2), complicated firms are those operating in more than one four-digit NAICS industry. In columns (3) and
(4), the measure of complicated firms is the number of distinct four-digit NAICS industries in which a firm
operates. In columns (5) and (6), complicated firms are those in which the entity structure is a holding
company. All three firm-level measures are aggregated at the fund-level by taking their portfolio-weighted
averages. All control variables are lagged by one period. The sample consists of actively managed domestic
equity mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015 period. Robust t -statistics adjusted for clustering at the fund
level are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively.

                                                                   Number of
                                          Multi Industry           Industries          Holding Company
                                           (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)
 Indirect International Exposure        0.436       1.069      0.503       1.069      0.482       1.114
                                        (6.642)     (10.268)    (7.541)    (10.196)    (7.415)    (10.681)
                                                                                   
 Exposure to Complicated Firms          0.192       0.522       -0.020     0.126        -0.095    -0.923
                                        (2.414)     (4.967)    (-0.882)    (3.689)     (-0.272)   (-2.020)
 Controls                                 Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
 Benchmark FE                             Yes         No          Yes         No         Yes         No
 Country FE                               Yes         No          Yes         No         Yes         No
 Time FE                                  Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
 Fund FE                                   No         Yes         No         Yes         No          Yes
 Observations                           456,235     456,235    456,235     456,235     456,235    456,235
 Adjusted R2                             0.039       0.040       0.039      0.040       0.039       0.040




                                                     15
Table IA.14: International Investment Treaties
This table presents estimates of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of fund performance. The
dependent variable is the alpha from the four-factor model estimated using regional factors based on a
fund's investment region in each month. The exposure measures are calculated based on FactSet Revere
data, which provides a breakdown of foreign revenues by each individual country. Funds are required to
have at least 75% of their stock holdings value with non-missing total foreign revenues. BIT Exposure is the
fraction of of the fund's portfolio invested in a domestic company that has an investment treaty between its
headquarter country and the country in which it generates foreign revenues in the same year. All control
variables are lagged by one period. The sample consists of actively managed domestic equity mutual funds
over the 2005 to 2015 period. Robust t -statistics adjusted for clustering at the fund level are reported in
parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                                         (1)         (2)
                                BIT Exposure        1.179***     2.760***
                                                     (5.908)      (8.300)
                                Controls                 Yes        Yes
                                Benchmark FE             Yes         No
                                Country FE               Yes         No
                                Time FE                  Yes        Yes
                                Fund FE                  No         Yes
                                Observations         368,038      368,030
                                Adjusted R2           0.044        0.046




                                                    16
Table IA.15: Alternative International Exposure Measures
This table presents estimates of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of fund performance. The
dependent variable in columns (1), (2), (5) and (6) is the alpha from the four-factor model estimated using
regional factors based on a fund's investment region in each month. The dependent variable in columns (3),
(4), (7) and (8) is the characteristic-adjusted return, defined as the fund portfolio-weighted average of the
individual stock characteristic-adjusted returns, i.e., the difference between the individual stock return and
the return of the size/book-to-market/foreign revenue portfolio to which a stock belongs in each month.
The portfolios are estimated using five quintiles based on size by five quintiles based on book-to-market
ratio. These 25 portfolios are further split into two groups based on whether foreign revenues exceed 25% of
total revenues or not. Indirect International Exposure - Assets is the fraction of the funds holdings invested
in domestic stocks weighted by foreign assets. Indirect International Exposure - Country is the fraction of
the funds holdings invested in domestic stocks weighted by foreign sales using FactSet Revere data, which
provides a breakdown of foreign revenues by each individual country. Funds are required to have at least
75% of their stock holdings value with non-missing total foreign revenues. All control variables are lagged
by one period. The sample consists of actively managed domestic equity mutual funds over the 2005 to
2015 period. Robust t -statistics adjusted for clustering at the fund level are reported in parentheses. *, **,
and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                                                   Characteristic-                           Characteristic-
                                               Four-Factor           Adjusted            Four-Factor           Adjusted
                                                 Alpha                Return               Alpha                Return
                                               (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)        (7)       (8)
 Indirect International Exposure - Assets    0.448     1.110      -0.064     0.329
                                             (5.269)   (7.992)    (-0.676)   (2.356)
 Indirect International Exposure - Country                                             0.635     2.163       0.164    0.931
                                                                                       (7.434)   (14.770)   (1.637)   (6.200)
 Controls                                     Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes
 Benchmark FE                                 Yes        No         Yes        No       Yes        No        Yes        No
 Country FE                                   Yes        No         Yes        No       Yes        No        Yes        No
 Time FE                                      Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes
 Fund FE                                       No       Yes         No        Yes        No        Yes        No       Yes
 Observations                                388,011   388,004    388,002    387,995   372,028   372,024    372,019   372,015
 Adjusted R2                                  0.037     0.038      0.094      0.105     0.044     0.047      0.124     0.140




                                                             17
Table IA.16: Winsorized International Exposure Measures
This table presents estimates of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of fund performance. The
dependent variable is the alpha from the four-factor model estimated using regional factors based on a
fund's investment region in each month. Indirect International Exposure is the fraction of the funds holdings
invested in domestic stocks weighted by foreign sales. The international exposure measures are winsorized
at the top and bottom 1%. All control variables are lagged by one period. The sample consists of actively
managed domestic equity mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015 period. Robust t -statistics adjusted for
clustering at the fund level are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% level, respectively.

                                                                   (1)         (2)
                       Indirect International Exposure          0.511       1.166
                                                                (7.829)     (11.040)
                       Direct International Exposure            -0.153       -0.165
                                                                (-2.413)    (-1.351)
                       Controls                                    Yes         Yes
                       Benchmark FE                                Yes         No
                       Country FE                                  Yes         No
                       Time FE                                     Yes         Yes
                       Fund FE                                     No          Yes
                       Observations                             456,235      456,235
                       Adjusted R2                               0.039        0.040




                                                     18
Table IA.17: Alternative Clustering
This table presents estimates of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of fund performance. The
dependent variable is the alpha from the four-factor model estimated using regional factors based on a
fund's investment region in each month. Indirect International Exposure is the fraction of the funds holdings
invested in domestic stocks weighted by foreign sales. All control variables are lagged by one period. The
sample consists of actively managed domestic equity mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015 period. t -statistics
adjusted for clustering at the fund family level in columns (1) and (2) and two-way fund and year in columns
(3) and (4) are reported in parentheses. Column (5) reports the estimates of Fama-MacBeth cross-sectional
regressions in which Newey-West t -statistics with 12 lags. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                            Clustering:        Two-Way Clustering:
                                           Fund Family           Fund and Year            Fama-MacBeth
                                          (1)         (2)        (3)           (4)               (5)
                                                                                     
 Indirect International Exposure        0.484      1.118       0.483         1.118            0.367
                                        (5.149)     (7.101)    (2.295)      (2.473)           (2.393)
 Controls                                 Yes         Yes        Yes           Yes              Yes
 Benchmark FE                             Yes         No         Yes           No                No
 Country FE                               Yes         No         Yes           No                No
 Time FE                                  Yes         Yes        Yes           Yes               No
 Fund FE                                  No          Yes        No            Yes               No
 Observations                           456,172    456,172     456,235      456,235           456,235
              2
 Adjusted R                              0.039       0.040      0.039         0.040            0.115




                                                     19
Table IA.18: Alternative Sample Periods
This table presents estimates of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of fund performance. The
dependent variable is the alpha from the four-factor model estimated using regional factors based on a
fund's investment region in each month. Indirect International Exposure is the fraction of the funds holdings
invested in domestic stocks weighted by foreign sales. All control variables are lagged by one period.
The sample consists of actively managed domestic equity mutual funds. Robust t -statistics adjusted for
clustering at the fund level are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% level, respectively.

                                             2000-2015              2005-2010               2011-2015
                                           (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
                                                                                             
 Indirect International Exposure        0.303       0.917       0.415      1.070       0.556       1.855
                                         (4.888)    (9.561)     (4.294)     (5.524)    (6.558)     (13.512)
 Controls                                  Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
 Benchmark FE                              Yes         No         Yes         No          Yes         No
 Country FE                                Yes         No         Yes         No          Yes         No
 Time FE                                   Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
 Fund FE                                   No         Yes         No          Yes         No         Yes
 Observations                           563,729     563,729     239,351    239,333     216,882     216,879
              2
 Adjusted R                               0.045      0.049       0.039       0.036       0.059      0.061




                                                     20
Table IA.19: Samples of U.S. and Non-U.S. Funds
This table presents estimates of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of fund performance. The
dependent variable is the alpha from the four-factor model estimated using regional factors based on a
fund's investment region in each month. Indirect International Exposure is the fraction of the funds holdings
invested in domestic stocks weighted by foreign sales. All control variables are lagged by one period. The
sample consists of actively managed domestic equity mutual funds over the 2005 to 2015 period. Robust
t -statistics adjusted for clustering at the fund level are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                                       U.S. Funds            Non-U.S. Funds
                                                      (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)
           Indirect International Exposure          0.156      0.665       1.042        1.660
                                                    (1.825)    (5.160)     (10.813)     (12.930)
           Controls                                   Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
           Benchmark FE                               Yes         No          Yes          No
           Style FE                                   Yes         No          No           No
           Time FE                                    Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
           Fund FE                                    No          Yes         No          Yes
           Observations                            191,749     232,051     224,184      224,184
           Adjusted R2                               0.114       0.073       0.098       0.099




                                                     21
