                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       TRADE FLOWS AND FISCAL MULTIPLIERS

                                      Matteo Cacciatore
                                        Nora Traum

                                     Working Paper 27652
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27652


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2020




For helpful comments, we thank Olivier Coibion, Giancarlo Corsetti, Michael Devereux, Fabio
Ghironi, Eric Leeper, Campbell Leith, Evi Pappa, Paolo Pesenti, Morten Ravn, Linda Tesar, and
participants at various conferences and seminars. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Matteo Cacciatore and Nora Traum. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Trade Flows and Fiscal Multipliers
Matteo Cacciatore and Nora Traum
NBER Working Paper No. 27652
August 2020
JEL No. E2

                                         ABSTRACT

We present novel insights on the role of international trade following unanticipated government
spending and income tax changes in a flexible exchange rate environment. In a simple two-
country, two-good model, we show analytically that fiscal multipliers can be larger in economies
more open to trade, even when fiscal expansions imply a trade deficit. Cross-country
comovement can be positive or negative. Three factors determine how trade linkages affect fiscal
multipliers: the relative import share of public and private goods, how the government finances
its budget, and the currency invoicing of exports. A Bayesian prior-predictive analysis shows a
quantitative international business-cycle model bears the same predictions. Estimating the model
on Canadian and U.S. data, we find support for larger multipliers relative to a counterfactually
closed economy and positive cross-country spillovers.


Matteo Cacciatore
HEC Montreal
Institute of Applied Economics
3000 Côte-Sainte-Catherine
Montreal, QC H3T 2A7
CANADA
and NBER
matteo.cacciatore@hec.ca

Nora Traum
HEC Montreal
Institute of Applied Economics
3000, chemin de la Cote-Sainte-Catherine
Montreal, Quebec H3T 2A7
Canada
nora.traum@hec.ca




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27652
1        Introduction

Since the onset of the Great Recession, debates over a need for globally-coordinated fiscal
stimulus feature prominently in policy discourse (e.g., the 2009 G-20 London Summit and G-
20 Brisbane meeting in November 2014). Discussions stem from varying perceptions on the
sign of fiscal spillovers and the domestic effectiveness of a fiscal stimulus in open economies.
In the policy narrative, incentives to coordinate fiscal policy interventions depend on trade
balance dynamics (e.g., Frankel, 2016), implying the issue ultimately centers around a key
question: How do trade linkages affect the transmission of fiscal policy? Conventional wisdom
dictates real exchange rate appreciation and/or rising aggregate income lowers net exports,
mitigating the domestic effectiveness of fiscal policy by shifting stimulus abroad.1 In this
conventional view, net export crowding out is the dominant, negative force through which
international trade affects fiscal multipliers and incentives to coordinate fiscal interventions
across countries.2
        This paper shows this view offers only a partial characterization of the effects of trade
linkages on the transmission of fiscal policy. We show following unanticipated government
spending and income tax changes, multipliers can be larger in economies more open to trade,
even when fiscal expansions imply a trade deficit. Cross-country spillovers can be positive
or negative. Domestic multipliers can be larger since private consumption and investment
can increase (i.e., can be crowded-in) relative to less open economies. Moreover, the total
trade-to-GDP ratio does not intrinsically determine these results. Holding the trade share
and trade elasticity constant, we show countries can have higher or lower fiscal multipliers
with stronger trade linkages depending on 1) the private-sector import intensity relative to
the public-sector, 2) how the government finances fiscal expansions, and 3) the invoicing of
import and export prices.
    1
     See Frenkel and Mussa (1981) and Chinn (2013) for a more formal discussion.
    2
     In this paper, we define a fiscal multiplier as measuring the change in GDP relative to the change in a
fiscal instrument, e.g., public spending or tax revenue.




                                                     1
       We first demonstrate these results analytically in a simple two-good, two-country model.
Then, using a Bayesian prior-predictive analysis, we show a quantitative international business-
cycle model bears the same agnostic predictions. Estimating the model with likelihood-based
methods on Canadian and U.S. data, we find support for larger domestic multipliers relative
to a counterfactually closed economy and positive cross-country spillovers.
       We illustrate the core intuition about the role of trade linkages in a simple open-economy
variant of Woodford (2011) with endogenous physical capital. Analytical solutions show
the effects of trade linkages on fiscal multipliers depend on the relative price of domestic
to imported goods, which we define as the domestic terms of consumption. This measure
coincides with the terms of trade under complete exchange rate pass-through, whereas it
features a markup-adjustment otherwise.3 When fiscal policy induces an appreciation of
the domestic terms of consumption--e.g., following an increase in government spending
that raises world demand for domestic goods--trade linkages increase domestic multipliers
provided the positive wealth effect stemming from the favorable relative price movement
more than offsets its negative substitution effect.4 Importantly, larger domestic multipliers
can coexist with a trade deficit and positive cross-country comovement. Alternatively, when
fiscal policy induces a deterioration of the domestic terms of consumption--e.g., following
a decrease in the income tax rate that raises the relative supply of the domestic good--the
positive substitution effect must more than offset the negative wealth effect.
       Analytical solutions demonstrate the relative import share of public and private goods,
the financing of the government budget, and the currency invoicing of trade shape terms-of-
consumption dynamics, for a given trade elasticity. To build intuition, consider an increase
in government spending under flexible prices. Provided higher public expenditure raises
the world demand for domestic goods, domestic prices increase relative to the rest of the
   3
     With incomplete exchange rate pass-through, the domestic terms of consumption equals the terms of
trade multiplied by the ratio of domestic to export markups.
   4
     The positive wealth effect occurs since domestic households give up fewer imports to consume one unit
of the domestic good when the domestic terms of consumption increase. The negative substitution effect
occurs as households switch to cheaper imports.



                                                    2
world. The resulting domestic terms-of-consumption appreciation (which coincides with an
appreciation of the terms of trade with flexible prices) can lead to higher fiscal multipliers
in more open economies depending on the relative import shares of the private and public
sectors. Other things equal, a higher private import share implies that domestic households
benefit more from the positive wealth effect of a terms-of-consumption appreciation, boosting
private demand. In contrast, a higher public import share implies the increase in public
demand falls more on imported goods, all else constant, raising the trade deficit.5
       Distortionary financing can increase the likelihood that trade linkages enhance fiscal mul-
tipliers. When public expenditures are financed with higher income taxes, the appreciation
of the domestic terms of consumption implied by higher taxes can partly offset the decline
in the domestic labor and capital supply, raising multipliers relative to a closed economy.
When an income tax cut is financed with lower public spending, multipliers can be higher
since part of the reduction in public demand falls on trading partners. Nevertheless, consis-
tent with the literature, distortionary financing worsens the domestic effectiveness of a fiscal
stimulus relative to lump-sum financing, for a given trade openness.
       Finally, the currency denomination of export prices also affects the dynamics of the
domestic terms of consumption, and in turn, fiscal multipliers. For instance, in the limit-
ing case of fully rigid prices, the domestic terms of consumption is tied to the response of
the real exchange rate under local currency pricing (LCP, i.e., export prices sticky in the
destination-market currency). In contrast, in the more empirically-relevant scenario of domi-
nant currency pricing (DCP, i.e., export prices sticky everywhere in the dominant currency),
what matters is the relative price of domestic to imported goods, despite the terms of trade
being constant. In turn, when a fiscal expansion increases the real price of Home goods
relative to Foreign goods--e.g., with an increase in government spending--multipliers are
more likely to be larger under DCP relative to LCP, for a given response of the real exchange
rate.
   5
    Blanchard et al. (2016) and Erceg et al. (2005) also show that increasing the public sector import share
decreases the domestic effectiveness of higher public spending.


                                                     3
      Equipped with these analytical predictions, we then assess and quantify how trade link-
ages shape fiscal multipliers in a state-of-the-art international business-cycle model that
includes additional, competing forces for the fiscal transmission--wage-setting frictions, in-
tertemporal trade in assets, and complementarity between private and public consumption.6
We employ a Bayesian prior-predictive analysis, as in Geweke (2010), to first uncover the
full range of fiscal outcomes implied by the model structure. This exercise shows the model
does not restrict fiscal outcomes along any dimension a priori. In particular, the model is
agnostic about the role of trade linkages for fiscal multipliers, as well as the sign and size
of the responses of the terms of consumption, real exchange rate, and international macroe-
conomic spillovers following discretionary fiscal interventions. However, the probability of
fiscal multipliers being larger in a more open economy remains tied to the dynamics of the
terms of consumption and the trade balance, consistent with the analytical model.
      To discern which predictions are favored by the data, we estimate the model for a well-
studied country pair with a flexible exchange rate, Canada and the U.S. We focus on this
country pair because of the strong trade linkages (from the perspective of Canada, the U.S. is
a good approximation of the rest of the world) and the high quality of fiscal and trade data.
Posterior estimates imply government spending multipliers are larger with stronger trade
linkages. For every dollar spent by the Canadian government, GDP can be up to 15 cents
higher than a counterfactually closed economy (around a 20% increase in the multiplier). In
addition, both a U.S. public spending increase and a tax cut raise GDP in Canada.


Related Literature This paper is related to several strands of the literature. Seminal the-
oretical contributions focused on whether fiscal policies are beggar or prosper-thy-neighbor
(e.g. Betts and Devereux, 2001, Corsetti and Pesenti, 2001, Mendoza and Tesar, 1998, and
Obstfeld and Rogoff, 1995). In addition, a few early quantitative studies examine govern-
ment spending and tax changes in flexible exchange-rate models (e.g. Baxter, 1995 and
  6
   The literature has shown these features are key determinants of fiscal multipliers in closed economy
models. See for instance Leeper et al. (2017), Uhlig (2010), and Woodford (2011).



                                                  4
Erceg et al., 2005). In contrast to these studies, we focus on the role of trade linkages for
the domestic and international transmission of fiscal policy.
    Our analysis does not consider the role of fixed exchange rates nor cross-country strategic
interactions in the design of fiscal policy. Without addressing the specific role of trade
linkages, recent work addresses how monetary and exchange rate policies affect the fiscal
transmission (e.g., Beetsma and Jensen, 2005, Born et al., 2013, Corsetti et al., 2013, Erceg
and Linde, 2012, Gali and Monacelli, 2008, and Muller, 2008). Farhi and Werning (2016) also
compare analytically fiscal multipliers in open and closed economies but focus on a currency
union in a liquidity trap. Mendoza et al. (2014) study the effects of tax adjustments in
response to large public debt shocks, considering cooperative and non-cooperative equilibria.
    A few recent empirical studies examine cross-country spillovers from expansionary fiscal
policies (Auerbach and Gorodnichenko, 2013 and Faccini et al., 2016). Our estimates in
favor of positive international spillovers are consistent with these studies. The role of trade
openness for the domestic transmission of government spending has been explored in the
context of structural panel vector autoregressions. For instance, Ilzetzki et al. (2013) find
public spending multipliers are smaller on average in countries where the trade-to-GDP ratio
exceeds 60%.7 Our theoretical analysis shows that behind these average effects, there can be
cross-sectional heterogeneity depending on the composition of private and public imports,
the financing of the government's budget, the currency invoicing of trade, and the trade
elasticity. In light of our results, an important consideration for future empirical work is
to include time-varying controls along these dimensions. Moreover, our results suggest the
effects of trade openness can vary across fiscal instruments.
    Finally, the paper relates to likelihood-based analyses on fiscal policy in closed economies
(e.g., Drautzburg and Uhlig, 2015 and Leeper et al., 2017) and the international transmission
of business-cycles (e.g., Adolfson et al., 2005, Justiniano and Preston, 2010, and Lubik and
Schorfheide, 2005). Our analysis focuses on the role of trade linkages for fiscal multipliers.
    7
      While Canada and the U.S. are included in their analysis, both countries fall in the "closed" classification
(less than 60% trade-to-GDP ratios).


                                                        5
2      Building Intuition: A Simple Model

To understand the core implications of trade linkages for fiscal multipliers, we study a bench-
mark two-country model. The closed-economy version adds physical capital into Woodford's
(2011) model, whose dynamics have been extensively studied in the literature. We present
the model details below and provide the full system of equilibrium conditions in Appendix
A.1.
    We start with the stark assumptions of flexible prices, financial autarky, and full home
bias in government spending. In this context, the response of the terms of trade summa-
rizes the qualitative effects of trade linkages on fiscal multipliers. We then discuss how
the composition of government spending, distortionary financing, net-export dynamics, and
price stickiness affect the core intuition in this simple environment. The key message of this
section is that trade linkages can increase fiscal multipliers either by crowding-in private
demand relative to a closed economy (following an increase in government spending) or by
inducing expenditure switching towards domestic goods (following a tax cut).


A Two-Country Model with Flexible Prices

Consider two symmetric countries, Home and Foreign. We use the subscript D to denote
quantities and prices of a country's own tradable good consumed domestically, and the
subscript X to denote quantities and prices of exports.
                                                   {           (                   )}
                                                                            L1+ 
   A representative agent at Home maximizes E0          t=0  t
                                                                 log Ct -    t
                                                                            1+
                                                                                        , where Ct is
consumption and Lt denotes hours worked. The baseline analysis assumes a unitary Frisch
elasticity ( = 1). Consumption Ct aggregates Home and Foreign tradable consumption
sub-baskets in Armington form with an exogenous elasticity of substitution  > 0:

                  [                     1 (
                                                    ] -
                                                      
                            1       -1
                                            
                                              ) - 1     1
              Ct = (1 - X )  (CD,t )  + X CX,t 
                                        
                                                          ,        0   X           1,             (1)


where 1-X is the weight attached to the country's own good. The corresponding price index

                                              6
       [                       (  )1- ]1/(1-)
                         1-
is Pt = (1 - X ) (PD,t )    + X PX,t          . Foreign households derive utility from an
                                                                          
analogous consumption bundle of domestic and imported consumption goods, CD,t and CX,t .
Let D,t  PD,t /Pt and       
                      X,t  PX,t /Pt respectively denote the real prices of the domestic and

imported goods expressed in Home consumption units. Home private demands for domestic
and exported goods are, respectively, CD,t = (1 - X ) -                   - 
                                                      D,t Ct and CX,t = X X,t Ct .

       Households accumulate physical capital, Kt , and rent it to producers in a competitive
capital market. We make two assumptions that ensure analytical tractability without loss
of generality: (i) full capital depreciation and (ii) no time-to-build delays. This implies the
model is static: in each period capital is equal to investment, i.e., It = Kt .8 Investment
in physical capital, It , requires purchasing a bundle that has the same composition of final
consumption Ct .9 The demand for domestic and exported capital goods are given by ID,t =
(1 - X ) -                   - 
         D,t It and IX,t = X X,t It .

       The household's budget constraint is Ct + It = (1 - t ) (wt Lt + rK,t Kt ) + Tt , where wt
denotes the real wage, rK,t is the rental rate of capital, t is an exogenous income tax,
and Tt is a lump-sum transfer from the government. The optimal labor supply implies
Lt = (1 - t ) wt /Ct . Optimality in investment requires rK,t = 1/(1 - t ).

                                                                                     -
       Each country produces with a constant-returns to scale technology Yt = Kta L1
                                                                                   t   . Opti-
mal demand for the factors of production requires rK,t = D,t Yt /Kt and wt = (1 - ) D,t Yt /Lt .
International trade is frictionless and the law of one price holds, implying: X,t = D,t /Qt ,
where Qt is the real exchange rate (in units of Home consumption per unit of Foreign con-
sumption).
   8
    In Appendix B.1, we show numerically the results hold with dynamic capital accumulation.
   9
    In the quantitative model of the next section, we allow for the relative import shares of investment and
consumption to differ, consistent with the data.




                                                     7
The Government The government uses income taxes and transfers to finance an exoge-
nous level of public expenditures Gt , which depends on both domestic and imported goods:

                 [        1       -1      1 (     ) - 1 ] -1
                                                          

             Gt = (1 - X
                       g               g 
                         ) (GD,t )  + (X ) G  X,t
                                                    
                                                             ,                    0    g
                                                                                       X     1,   (2)


                                                                     g
where we allow the share of Foreign goods in government consumption, X , to vary from
the private-demand import share. The corresponding price index is

                           [                                 ]1/(1-)
                     PG,t = (1 - X
                                 g
                                   ) (PD,t )1- + X
                                                 g
                                                   (PX,t )1-         .


The government's demand for domestic and exported goods are:

                                     (         )-                       (         )-
                                         D,t                                X,t
                 GD,t = (1 -   g
                               X )                  Gt ,   GX,t =   g
                                                                    X                  Gt,
                                         G,t                                G,t



where G,t  PG,t /Pt denotes the Home price of government consumption relative to Home
consumption. The Home government budget constraint is G,t Gt + Tt = t (wt Lt + rK,t Kt ).
The aggregate resource constraint implies Yt = CD,t + CX,t + ID,t + IX,t + GD,t + GX,t .


Fiscal Financing and International Asset Markets

We consider two alternative scenarios about the financing of the government's budget: (i)
lump-sum transfer financing (through the instrument Tt ) and (ii) distortionary financing
(assuming Tt = T in every period).
   Concerning the structure of international asset markets, we also consider two different
scenarios: (i) financial autarky and (ii) complete international asset markets. The latter case
allows us to study how trade-balance dynamics affect fiscal multipliers. Financial autarky
implies balanced trade in every period: T Bt = 0, where T Bt  Qt X,t (CX,t + IX,t + GX,t ) -
     (                   )
 X,t  C X,t + I 
               X,t + GX,t denotes the trade balance. Full risk-sharing implies that cross-
                      


country consumption levels are tied to the real exchange rate, Qt = Ct /Ct , replacing the


                                                     8
balanced-trade condition presented above.


Additional Definitions

We focus on the effects of fiscal expansions on real GDP, defined in units of Home output Yt 
      -                  ~t  Ct + It + G,t Gt is real GDP in units of Home consumption.10
         ~t /D,t , where Y
Kt L1
    t   =Y
While the latter measure is identical to output in a closed economy (since D,t = 1), in the
open economy the two can differ. As discussed in section 3, our quantitative results are
even stronger when considering real GDP in consumption units, arguably a metric closer to
welfare.
       For future reference, we define the terms of trade as the Home price of exports relative
to the price of imports (both expressed in Home currency): T OTt  Qt X,t /X,t . With

complete exchange-rate pass through, the terms of trade also are equal to the relative price
                                                    (       )
of domestic and imported goods, i.e., T OTt = D,t /   D,t Qt . Moreover, in the symmetric

steady state (where Q = 1), the total trade-to-GDP ratio is given by

                                 [                           ]
                                                      X
                               2 X (CX + IX ) +         G
                                                      G X
               trade/GDP                                         = 2 [(1 - sG ) X + X
                                                                                    g
                                                                                      sG ] ,
                                              Y

where sG  G/Y is the steady-state ratio of government spending to GDP. Consequently,
                                                      g
trade openness increases monotonically in either X or X .
       We log-linearize the equilibrium conditions and use the method of undetermined coeffi-
cients to solve the model.11 In what follows, hats denote variables in percentage deviations
from the steady state. We consider exogenous changes to either domestic government spend-
     ^ t > 0) or taxes (^
ing (G                  t < 0), while holding foreign government spending and taxes constant,
^ = 
G   ^t = 0 for all t.
 t
  10
      To simplify the analytical exposition, we focus directly on the GDP response. Results are similar when
considering GDP multipliers. The only caveat concerns tax multipliers. While output always increases
following a tax cut, tax revenue can either rise or fall, depending on the position of the income tax rate on
the Laffer curve.
   11
      Appendix A.1 lists the complete set of log-linearized equilibrium conditions.



                                                     9
Analytical Results in the Closed Economy

In a closed economy, both private- and public-consumption import shares are zero, i.e.,
    g
X = X = 0. The GDP response is given by:


                 ^tclosed =
                 Y
                                  sG      ^ t + (sI - ) [1 - sG +  (1 + sC - sI )] 
                                          G                                        ^t ,
                              1 + sC - sI            sI (1 + sC - sI ) (1 - )

where sC  1-(1- )-sG is the steady-state ratio of consumption to GDP and sI  (1- )
is the steady-state ratio of investment to GDP. Notice in a log-linear approximation, t
affects the equilibrium conditions only when  > 0 in steady state--otherwise sI =  in the
expression above.
       GDP rises following either an increase in government spending or a reduction in income
taxes. For an increase in public spending, GDP increases less than one-for-one, reflecting the
crowding-out of private consumption. Moreover, in this static model, investment increases
following an increase in public spending. This happens since the rental rate of capital is
constant absent changes in the tax rate, increasing the firm's demand for both production
inputs.12 Absent capital ( = 0), labor and GDP still rise with an increase in public spending,
while consumption still declines (see Woodford, 2011). Following an income tax cut, GDP
increases, reflecting a higher after tax-return to labor and a lower cost of capital.


Analytical Results in the Open Economy

We start with the assumption of financial autarky. Under this assumption, we study the
role of home bias in public and private demand and the implications of alternative types of
fiscal financing. We then consider the role of international trade in assets.
  12
    In the closed economy, I     ^ t = -C
                            ^t = L      ^t , as implied by the firm's first-order conditions, the labor supply
equation, and the fact that ^D,t = 0.




                                                     10
Full Home-Bias in Government Spending

                                                                     g
We first consider the case of full home-bias in government spending, X = 0, a simplifying
assumption often adopted in the literature.13 We also assume a unitary trade elasticity ,
another benchmark value in the literature. Under these knife-edge assumptions, terms-of-
trade fluctuations ensure full international risk sharing (Cole and Obstfeld, 1991).


Proposition 1 Let sC and sI denote, respectively, the steady-state shares of private con-
sumption and investment relative to GDP. Assume a unitary trade elasticity ( = 1), full
                                  g
home bias in government spending (X = 0), financial autarky, and lump-sum transfer fi-
nancing. Following a fiscal expansion at Home:


   1. The response of the terms of trade is given by:

                                                 sC - sI ^   sI - 
                                      T OT t =          Gt -       ^t ,
                                                   G           

       where G > 0 and  > 0. It follows that:


       (a) For an increase in government spending, T OT t > 0 provided sI < sC .

       (b) For a decrease in income taxes, T OT t < 0, since sI   (1 -  ) < .


   2. Provided T OT t > 0, it follows that

                                ^t , C
       (a) In the Home economy, Y    ^t , and I
                                              ^t are increasing in openness (X ); L
                                                                                  ^ t is

            decreasing in openness.

                                        ^t , and I
                                   ^t , C
       (b) In the Foreign economy, Y             ^t are decreasing in openness (X ); Lt is

            increasing in openness.

       (c) The real exchange rate appreciates only when X < 0.5.
  13
    See for instance Corsetti and Pesenti (2001), Erceg et al. (2005), Cook and Devereux (2013), and Farhi
and Werning (2016).



                                                   11
       Proposition 1 (proved in Appendix A.2) states the response of the terms of trade, T OTt ,
determines whether or not stronger trade linkages imply a larger fiscal stimulus. In particular,
when T OTt improve, GDP in the open economy increases by more than GDP in the closed
               ^t > Y
economy, i.e., Y    ^tclosed . By contrast, Foreign GDP declines.

       What is the intuition for the results in Proposition 1? Higher government expenditure
raises the relative price of the Home good D,t , which, other things equal, crowds out private
consumption (lowering demand for domestic goods). At the same time, as in the closed
economy, investment rises, increasing private demand. Since a share of both investment and
consumption goods are imported, import demand also changes. When sC > sI , imports
fall relative to exports, and the terms of trade appreciate to maintain balanced trade. This
favorable relative price movement induces a positive wealth effect for Home as more foreign
goods are traded per domestic good. In turn, this allows domestic households to purchase
more Home goods, increasing private consumption, investment, and output relative to the
closed economy.14 Foreign GDP and its components decline.
       Proposition 1 also shows the labor response is decreasing in openness when the terms
of trade appreciate. The lower (albeit positive) response of Lt relative to Lclosed
                                                                             t      reflects
lower hours supply given the positive wealth effect of the terms-of-trade appreciation. In
equilibrium, the crowding-in of investment dominates and output increases. It is sufficient to
                                                                                  ^t > L
consider preferences that eliminate the wealth effect on labor supply to generate L    ^ closed
                                                                                         t

following a terms-of-trade appreciation. In Appendix B.3, we present the analytical results
for the limiting case of a zero capital share  and also consider preferences as in Greenwood
et al. (1988).
       Contrary to GDP and its components, the terms-of-trade response is not a sufficient
statistic for the real exchange rate response. For instance, when the terms of trade improve,
the real exchange rate can still appreciate or depreciate, depending on the degree of Home
  14
    If one interprets instantaneously adjustable capital as materials, the restriction sI < sC is not empirically
plausible. However, Y   ^t > Y^tclosed can occur even when sI > sC once the restriction of a unitary Frisch
elasticity,  , is relaxed. See Appendix B.2 for the derivations.



                                                       12
bias in private demand.
      Under the knife-edge parameterization of Proposition 1, an income tax cut unambiguously
depreciates the terms of trade. Following the tax cut, domestic households are willing to work
more, leading to lower wages and domestic prices. Moreover, the rental rate of capital falls--
      ^k =  /(1 -  )^
since r             t --increasing demand for capital. Both effects lead to a deterioration in
the terms of trade, which results in a negative (positive) wealth effect domestically (abroad).
In turn, this lowers the domestic effectiveness of the stimulus relative to the closed economy.
At the same time, Foreign GDP and its components increase.


Generalizing the Composition of Government Spending

In practice, governments import goods. For instance, import shares for Australia, the U.K.,
and Canada are approximately 11% (see Corsetti and Muller, 2006). We now show the
effectiveness of public spending depends on the relative size of public-private import shares
and not on trade openness per se. Put differently, the relative composition of public and
private imports and exports,   X
                               g             g
                                 /X (and not X or X per se) is key for the effects of
government spending.
      We continue to assume a unitary trade elasticity.15 To simplify the analytical results, we
impose  = 0,   1, and sC > sI (that is, the GDP consumption share is larger than the
                                                                                  ^t > Y
investment share), the latter being the restriction in Proposition 1 that ensures Y    ^ closed
                                                                                         t

following an increase in public spending. We then show numerically the results generalize
when these restrictions are relaxed.


Proposition 2 Let sC , sI , and sG denote, respectively, the steady-state shares of private
consumption, investment, and government spending relative to GDP. Let   X
                                                                        g
                                                                          /X be the
ratio of public-to-private sector import shares. Assume a unitary trade elasticity ( = 1), zero
income taxes ( = 0), sC > sI ,              1, financial autarky, and lump-sum transfer financing.
 15        g
      When X > 0, a unitary trade elasticity no longer implies perfect international risk sharing.




                                                      13
For an increase in Home government spending, there exists a threshold   :

                                               1 - sG - 2
                                                          ,
                                               2 - sG - 2

such that for any  <   :


                                            ^t > Y
                       (i) T OT t > 0; (ii) Y    ^ closed ,             ^  < 0,
                                                              and (iii) Y
                                                   t                      t




provided that sG < 1/2.

                           ^t > Y
       Proposition 2 shows Y    ^tclosed even for countries with a non-zero public import share.

As in Proposition 1, when the terms of trade improve, a higher private-sector import share
(X ) reduces consumption crowding out and increases investment, leading to higher GDP
                                                                           g
relative to the closed economy. In contrast, a higher public import share (X ) lowers GDP.
As the government consumes more Foreign goods, Foreign prices increase, dampening Home
imports' demand. For a sufficiently high value of  , the reduced private-import demand
implies a reduction in Home total imports, resulting in a terms-of-trade depreciation to
maintain balanced trade. In turn, the negative wealth effect generates more crowding out of
domestic private demand relative to the closed economy.
       Figure 1a demonstrates the robustness of proposition 2 for various combinations of 
and  .16 The figure depicts the Home and Foreign GDP responses as well as the terms-
of-trade response following a 1% increase in government spending. We consider a grid for
g
X  [0, 0.35] and let X adjust to maintain a constant trade share equal to 0.5. In addition,
we set  = 0.33, sG = 0.2, and  = 0.25. The plane in each panel plots the response in
the closed economy. The relative size of public-private import shares continues to determine
outcomes once relaxing the parametric restrictions on . Consistent with proposition 2,
Home GDP responses decline in  . Home GDP and the terms-of-trade responses also are
  16                                                                                       ^t > Y
    In Appendix A.5, we present additional numerical results, computing the probability of Y    ^tclosed
conditional on a range of values for ,  , and the inverse Frisch elasticity  .


                                                  14
decreasing in , since a higher trade elasticity dampens the terms of trade appreciation.


Distortionary Fiscal Financing

So far our analysis has assumed the government uses lump-sum transfers to finance its
budget. Here we demonstrate distortionary financing can increase the likelihood that trade
linkages enhance fiscal multipliers.
    To assess the role of distortionary financing, we must resort to numerical simulations.17
Figure 1b repeats the numerical analysis of figure 1a assuming income taxes finance the
government budget (i.e., lump-sum transfers remain constant). The plane in each panel
plots the response in the closed economy. Absent trade linkages, Home GDP falls when
government spending increases, due to the negative effect of higher taxes on the supply of
capital and labor. Trade linkages reduce this effect for all combinations of the trade elasticity
 and the relative share of public and private imports  --the GDP response is above the
closed economy in all cases. Other things equal, the increase in the income tax rate raises the
terms of trade, and this additional wealth effect partly offsets the negative response of the
supply of capital and labor. As explained before, the terms-of-trade appreciation is stronger
for lower  and  combinations.
    When an income tax cut is financed by lower government expenditures, again the relative
share of public and private imports,  , determines the size of GDP responses. As shown in
Appendix A.3, less home bias in public goods (i.e., a higher  ) raises domestic responses
since the reduction in public demand affects more heavily the Foreign economy. Provided
the decrease in government spending falls sufficiently on Foreign imports, the terms of trade
can improve in equilibrium, boosting Home GDP relative to the closed economy.
   17
      Analytical solutions are only possible under the knife-edge assumptions of Proposition 1, preventing us
                                          g
from analyzing the central role of   X      /X for distortionary financing.




                                                     15
                                Home Output                                                     Foreign Output                                                 Terms of Trade


          0.165

                                                                             0.03
           0.16                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                            0.025
          0.155
                                                                             0.02                                                               -0.1

           0.15
                                                                            0.015
                                                                                                                                                -0.2
          0.145
                                                                             0.01

           0.14                                                                                                                                 -0.3
                                                                            0.005

          0.135
                                                                                0                                                               -0.4

           0.13
                                                                            -0.005
                                                                                                                                                -0.5
          0.125                                                              -0.01
                                                                                                                                          2.5
                                                                      2.5                                                             2                                                          2.5
                   1                                                                     1                                                             1
                                                                2                                                               1.5                                                          2
                          0.5                             1.5                                      0.5                                                        0.5                      1.5
                                                                                                                           1
                                                1                                                                                                                                  1
                                   0      0.5                                                                0     0.5                                              0    0.5            


                                                                        ^ >Y
  (a) Government Spending Increase Financed by Lump-Sum Transfers; P r (Y  ^ closed ) = 0.3.


                                Home Output                                                     Foreign Output                                                 Terms of Trade


                                                                                0


                                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                                             -0.02
           -0.08                                                                                                                                0.45

                                                                                                                                                 0.4
            -0.1                                                             -0.04
                                                                                                                                                0.35

                                                                                                                                                 0.3
           -0.12
                                                                             -0.06
                                                                                                                                                0.25

           -0.14                                                                                                                                 0.2
                                                                             -0.08
                                                                                                                                                0.15
           -0.16
                                                                                                                                                 0.1
                                                                              -0.1
                                                                                                                                                0.05
           -0.18
                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                             -0.12
                   1
                                                                    2.5                                                                                1                                         2.5
                                                            2                        1                                                    2.5                                                2
                          0.5                                                                                                         2                    0.5
                                                    1.5                                                                                                                                1.5
                                                                                             0.5                               1.5
                                           1                                                                           1                                                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                  0 0.5                                                                  0       0.5                                                0   0.5




                                                                     ^ >Y
     (b) Government Spending Increase Financed by Income Taxes; P r (Y  ^ closed ) = 1.0.

Figure 1. Impact response of GDP (Home and Foreign) and the terms of trade under financial
autarky following a 1% increase in government spending for different combinations of  and . The
plane in each panel denotes the response in the closed economy. In all cases,  = 0.33, sG = 0.2,
 = 0.25, and the trade share = 0.5.
                                                                                                         16
International Trade in Financial Assets

We now relax the assumption of financial autarky and consider the role of trade balance
                                                                               g
dynamics. To obtain analytical results under complete asset markets, we impose X = 0
and the following simplifying assumptions:  = 0 following an increase in public spending
and sG = 0 following an income tax cut. In Appendix A.4, we show numerically the results
generalize when relaxing these restrictions.

                                                      g
Proposition 3 Let  denote the trade elasticity; X and X respectively denote the private-
and public-sector home bias;  is the income tax rate; and sG is the share of government
spending to GDP. Assume complete international asset markets, lump-sum transfer financ-
         g
ing, and X = 0. Following a fiscal expansion, trade linkages can increase domestic output
even when net exports decline.


  1. Assuming  = 0, following an increase in Home government spending:


      (a) The terms of trade increase (T OT t > 0).

          ^t > Y
      (b) Y    ^ closed if X and  are sufficiently small (X < ~ X and  < ~).
                 t

                ^t > Y
      (c) Given Y    ^ closed , net exports decline when X and  are sufficiently large (¯X <
                       t

           X < ~ X and ¯<<~).


  2. Assuming sG = 0, following a decrease in Home income taxes:


      (a) The terms of trade decline (T OT t < 0).

          ^t > Y
      (b) Y    ^ closed if trade is sufficiently price elastic, i.e.,  > .
                 t

                ^t > Y
      (c) Given Y    ^ closed , net exports always increase.
                       t



   See Appendix A.4 for the definitions of the cut-off values ~X , ¯X , ~, ¯, and . Proposition

3 shows even with net export crowding out, trade linkages can increase domestic GDP
responses. Following an increase in government spending, output is higher than in the closed

                                               17
economy when private-sector home bias and the trade elasticity are below threshold values.
Intuitively, trade linkages increase domestic output when the positive wealth effect stemming
from the appreciation of the terms of trade more than offsets its negative substitution effect
through net exports. In contrast, for a decrease in income taxes, output is higher than in
the closed economy when the trade elasticity is higher than a threshold value. In this case,
the increase in net exports is sufficient to offset the negative wealth effect implied by the
terms-of-trade depreciation. Appendix A.4 shows the qualitative responses of Home and
Foreign GDP remain consistent with Proposition 3 once relaxing the parametric restrictions
               g
on  , sG , and X . Moreover, consistent with Proposition 2, the response of GDP continues
to depend on the relative share of public and private imports,  .


Nominal Rigidities and The Role of International Pricing

Finally, we discuss the role of price-setting frictions. In the presence of nominal rigidities,
there are three scenarios depending on the invoicing of export prices: (i) producer currency
pricing (PCP), in which both domestic and export prices are sticky in the domestic currency;
(ii) local currency pricing (LCP), in which export prices are sticky in the foreign currency;
and (iii) dominant currency pricing (DCP), in which export prices are sticky everywhere in
the Foreign currency (the dominant currency).
   In order to derive analytical solutions, we make the following assumptions: (i) complete
price stickiness and (ii) financial autarky. We present the analytical derivations for the three
alternative export pricing scenarios in Appendix A.6. Here we highlight two main insights.
   First, incomplete exchange-rate pass-through (e.g., LCP and DCP) creates a wedge be-
tween terms-of-trade fluctuations and cross-country wealth effects. For instance, with fixed
                                                               ¯  ). Nevertheless, trade
                                                           ¯X /P
prices, the terms of trade are constant under DCP (T OTt = P     D

linkages affect fiscal multipliers. Independent of export invoicing, the markup-adjusted terms
of trade,
                                             µD,t /µD,t    D,t
                             T OCt  T OTt           
                                                        =        ,
                                             µX,t /µX,t   Qt D,t



                                              18
summarize the domestic effects of trade linkages following a fiscal expansion (see Appendix
A.6 for the proof). We refer to this relative price as the domestic terms of consumption. In-
tuitively, when export prices are sticky in a foreign currency, lack of markup synchronization
affects domestic wealth even if the terms of trade are constant, since a unit of export revenue
does not yield one unit of domestic consumption once expressed in the same consumption
units. Mirroring the intuition of the flexible price model (where T OCt = T OTt ), an increase
in T OCt implies that Home agents can consume more Foreign goods per unit of the Home
good. Other things equal, this positive wealth effect reduces the crowding out of private
demand relative to a closed economy.
    Second, the currency invoicing of imports and exports affects the behavior of the domestic
terms of consumption. For instance, with complete price stickiness, T OCt = 1/Qt under
LCP, whereas T OCt = D,t /X,t under DCP. Thus, while under LCP the effects of a fiscal

expansion are simply tied to the response of the real exchange rate, under DCP what matters
is the relative price of domestic to imported goods (since in this case the aggregate price
indices Pt and Pt are not constant). In turn, when a fiscal expansion increases the real price
of Home goods relative to Foreign goods--e.g., with an increase in government spending--
trade linkages are more likely to strengthen the response of GDP under DCP for a given
response of the real exchange rate. We explore the quantitative significance of price-setting
frictions and the invoicing of export prices when studying the quantitative model presented
in the next section.


3    The Quantitative Model

In this section, we use a Bayesian prior-predictive analysis to show a benchmark, interna-
tional business-cycle model preserves the key insights from section 2. In the next section,
we estimate the model for a well-studied country pair with a flexible exchange rate, Canada
and the U.S.
    Towards this goal, we introduce additional competing forces for the fiscal transmission

                                              19
absent in the analytical model. First, we consider a rich fiscal environment, including gov-
ernment debt, public spending, and consumption and income taxes. Second, we include
features proven to be important for the transmission of fiscal shocks in a closed economy--
non-separable utility between public and private consumption and wage-setting frictions.
Third, we introduce intertemporal investment dynamics and incomplete international asset
markets, thus allowing fiscal shocks to affect the current account position of trading partners
without imposing complete international risk sharing.
   We consider a small open economy that trades with the rest of the world, since in our em-
pirical application we focus on Canada and the U.S.--the latter being a good approximation
of the rest of the world for Canada. We follow the standard approach in the literature and
model two countries in which one (the small open economy, Home henceforth) is of measure
zero relative to the other (the rest of the world, Foreign henceforth). Consistent with recent
empirical evidence (e.g., Goldberg and Tille, 2008 and Gopinath, 2015), we assume export
prices are sticky in the Foreign currency (the dominant currency). The small open economy's
terms of trade fluctuate endogenously due to firms' monopoly power.
   Below, variables without a time subscript denote non-stochastic values along the balanced
growth path. Unless otherwise specified, exogenous shocks follow a stationary autoregressive
                                                      iid   (     )
                     ¯ t = X     ¯ t-1 + Xt         ¯  N 0, X                       ¯
                                                                2
process in logs: log X     ¯ log X         ¯ with Xt             ¯ , for any shock Xt . We

present the model details below, relegating to Appendix C standard first-order conditions.
In Appendix D, we show our results are unchanged in a two large-country version of the
model.


Households

The representative household, indexed by j  [0, 1], maximizes the expected intertemporal
utility function           {             [                                    ]}
                                             (                )        L1+ 
                                       ¯t log C
                                              ~jt - hC C            ¯   jt
                      E0              t                ~t-1       - ht             ,       (3)
                               t=0
                                                                       1+



                                                  20
where   (0, 1) is the discount factor, C
                                       ~jt is a consumption basket that consists of private

and public consumption as described below, and Ljt is the number of hours worked. To
introduce wage stickiness, we assume each household is a monopolistic supplier of a differen-
tiated labor input Ljt . The household values consumption relative to a habit stock defined
                                            ~t-1 , where hC  [0, 1). 
in terms of lagged aggregate consumption hC C                        ¯t is an exogenous
                                    ¯ t is an exogenous shock to the marginal disutility of
shock to the discount factor, while h
hours worked. Consumption utility is logarithmic to ensure balanced growth in the presence
of non-stationary technological progress.
   To allow for an agnostic response of private consumption following a government spend-
ing shock, we follow F`
                      eve et al. (2013) and Leeper et al. (2017), assuming non-separable
                                                                       ~jt , is the sum of
preferences between private and public consumption. Total consumption, C
                                      ~jt = Cjt + G Gt . When G < 0, private and public
private and public consumption goods, C
consumption are complements; when G > 0, the goods are substitutes.
   Market consumption Ct aggregates Home and Foreign consumption sub-baskets as de-
scribed by equation (1) in the previous section. We allow for exogenous fluctuations in the
elasticity of substitution between Home and Foreign baskets, ¯t , capturing in reduced form

fluctuations in the relative price of imported goods (Mukhin and Itskhoki, 2016 and Pavlova
and Rigobon, 2007).
   The sub-basket CD,t aggregates domestic differentiated consumption varieties CD,t (i):
      [             ¯t -1)/¯t
                                 ]¯ /(
                                   t
                                      ¯ -1)
                                       t
        1
CD,t = 0 CD,t (i) (
                              di            , where ¯t > 1 is the exogenous elasticity of substitution

across domestic goods, capturing price-markup shocks. A similar basket describes consump-
                              [            ¯ -1)/¯
                                                       ]¯ /(
                                                         t
                                                            ¯ -1)
                                                             t
                                1 
tion of Foreign goods: CX,t = 0 CX,t (i) (  t     t di            .
   International asset markets are incomplete, as a non-contingent nominal bond denomi-
nated in Foreign currency is the only internationally traded asset. We denote Home holdings
with Aj
      t . To ensure a determinate steady-state equilibrium and stationary responses to ag-

gregate shocks, we assume that there is a premium on the Home holdings of Foreign bonds
                                                                         {           }
(e.g. Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe, 2003 and Adolfson et al., 2005): t  exp - QY     t At
                                                                                  t
                                                                                       ¯ at ,
                                                                                       


                                                 21
where  > 0, and Qt is the real exchange rate. The risk premium increases with the econ-
omy's aggregate level of debt (-At ) as a share of GDP (Yt , defined below). The term ¯ at

captures exogenous fluctuations in the risk-premium as in Mukhin and Itskhoki (2016).
    Households also have access to one-period, riskless nominal domestic government bonds
 j 18
Bt . Moreover, the household accumulates physical capital and rents it to intermediate
input producers in a competitive market. Investment aggregates domestic and imported
investment goods ID,t and IX,t in Armington form:

                   [                                                                 ]¯t /(¯t -1)
                                            ¯     ¯  ( I )1/¯t (      )( ¯t -1)/¯t
                                    (ID,t )(t -1)/t + X
                              ¯                                   
             It = (1 -    I 1/
                          X ) t                                  IX,t                               ,


where 1 - X
          I
            is the weight attached to the country's own investment good. The investment
                      
sub-baskets ID,t and IX,t have the same composition as the private consumption sub-baskets
          
CD,t and CX,t .
    We introduce convex adjustment costs in physical investment and variable capital uti-
                                                                                       ~ tj , and the
lization. Effective capital rented to firms, Ktj , is the product of physical capital, K
utilization rate, uj      j    j   ~j                                  j
                   K,t : Kt = uK,t Kt . Utilization incurs a cost of (uK,t ) per unit of physical

capital. In steady state, uK = 1 and (1) = 0. We define the parameter   [0, 1) such that
     
 (1)/ (1)  / (1 -  ). Physical capital, K
                                        ~ t , obeys a standard law of motion:

                                                                 (            )2 
                       ~ tj+1 = (1 - K ) K      ¯K,t 1 - K            Itj          Itj ,
                       K                 ~ tj + P                            -z
                                                                              ¯                          (4)
                                                         2           Itj-1


                                  ¯K,t is an exogenous investment specific shock, and z
where K > 0 is a scale parameter, P                                                   ¯ is
the growth rate of productivity along the balanced growth path.
    Household's income (the sum of rental capital and labor income) is taxed at the rate
tI . Moreover, the household pays consumption taxes tC . The household's period budget
  18
     We assume all government debt is issued in domestic currency and held by domestic households. See
Broner et al. (2018) and Priftis and Zimic (2018) for a discussion of how foreign debt holdings affect fiscal
multipliers.




                                                     22
constraint is:

                                    (         )                                ( j        )
                                                                K,t )Pt Kt - Pt Tt + TG,t
             Btj
                  + t A j         j
                        t + Pt C t 1 +  t
                                            C
                                                + PtI Itj + (uj         ~j            j

                                                   (            w 2 ) n            (        )
                              
 = (1 + it-1 )Btj
                 -1 + (1  + i t-1 )     A j
                                     t-1 t-1 t   +   1   -  I
                                                            t -      W,t wjt Ljt + 1 - tI Pt rK,t Ktj ,
                                                                 2
                                                                                                    (5)


where it and it are, respectively, the nominal interest rates on Home and Foreign bond

holdings between t - 1 and t, known with certainty as of t - 1, and t is the nominal
exchange rate (in units of Home currency per unit of Foreign currency). Ttj is a lump-sum
                                   j
rebate of producer profits, while TG,t is a lump-sum transfer from the government. Finally,
                                     n
the household sets the nominal wage wjt subject to a quadratic adjustment cost w /22
                                                                                   W,t ,

where
                                      [  n                     ]
                                    1 wjt                 -w
                             W,t       n
                                             (1 + C,t-1 )    -1 .
                                    z
                                    ¯ wjt -1

Households index wage changes to past CPI inflation, 1 + C,t  Pt /Pt .
   The household maximizes its expected intertemporal utility subject to (4) and (5). In
                                                            n
Appendix C, we report the first-order conditions for Ljt , wjt  ~ tj+1 , uj , Itj , Ctj , and bond
                                                               ,K         K,t

holdings.


Production

In each country, there are two vertically integrated production stages. At the upstream level,
perfectly competitive firms use capital and labor to produce a non-tradable intermediate
input. At the downstream level, monopolistically competitive firms use the intermediate
input to produce tradable final consumption goods.


Homogeneous Intermediate Input Production The representative intermediate firm
                        (      )
produces output YtI = Kt Z¯t Lt 1- , where Z
                                           ¯t is exogenous productivity, Kt is physical
                                                                                   ¯t and
capital, and Lt is a bundle of the labor inputs supplied by individual households. Z



                                                 23
¯  are non-stationary and cointegrated stochastic processes.19 The growth rate of Foreign
Zt

                ¯  /Z
                    ¯  follows a stationary AR(1) process in logs. Home productivity
productivity z
             ¯t Z t   t-1

¯t features the same stochastic trend up to a stationary stochastic disturbance, 
Z                                                                                    ¯t /Z
                                                                                 ¯t  Z   ¯t ,

which also follows a stationary AR(1) process in logs. As a result, the growth rate of Home
                                                                     ¯t-1 - log ¯t .
             ¯t  Z
productivity z   ¯t /Z
                     ¯t-1 evolves according to log z
                                                   ¯t = log z
                                                            ¯t + log 
   The composite labor input aggregates in Dixit-Stiglitz form the differentiated labor inputs
                                      [                   ]/(-1)
provided by domestic households: Lt  0 (Ljt )(-1)/ dj
                                         1
                                                                 where  > 0 is the elasticity
of substitution, and Ljt denotes the labor hired from household j . Let t be the real price
(in units of final consumption) of the intermediate input. The Home firm chooses Lt and Kt
to maximize the value of per-period profit: t YtI - (wt
                                                      n
                                                        /Pt ) Lt - rK,t Kt . Appendix C presents
the first-order conditions.


Final Producers A continuum of symmetric firms produce tradable consumption varieties
indexed by j  (0, 1). Final producers pay a quadratic adjustment cost when changing
domestic and export prices.20 Final producers index domestic and export prices to past CPI
inflation in each respective market. The cost of adjusting the domestic price is

                               [ j                     ]2
                              p PD,t               -p
                                 j     (1 + C,t-1 ) - 1 PD,t
                                                          j   j
                                                             YD,t ,
                              2 PD,t-1


where p  0 is the size of the adjustment costs, and YD,t
                                                     j
                                                         denotes aggregate domestic
demand. The cost (in Home currency) of adjusting the export price is

                             [ j                           ]2
                            p PX,t (      
                                                 ) - 
                                                        - 1 t PX,t
                                                               j    j
                                                      p
                               j      1 + C,t -1                   YX,t ,
                            2 PX,t -1

  19
     Rabanal and Rubio-Ramirez (2015) and Rabanal et al. (2011) show this specification for TFP helps
match properties of real exchange rate data.
  20
     Up to a first-order approximation and with zero trend inflation, Rotemberg and Calvo price adjustment
yield identical dynamics.




                                                   24
       j
where YX,t denotes aggregate export demand. In the symmetric equilibrium, the domestic
price of Home output is a time-varying markup, µD,t , over the marginal cost t : D,t 
PD,t /Pt = µD,t t . The export price is a time-varying markup, µX,t , over the marginal cost:
X,t  PX,t /Pt = µX,t t /Qt . We report the markups' derivations in Appendix C.


Monetary and Fiscal Policy

The monetary authority follows a Taylor rule in which the nominal interest rate responds
to its lagged value, deviations of CPI inflation, and GDP from their long-run targets. We
denote a variable in percentage deviations from steady state by a hat. The interest rate
obeys
                                               [            ]
                          ^     it-1 + (1 - i )  
                          it = i^                         ^t + i,t ,
                                                 ^C,t + Y Y                                    (6)

where i,t is an i.i.d. monetary shock. We define real GDP by evaluating expenditures at
fixed (steady-state) relative prices (e.g., Laxton and Pesenti, 2003): Yt  Ct + I It + G Gt +
QX YX,t -    
          X YX,t .

   As in the one-period model of section 2, government consumption Gt aggregates Home
and Foreign government consumption sub-baskets, GD,t and GX,t . Fiscal choices satisfy the

government's per-period budget constraint:


          Bt + tI (rK,t Pt Kt + wt
                                 n
                                   Lt ) + Pt tC Ct = (1 + it-1 )Bt-1 + PG,t Gt + Pt TG,t .

                                                                        {             }
Fiscal rules dictate the evolution of policy instruments, X =               G,  C ,  L . We assume
                           ^t-1 + X,t , where X iid
        ^ t-1 - (1 - X ) X S
^ t = X X
X                                                N (0, X
                                                       2
                                                         ). We include an autoregressive
term to allow for serial correlation and a response to the debt-to-GDP ratio, St  Bt / (Pt Yt ),
to ensure policies stabilize debt. Lump-sum transfers, TG,t , capture all movements in gov-
ernment debt that are not explained by the model nor the government spending and tax
processes. TG,t follows an AR(1) process.




                                                25
Net Foreign Assets
                                                            (        )     (       )
Home net foreign assets are determined by: Qt a,t = a,t-1 Qt 1 + i              
                                                                  t-1 t-1 / 1 + C,t +

T Bt , where a,t  At /Pt denotes real holdings of Foreign bonds (in units of Foreign con-
sumption) and T Bt  Qt X,t YX,t -        
                                    X,t YX,t is the trade balance. The change in net foreign
                                                  (              )
                                                          a,t-1
assets is determined by the current account, Qt a,t - 1+           = CAt  Qt rt a,t-1 + T Bt ,
                                                             C,t

         
                                  [(          )         ]  (        )
where C,t    Pt /Pt-1 - 1 and rt     1 + i                         
                                          t-1 t-1 - 1 / 1 + C,t denotes the real interest

rate.
   We present additional details of the symmetric equilibrium and the determination of
Foreign variables in Appendix C. We rewrite the model in terms of detrended variables and
compute the log-linear approximation around the non-stochastic steady state.


Model Predictions

We employ a prior-predictive analysis to uncover the full range of fiscal outcomes implied by
the model structure before confronting the data (see Geweke, 2010). To do so, we propose
independent prior density functions for structural parameters, take draws from these priors,
and calculate model-implied present-value fiscal multipliers, defined below. This exercise
serves two purposes. First, the analysis shows the model does not restrict fiscal outcomes
along any dimension a priori. In particular, the model is agnostic about the role of trade
linkages for fiscal multipliers, as well as the sign and size of the responses of the terms
of consumption, real exchange rate, and international macroeconomic spillovers following
discretionary fiscal interventions. Second, the analysis confirms the central wisdom of section
2 is preserved in a quantitative version of the model. The effects of trade linkages on fiscal
multipliers are tied to the dynamics of the terms of consumption and the trade balance.


Priors

We impose dogmatic priors for a few parameters. We set the discount factor  equal to 0.99,
the share of capital in the Cobb-Douglas production function  equal to 0.33, and the capital

                                              26
depreciation rate K equal to 0.025. We set the elasticity of substitution of differentiated
varieties  equal to 6 to generate a 20 percent steady-state markup. We set the elasticity of
substitution of labor inputs  to 11 to generate a 10 percent steady-state wage markup. For
the remaining parameters, we specify independent prior density functions.
   We choose conventional prior distributions for the parameters that are standard in the
Bayesian estimation literature (e.g., Smets and Wouters, 2007). We discuss these priors in
Appendix D. Concerning less-standard parameters, we employ the following approach. We
adopt a uniform distribution for the elasticity of substitution between Home and Foreign
goods () over the interval 0.05 to 6. A uniform prior ensures the data fully inform the
parameter's estimate. Likewise, we adopt a uniform prior for the elasticity of substitution
between public and private goods (G ). For the parameter governing the endogenous risk
premium ( ), we adopt an inverse gamma distribution for 10 ×  with a mean of 0.75 and
standard deviation of 1.5. The low mean reflects the low values of this parameter found in the
literature (e.g., Lane and Milesi-Ferretti, 2002). The inverse gamma distribution allows for
a long right tail encompassing higher estimates in the literature (e.g., Adolfson et al., 2007).
We adopt uniform distributions encompassing empirically-relevant ranges for the following
parameters: the steady-state trade-to-GDP ratio follows U (0.25, 0.75); the import intensities
of public consumption and private investment relative to private consumption are such that
g
X /X  U (0.1, 0.4) and X
                       I
                         /X  U (0.75, 1.40); the steady-state public spending share is
G/Y  U (0.10, 0.35); the annualized debt-to-GDP ratio is B/ (4 × Y )  U (0.40, 0.80); and
the tax rates are such that  I  U (0.15, 0.35), and  C  U (0.05, 0.20).


Prior-Predictive Analysis

We take 10,000 draws from our priors and calculate present-value multipliers for various
variables of interest X (i.e., GDP, consumption or investment). Formally, the multiplier for




                                              27
a variable X is:                         k     [         ]
                                                   k  -1
                                    Et
                                   j =0          + i=0 (1
                                                   r )     Pt+j Xt+j
                            MX          [ k              ]           ,                                   (7)
                                Et k
                                   j =0   i=0 (1 + r ) -1 P     F
                                                            t+j t+j


where k is the time horizon, r is the steady-state real interest rate, and F denotes government
spending or income tax revenue. All values are expressed in constant-price units. Addition-
                                                        ~t = Ct + I,t It + G,t Gt + T Bt .21
ally, we report GDP multipliers expressed in CPI units, Y
These present-value multipliers measure the present value change over the k -horizon in the
variable of interest when government spending or income tax revenue increases in present
value by one unit over the same horizon.22
       The prior-predictive analysis allows one to assess the range within which fiscal multipliers
vary in an open vs. closed economy. In addition, it allows one to verify whether the model
systematically restricts fiscal outcomes a priori. Figure 2a plots 90-percent confidence bands
for the difference between open- and closed-economy multipliers following either a Home or
Foreign fiscal shock. This multiplier difference subtracts the Home multiplier in a counterfac-
                                               g   I
tually closed economy (formally defined as X = X = X = 0) from the Home multiplier in
the open economy. Figure 2a shows large differences in open- vs. closed-economy multipliers
following Home fiscal shocks, encompassing both positive and negative values. In addition,
there is a wide range of spillovers from Foreign fiscal shocks to the Home economy.
       Figure 2b shows the model also is agnostic about the sign and size of key international
variables including the real exchange rate, the trade balance, and the domestic terms of
consumption following any fiscal shock. In particular, the real exchange rate can depreciate
following an increase in government spending, and higher open-economy multipliers can
coincide with a real depreciation.23 The agnostic predictions about the real exchange-rate
response depend on the presence of a debt-elastic risk premium (Bouakez and Eyquem,
  21
     Multipliers constructed using real variables in production units (YtI ) are similar (see Appendix D).
  22
     When analyzing an income tax cut, we multiply the fiscal multipliers by -1, so that a positive GDP
multiplier implies GDP increases, while a negative multiplier implies GDP declines. This favors comparability
with the effects of a public spending increase.
  23
     For instance, two years after an increase in government spending, GDP multipliers are higher relative
to the closed economy in about 50% of the cases in which the real exchange rate depreciates.


                                                     28
                                         Home Gov                                          Home Income                                          Foreign Gov                                        Foreign Income
                                      Spending Increase                                    Tax Decrease                                       Spending Increase                                     Tax Decrease
                              0.5                                                   0.1                                               0.5
           Open-Closed




                                                                Open-Closed
            GDP PVM




                                                                 GDP PVM




                                                                                                                     GDP PVM




                                                                                                                                                                           GDP PVM
                                                                                       0                                                                                                    0.2
             C units




                                                                  C units




                                                                                                                      C units




                                                                                                                                                                            C units
              Home




                                                                   Home




                                                                                                                      Home




                                                                                                                                                                            Home
                                  0                                                -0.1                                                                                                     0.1
                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                   -0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                              -0.5                                                 -0.3
                                                                                                                                      -0.5
                                            5    10   15   20                                  5    10   15   20                                    5    10   15   20                                  5    10   15   20

                                                                                    0.1
              Open - Closed




                                                                   Open - Closed
                              0.2                                                                                                     0.4




                                                                                                                         GDP PVM




                                                                                                                                                                              GDP PVM
                GDP PVM




                                                                     GDP PVM
                                                                                                                                                                                            0.1
                 Home




                                                                      Home




                                                                                                                          Home




                                                                                                                                                                               Home
                                  0                                                    0                                              0.2
                              -0.2                                                                                                        0                                                    0
                                                                                   -0.1
                              -0.4                                                                                                    -0.2
                              -0.6                                                 -0.2                                                                                                    -0.1
                                            5    10   15   20                                  5    10   15   20                                    5    10   15   20                                  5    10   15   20
             Open - Closed




                                                                 Open - Closed




                              0.2                                                                                                     0.1                                                   0.1
              Cons. PVM




                                                                  Cons. PVM




                                                                                                                        Cons. PVM




                                                                                                                                                                             Cons. PVM
                                                                                       0
                Home




                                                                    Home




                                                                                                                          Home




                                                                                                                                                                               Home
                              0.1                                                                                                         0
                                                                                 -0.05                                                                                                     0.05
                                  0
                                                                                                                                      -0.1
                                                                                   -0.1
                              -0.1                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                      -0.2
                                            5    10   15   20                                  5    10   15   20                                    5    10   15   20                                  5    10   15   20
             Open - Closed




                                                                 Open - Closed




                                                                                   0.05
              Invest. PVM




                                                                  Invest. PVM




                              0.2




                                                                                                                        Invest. PVM




                                                                                                                                                                             Invest. PVM
                                                                                                                                                                                            0.1
                                                                                                                                      0.1
                                                                                       0
                 Home




                                                                     Home




                                                                                                                           Home




                                                                                                                                                                                Home
                                                                                                                                          0                                                0.05
                                  0                                              -0.05
                                                                                                                                      -0.1                                                     0
                                                                                   -0.1
                              -0.2                                                                                                    -0.2
                                            5    10   15   20                                  5    10   15   20                                    5    10   15   20                                  5    10   15   20




                                                                                 (a) Present-Value Multipliers

                                         Home Gov                                          Home Income                                          Foreign Gov                                        Foreign Income
                                      Spending Increase                                    Tax Decrease                                       Spending Increase                                     Tax Decrease
                           0.08                                                                                                  0.04                                                 0.06
                                                                              0.02
                           0.06                                                                                                  0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                      0.04
              Terms of




                                                                   Terms of




                                                                                                                     Terms of




                                                                                                                                                                          Terms of

                           0.04                                                    0                                                0
               Cons.




                                                                    Cons.




                                                                                                                      Cons.




                                                                                                                                                                           Cons.

                           0.02                                                                                                 -0.02                                                 0.02
                                                                              -0.02
                              0                                                                                                 -0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                              -0.04                                             -0.06
                          -0.02
                                                                                                                                -0.08                                                 -0.02
                                                                              -0.06
                                        5       10    15   20                              5       10    15   20                                5       10    15   20                              5       10    15   20


                          0.04
                                                                                   0                                                                                                  0.04
               Terms of




                                                                   Terms of




                                                                                                                     Terms of




                                                                                                                                                                           Terms of




                                                                                                                                      0
                Trade




                                                                    Trade




                                                                                                                      Trade




                                                                                                                                                                            Trade




                          0.02
                                                                              -0.02                                             -0.02                                                 0.02

                              0                                               -0.04                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                -0.04

                                        5       10    15   20                              5       10    15   20                                5       10    15   20                              5       10    15   20


                          0.02                                                0.04                                              0.06
           Exchange




                                                                Exchange




                                                                                                                   Exchange




                                                                                                                                                                        Exchange




                              0                                                                                                 0.04                                                       0
             Rate




                                                                  Rate




                                                                                                                     Rate




                                                                                                                                                                          Rate
             Real




                                                                  Real




                                                                              0.02
                                                                                                                     Real




                                                                                                                                                                          Real




                          -0.02                                                                                                 0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                      -0.02
                                                                                   0                                                  0
                          -0.04
                                                                                                                                -0.02                                                 -0.04
                                        5       10    15   20                              5       10    15   20                                5       10    15   20                              5       10    15   20

                                                                              0.05                                               0.3                                                  0.05
                           0.1
                                                                                                                                 0.2
               Balance




                                                                   Balance




                                                                                                                      Balance




                                                                                                                                                                          Balance




                              0
                Trade




                                                                    Trade




                                                                                                                       Trade




                                                                                                                                                                           Trade




                                                                                                                                 0.1
                           -0.1                                                    0                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                      0
                           -0.2
                                                                                                                                 -0.1
                           -0.3
                                                                              -0.05                                                                                                   -0.05
                                        5       10    15   20                              5       10    15   20                                5       10    15   20                              5       10    15   20




                                                                                 (b) Select Impulse Responses

Figure 2. 90-percentile intervals implied by the prior-predictive analysis. X-axis denotes quarters.




                                                                                                              29
2015), the diffuse prior for the trade elasticity encompassing both micro and macro estimates
(Enders et al., 2011), and the diffuse prior for the degree of complementarity between public
and private goods.24 The latter shapes the response of private consumption following a
public expenditure increase, affecting the real exchange rate through the uncovered interest
parity condition. Finally, due to price stickiness, the responses of the terms of trade and
terms of consumption can differ a priori (even qualitatively). Given the assumption of dollar
currency pricing, the response of the terms of trade is always smaller in magnitude.
    While the model is a priori agnostic about the effects of trade linkages, table 1 shows that
whether fiscal multipliers are larger in an open economy depends on the responses of the
terms of consumption and the trade balance, as highlighted in section 2. The left column of
the table reports the unconditional probability of a larger multiplier in the open economy for
                                        (        closed
                                                        )
each fiscal instrument, defined as P r MY > MY            . Following an increase in government
               (        closed
                               )
spending, P r MY > MY            is 36% on impact and 38% after one year. For a tax cut, the
probabilities are 20% on impact and 47% after one year. Consistent with the intuition of the
                                                                         (      closed
                                                                                       )
analytical results, table 1 also shows for a public spending increase, Pr MY > MY        is tied
to the favorable wealth effect induced by the appreciation of the terms of consumption--e.g.,
                                                                            closed
after one year, the response of T OC is positive 99% of the time when MY > MY      . In
contrast, for a tax cut, the beneficial effects of trade openness are tied to an increase of net
                                                       closed
exports--e.g., T B improves 98% of the time when MY > MY      after one year. In this case,
the terms of consumption depreciate, reflecting a lower domestic marginal cost, once again
consistent with the analytical results.
    The right column of table 1 plots probabilities of positive international spillovers. In this
case, we compute the probability that a Foreign increase in public spending or a Foreign tax
cut raises the Home GDP multiplier at a given time horizon. Following a Foreign government
spending increase, P r (MY > 0) = 62% after one year. The table shows the positive spillover
stems from an increase in Home net exports, which happens in virtually all the cases (both on
  24
     Ravn et al. (2012) show deep habits also can generate exchange rate depreciation, while Corsetti et al.
(2012) focus on spending reversals.


                                                    30
impact and after one year). Moreover, the positive spillover occurs despite the depreciation
of the Home terms of consumption. Following a Foreign income tax cut, P r (MY > 0) =
56% after one year. The dominant force in this case is the appreciation of the terms of
consumption, which occurs in 99% of the cases.
    Summing up, the intuition from the analytical model is preserved in the quantitative
framework. Theoretically the sign and size of the effects of trade linkages on fiscal multipliers
are ambiguous. To discern which predictions are favored empirically, we now turn to the
estimation of the model.


4    An Empirical Application: Canada & the U.S.

We estimate the model using data for Canada and the U.S. This country pair is particularly
suited for the analysis, since 80% of Canadian trade occurs with the U.S., implying the latter
provides a realistic characterization of the rest of the world for Canada. In Appendix F.3,
we present results for an alternative country pair, the Euro Area and the U.S., and show the
results are qualitatively similar to the U.S.-Canada application.




                                     Table 1: Prior Probabilities for GDP Multipliers.
                                    Domestic Multiplier                                         Int. Spillover
                                      Gov.          Income                                     Gov.        Income
                                    Spending         Taxes                                   Spending       Taxes
 Impact                                                           Impact
    (       closed
                   )
 Pr (MY > MY                  )        36%            20%         Pr (
                                                                     ( MY > 0)       )       63%           76%
 Pr T OC > 0|MY > MY   closed
                                       97%             6%         Pr T OC > 0|MY > 0         29%           60%
    (                       )                                       (              )
 Pr T B > 0|MY > MY  closed
                                      94.5%           83%         Pr T B > 0|MY > 0          99.9%         96%


 After One Year                                                   After One Year
    (       closed
                   )
 Pr (MY > MY                  )        38%            47%         Pr (
                                                                     ( MY > 0)       )       62%           56%
 Pr T OC > 0|MY > MY   closed
                                      99.9%            1%         Pr T OC > 0|MY > 0         15%           99%
    (                       )                                       (              )
 Pr T B > 0|MY > MY  closed
                                       56%            98%         Pr T B > 0|MY > 0          94%           47%
    Note: MY  Present Value Multiplier; T OC  terms of consumption; T B  Trade Balance. Pr(·) denotes a probability.




                                                         31
       We estimate the model using Bayesian methods over the period 1992-2007, including the
following observables: consumption, investment, inflation, hours worked, the interest rate,
and the ratios of government consumption to GDP, income tax revenue to GDP, consump-
tion tax revenue to GDP, and the real market-value of government debt to GDP. In addition,
we include the log first-difference of the bilateral real exchange rate between Canada and the
U.S., U.S. bilateral exports in goods to Canada, and U.S. bilateral imports in goods from
Canada. Details of the data construction, estimation procedure, posterior parameter esti-
mates, as well as a comparison of model and data volatilities and correlograms are presented
in Appendices E.1-E.4.25
       Figures 3a-3b display posterior 90-percent intervals for the difference in open- and closed-
economy present-value multipliers and impulse responses for select variables. When calcu-
                                                                                g
lating multipliers for a counterfactually closed Canadian economy we assume X = X =
I
X = 0.26 Column 1 of figure 3 presents responses to a 1% increase in government spending
in Canada. Despite the significantly persistent deterioration of the trade balance, the GDP
multiplier is unambiguously larger relative to the counterfactually closed economy, and the
positive difference materializes well before the reversal of the trade deficit. The effect is quan-
titatively notable: 6-15 cents higher after 20 quarters (i.e., approximately 20% higher than
the closed economy) and 14-26 cents higher when GDP is measured in consumption units.
In line with the intuition of the analytical model in section 2, the larger open-economy mul-
tiplier reflects the persistent appreciation of the domestic terms of consumption and terms
of trade.27 This appreciation crowds in private consumption and investment relative to the
closed economy. Finally, there is an appreciation, albeit modest, of the real exchange rate.28
  25
     In Appendix F.1, we show the robustness of our results to estimating with a longer sample period,
1992-2017, and in Appendix F.2 to the inclusion of an observable for the terms of consumption.
  26
     An alternative approach is to measure the effects of trade linkages by assuming Canada trades with a
symmetric trading partner, i.e., directly comparing Home and Foreign multipliers assuming both countries
feature Canadian posterior estimates. Appendix E.5 presents the results for this case, demonstrating the
asymmetries in parameter estimates between Canada and the U.S. play a modest role for the results.
  27
     Basu and Kollmann (2013) show increases in government investment can lead to a deterioration in the
terms of trade, akin to an increase in total factor productivity. Over our sample, government investment is
only 14% of total government purchases in Canada and 21% in the U.S.
  28
     For Canada, there is VAR evidence supporting a real appreciation following an increase in government


                                                    32
                                  Canada Gov                                               Canada Income                                            U.S. Gov                                                  U.S. Income
                                Spending Increase                                           Tax Decrease                                        Spending Increase                                            Tax Decrease
                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                        0.2
      Open-Closed




                                                          Open-Closed
                         0.2                                                                                                                                                                 0.15
       GDP PVM




                                                           GDP PVM




                                                                                                                      GDP PVM




                                                                                                                                                                            GDP PVM
       Canadian




                                                           Canadian




                                                                                                                      Canadian
                                                                            -0.2
        C units




                                                            C units




                                                                                                                       C units




                                                                                                                                                                             C units
                                                                                                                                                                            Canada
                                                                                                                                        0.1
                         0.1                                                                                                                                                                  0.1
                                                                            -0.4                                                            0
                            0                                                                                                                                                                0.05
                                                                                                                                       -0.1
                                                                            -0.6
                        -0.1                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                      5    10   15   20                                        5    10   15    20                                     5    10   15   20                                          5    10   15   20

                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                              0.1
        Open - Closed




                                                            Open - Closed
                         0.1                                                                                                            0.2




                                                                                                                           GDP PVM




                                                                                                                                                                               GDP PVM
         GDP PVM




                                                             GDP PVM
          Canadian




                                                              Canadian




                                                                                                                           Canadian




                                                                                                                                                                               Canadian
                                                                            -0.2                                                        0.1
                            0                                                                                                                                                                0.05
                                                                                                                                            0
                        -0.1                                                -0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                      5    10   15   20                                        5    10   15    20                                     5    10   15   20                                          5    10   15   20

                                                                                0
       Open - Closed




                                                            Open - Closed


                         0.1
        Cons. PVM




                                                             Cons. PVM




                                                                                                                        Cons. PVM




                                                                                                                                                                               Cons. PVM
                                                                                                                                            0                                                0.04
         Canadian




                                                              Canadian




                                                                                                                        Canadian




                                                                                                                                                                               Canadian
                                                                                                                                      -0.02
                                                                            -0.1
                        0.05                                                                                                          -0.04                                                  0.02
                                                                                                                                      -0.06
                                                                            -0.2                                                      -0.08
                            0                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                      5    10   15   20                                        5    10   15    20                                     5    10   15   20                                          5    10   15   20

                                                                                0
       Open - Closed




                                                            Open - Closed




                                                                                                                                                                                              0.1
        Invest. PVM




                                                             Invest. PVM




                                                                                                                                       0.05




                                                                                                                        Invest. PVM




                                                                                                                                                                               Invest. PVM
         Canadian




                                                              Canadian




                                                                                                                         Canadian




                                                                                                                                                                                Canadian
                         0.1                                                -0.1                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                             0.05
                        0.05                                                                                                          -0.05
                                                                            -0.2

                            0                                                                                                          -0.1                                                       0
                                      5    10   15   20                                        5    10   15    20                                     5    10   15   20                                          5    10   15   20




                                                                                (a) Present-Value Multipliers

                                  Canada Gov                                           Canada Income                                                U.S. Gov                                                  U.S. Income
                                Spending Increase                                       Tax Decrease                                            Spending Increase                                            Tax Decrease
                                                                            0
                     0.1                                                                                                               0
         Terms of




                                                            Terms of




                                                                                                                      Terms of




                                                                                                                                                                            Terms of
                                                                                                                                                                                       0.02
          Cons.




                                                             Cons.




                                                                                                                       Cons.




                                                                                                                                                                             Cons.
                                                                       -0.05
                                                                                                                                 -0.02
                    0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                         -0.1                                                    -0.04
                        0                                                                                                                                                              -0.02
                                  5       10    15   20                                    5       10    15    20                                 5       10    15   20                                      5       10    15   20


                                                                            0
                     0.1                                                                                                                                                               0.03
                                                                                                                                       0
         Terms of




                                                            Terms of




                                                                                                                      Terms of




                                                                                                                                                                            Terms of




                                                                                                                                                                                       0.02
          Trade




                                                             Trade




                                                                                                                       Trade




                                                                                                                                                                             Trade




                                                                       -0.05                                                                                                           0.01
                    0.05                                                                                                         -0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                       -0.01
                        0                                                -0.1                                                    -0.04
                                  5       10    15   20                                    5       10    15    20                                 5       10    15   20                                      5       10    15   20

                        0                                                0.1                                                     0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                       0.01
      Exchange




                                                          Exchange




                                                                                                                    Exchange




                                                                                                                                                                          Exchange




                    -0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                             0
        Rate




                                                            Rate




                                                                                                                      Rate




                                                                                                                                                                            Rate
        Real




                                                            Real




                                                                                                                      Real




                                                                                                                                                                            Real




                    -0.04                                              0.05                                                      0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                       -0.01
                    -0.06
                                                                                                                                       0                                               -0.02
                    -0.08
                                                                            0
                                  5       10    15   20                                    5       10    15    20                                 5       10    15   20                                      5       10    15   20

                                                                                    10-3                                                                                                              10-3
                                                                                                                                      0.1                                                    5
                        0
        Balance




                                                               Balance




                                                                                                                      Balance




                                                                                                                                                                               Balance




                                                                            0
         Trade




                                                                Trade




                                                                                                                       Trade




                                                                                                                                                                                Trade




                                                                                                                                 0.05                                                        0
                    -0.05                                                -10
                                                                                                                                       0                                                     -5

                     -0.1                                                -20
                                  5       10    15   20                                    5       10    15    20                                 5       10    15   20                                      5       10    15   20




                                                                                (b) Select Impulse Responses

Figure 3. 90-percentile intervals implied by the posterior estimates. X-axis denotes quarters.




                                                                                                              33
    Column 2 plots the responses following a reduction in the Canadian income tax rate.
In contrast to the effects of a public spending increase, trade linkages reduce the effective-
ness of a tax stimulus at all horizons. Cumulative GDP multipliers are lower than in the
counterfactually closed economy, consistent with the deterioration of the domestic terms of
consumption which crowds out private consumption and investment.
    Turning to the spillover effects of U.S. policy, a 1% increase in U.S. public spending
(column 3) and a 1% cut in U.S. income taxes (column 4) induce a positive spillover on
Canadian GDP. This positive spillover is quantitatively stronger, albeit shorter lived, for the
increase in U.S. public spending.


Key Transmission Channels

We consider alternative counterfactual scenarios to disentangle how competing international
linkages affect Canadian present-value GDP multipliers. We consider three counterfactuals.
The first one holds constant the terms of consumption in response to fiscal shocks. The
other two address how the relative import share of public and private goods, the financing
of the government budget, and the currency invoicing of trade shape terms-of-consumption
dynamics. In all experiments, we condition the model on the posterior mean estimates.
    The top row of figure 4 considers Canadian government spending and tax shocks; the
bottom row considers U.S. fiscal shocks. In each quadrant, each line plots the Canadian GDP
                                                                         g   I
multiplier relative to a counterfactually closed economy (defined as X = X = X = 0)
under different counterfactual scenarios. For comparability, in each panel we also report this
difference at the posterior mean estimates (the solid squared line).
    We first consider the effects of Canadian fiscal shocks (top row of figure 4). Following the
insights of the analytical model, we consider a counterfactual economy where the domestic
terms of consumption are constant (solid-plus lines). We induce this outcome by assuming
spending. For example, Kim (2010) finds the real exchange rate appreciates significantly, while Canada is
the only country for which Monacelli and Perotti (2010) do not find depreciation of the exchange rate. While
there is no direct evidence on the response of the terms of consumption, Monacelli and Perotti (2008) and
Muller (2008) find the terms of trade appreciates with an increase in public spending.


                                                    34
U.S. firms receive a per-period, lump-sum export subsidy such that the price adjustment
leaves the domestic terms of consumption unchanged. Absent the appreciation of domestic
prices relative to import prices, the domestic effectiveness of an increase in public spending is
smaller than in the closed economy at all horizons. At the same time, absent the depreciation
of the terms of consumption, trade linkages would not reduce the GDP multiplier following
an income tax cut. These results confirm the insight from the analytical model.
   We then assess the importance of direct trade linkages related to government expenditures
                                                    g
by considering full home bias in public goods, i.e. X = 0 (the solid-starred lines of figure 4).
As in the analytical model, lowering the public-to-private import ratio  to zero increases
government-spending multipliers relative to the closed economy--with full home bias, trade
linkages induce an additional increase in GDP multipliers equal to 15 cents after two years.
Also consistent with the results of section 2, the public-to-private import share,  , affects
income tax multipliers. With full home bias in public goods, trade linkages result in a much
smaller income-tax GDP multiplier relative to the closed economy (30 cents lower after two
              g
years), since X = 0 implies a larger reduction in government spending on domestic goods
to finance the tax cut over time. In turn, lower domestic demand results in a stronger
deterioration of the domestic terms of consumption, leading to a more pronounced negative
wealth effect.
   Finally, we address the role of price setting frictions by considering local currency pricing,
i.e. LCP (the solid-diamond lines of figure 4). Once again, following the insights from the
analytical model, under LCP the terms of consumption respond less to fiscal shocks. In
turn, the beneficial effects of trade for government spending multipliers and the detrimental
effects on income tax multipliers are both reduced.
   The bottom row of figure 4 repeats the same counterfactuals as the top row for U.S. fiscal
shocks. Following a U.S. public spending increase, lack of depreciation in the Canadian
terms of consumption (solid-plus line) would result in a longer-lasting positive spillover.
Turning to a U.S. income tax cut, the appreciation in the Canadian terms of consumption


                                               35
                                            Canadian Open-Closed GDP PVM                                            Canadian Open-Closed GDP PVM
                                                                                                        -0.05

                                0.15
                                                                                                         -0.1



          Canadian Government




                                                                                      Canadian Income
            Spending Shock
                                 0.1




                                                                                        Tax Shock
                                                                                                        -0.15

                                0.05
                                                                                                         -0.2
                                   0

                                                                                                        -0.25
                                -0.05

                                                                                                         -0.3
                                        2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20                             2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20




                                            Canadian Open-Closed GDP PVM                                            Canadian Open-Closed GDP PVM

                                0.15
                                                                                                         0.1

                                 0.1
                                                                                                        0.08
          U.S. Government
          Spending Shock




                                                                                        U.S. Income
                                                                                         Tax Shock
                                0.05
                                                                                                        0.06

                                   0
                                                                                                        0.04
                                -0.05
                                                                                                        0.02
                                 -0.1

                                                                                                           0
                                        2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20                             2   4   6   8   10   12   14   16   18   20




Figure 4. First row : increase in Canadian government spending and Canadian tax cut; Second row :
increase in U.S. government spending and U.S. tax cut. Benchmark response at posterior mean
denoted by blue solid lines in all panels, while counterfactuals vary parameter/model structure as
described in the legends. X-axis measures quarters.


is essential for generating the positive, long-lasting comovement between U.S. and Canadian
GDP. The solid-plus line shows without the appreciation, the spillover is virtually zero at all
horizons. To understand this result, note that a U.S. income tax cut generates two opposing
forces for Canada. On the one hand, the increased after-tax return in the U.S. encourages
capital to shift from Canada to the U.S. Other things equal, this lowers Canadian GDP,
generating a negative spillover (see Mendoza et al., 2014 for a discussion of this mechanism
in a model of the Euro Area). At the same time, the decrease in U.S. income taxes leads to
an appreciation of the Canadian domestic terms of consumption. The positive wealth effect
from the appreciation encourages more consumption and investment in Canada, raising
Canadian GDP. Given our estimate of the trade elasticity, the terms-of-consumption effect
dominates in equilibrium and is essential for generating positive co-movement, as seen from
the counterfactual with constant terms of consumption (solid-plus line).




                                                                                      36
5    Conclusion

This paper shows fiscal multipliers can be larger in economies more open to trade, even
when fiscal expansions imply a trade deficit. Holding the trade share and trade elasticity
constant, countries can have higher or lower fiscal multipliers relative to a counterfactually
closed economy depending on 1) the private sector import intensity relative to the public
sector, 2) how the government finances fiscal expansions, and 3) the invoicing of import and
export prices. We demonstrate these ambiguous effects analytically in a simple two-good,
two-country model.
    We then employ a Bayesian prior-predictive analysis to show the forces highlighted in
the analytical model also determine fiscal outcomes in a quantitative international business-
cycle model. That is, the effects of trade linkages on fiscal multipliers remain tied to the
dynamics of the terms of consumption and net exports. An empirical application that
conditions the model on Canadian and U.S. data implies Canadian government spending
multipliers are higher than in a counterfactually closed economy. Income tax cuts generate
lower domestic multipliers but are more effective in inducing persistent and positive cross-
country comovement.
    Our results have direct implications for the effectiveness of fiscal policy in the global
economy, including incentives for international fiscal policy coordination and fiscal consoli-
dations. Moreover, our analysis suggests important considerations for future empirical work
on the transmission of fiscal policy.




                                             37
References
Adolfson, M., S. Laseen, J. Linde, and M. Villani (2005): "Bayesian Estimation
 of an Open Economy DSGE Model with Incomplete Pass-Through," Sveriges Riksbank
 Working Paper Series No. 179, March.

------ (2007): "Bayesian Estimation of an Open Economy DSGE Model with Incomplete
  Pass-Through," Journal of International Economics, 72, 481­511.

Auerbach, A. J. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2013): "Output Spillovers from Fiscal Pol-
 icy," American Economic Review, 103, 141­146.

Basu, P. and R. Kollmann (2013): "Productive Government Purchases and the Real
 Exchange Rate," The Manchester School, 81, 461­469.

Baxter, M. (1995): "International Trade and Business Cycles," in Handbook of Interna-
 tional Eeconomics, ed. by G. M. Grossman and K. Rogoff, Amsterdam: North Holland,
 vol. 3, 1801­1864.

Beetsma, R. M. and H. Jensen (2005): "Monetary and Fiscal Policy Interactions in
 a Micro-Founded Model of a Monetary Union," Journal of International Economics, 67,
 320­352.

Betts, C. and M. B. Devereux (2001): "The International Monetary Transmission of
 Monetary and Fiscal Policies in a Two Country Model," in Essays in Honor of Robert A.
 Mundell, ed. by M. Obstfeld and G. Calvo, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.

Blanchard, O., C. J. Erceg, and J. Linde (2016): "Jump-Starting the Euro Area
 Recovery: Would a Rise in Core Fiscal Spending Help the Periphery?" in NBER Macroe-
 conomics Annual 2016, Volume 31, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, NBER
 Chapters, 103­182.

Born, B., F. Juessen, and G. J. Muller (2013): "Exchange Rate Regimes and Fiscal
 Multipliers," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 37, 446­465.

Bouakez, H. and A. Eyquem (2015): "Government spending, monetary policy, and the
 real exchange rate," Journal of International Money and Finance, 56, 178­201.

Broner, F., D. Clancy, A. Martin, and A. Erce (2018): "Fiscal Multipliers and
 Foreign Holdings of Public Debt," European Stability Mecanism Working Paper No. 30-
 2018.

Chinn, M. (2013): "Fiscal Multipliers," in The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, ed.
 by S. N. Durlauf and L. E. Blume, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Cole, H. L. and M. Obstfeld (1991): "Commodity Trade and International Risk Shar-
 ing: How Much Do Financial Markets Matter?" Journal of Monetary Economics, 28,
 3­24.


                                          38
Cook, D. and M. B. Devereux (2013): "Sharing the Burden: Monetary and Fiscal
 Responses to a World Liquidity Trap," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5,
 190­228.

Corsetti, G., K. Kuester, and G. J. Muller (2013): "Floats, Pegs, and the Transmis-
 sion of Fiscal Policy," in Fiscal Policy and Macroeconomic Performance, ed. by L. Cespedes
 and J. Gali, Central Bank of Chile.

Corsetti, G., A. Meier, and G. J. Muller (2012): "Fiscal Stimulus with Spending
 Reversals," Review of Economics and Statistics, 94, 878­895.

Corsetti, G. and G. J. Muller (2006): "Twin deficits: squaring theory, evidence and
 common sense," Economic Policy, 21, 597­638.

Corsetti, G. and P. Pesenti (2001): "Welfare and Macroeconomic Interdependence,"
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 421­445.

Drautzburg, T. and H. Uhlig (2015): "Fiscal Stimulus and Distortionary Taxes," Re-
 view of Economic Dynamics, 18, 894­920.

Enders, Z., G. J. Muller, and A. Scholl (2011): "How Do Fiscal and Technology
 Shocks Affect Real Exchange Rates? New Evidence for the United States," Journal of
 International Economics, 83, 53­69.

Erceg, C. J., L. Guerrieri, and C. Gust (2005): "Expansionary Fiscal Shocks and
 the U.S. Trade Deficit," International Finance, 8, 363­397.

Erceg, C. J. and J. Linde (2012): "Fiscal Consolidation in an Open Economy," American
 Economic Review, 102, 186­191.

Faccini, R., H. Mumtaz, and P. Surico (2016): "International Fiscal Spillovers," Jour-
  nal of International Economics, 99, 31­45.

Farhi, E. and I. Werning (2016): "Fiscal Multipliers: Liquidity Traps and Currency
  Unions," in Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. B. Taylor and H. Uhlig, Amsterdam:
  Elsevier Press, vol. 2, 2417­2492.
 `ve, P., J. Matheron, and J.-G. Sahuc (2013): "A Pitfall with Estimated DSGE-
Fe
 Based Government Spending Multipliers," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
 5, 141­178.

Frankel, J. A. (2016): "International Coordination," National Bureau of Economic Re-
 search Working Paper 21878.

Frenkel, J. A. and M. L. Mussa (1981): "Monetary and Fiscal Policies in an Open
 Economy," American Economic Review, 71, 253­258.

Gali, J. and T. Monacelli (2008): "Optimal Monetary and Fiscal Policy in a Currency
 Union," Journal of Internatonal Economics, 76, 116132.

                                            39
Geweke, J. (2010): Complete and Incomplete Econometric Models, Princeton, NJ: Prince-
 ton University Press.

Goldberg, L. S. and C. Tille (2008): "Vehicle currency use in international trade,"
 Journal of International Economics, 76, 177­192.

Gopinath, G. (2015): "The International Price System," Jackson Hole Symposium Pro-
 ceedings.

Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and G. W. Huffman (1988): "Investment, Capacity
 Utilization, and the Real Business Cycle," American Economic Review, 78, 402­17.

Ilzetzki, E., E. G. Mendoza, and C. A. Vegh (2013): "How big (small?) are fiscal
  multipliers?" Journal of Monetary Economics, 60, 239­254.

Justiniano, A. and B. Preston (2010): "Monetary Policy and Uncertainty in an Em-
  pirical Small Open-Economy Model," Journal of Applied Econometrics, 25, 93­128.

Kim, S. (2010): "Country Characteristics and the Effects of Government Consumption
 Shocks on the Current Account and Real Exchange Rate," Seoul national university
 manuscript.

Lane, P. and G. Milesi-Ferretti (2002): "Long-Term Capital Movements," in NBER
 Macroeconomics Annual 2001, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, vol. 16, 73­
 136.

Laxton, D. and P. Pesenti (2003): "Monetary Rules for Small, Open, Emerging
 Economies," Journal of Monetary Economics, 50, 11091146.

Leeper, E. M., N. Traum, and T. B. Walker (2017): "Clearing Up the Fiscal Multi-
  plier Morass," American Economic Review, 107, 2409­2454.

Lubik, T. and F. Schorfheide (2005): "A Bayesian Look at the New Open Economy
 Macroeconomics," in NBER Macroeconomics Annual, ed. by M. Gertler and K. Rogoff,
 The University of Chicago Press, vol. 20, 313­366.

Mendoza, E. G. and L. L. Tesar (1998): "The International Ramifications of Tax
 Reforms: Supply-Side Economics in a Global Economy," American Economic Review, 88,
 226­245.

Mendoza, E. G., L. L. Tesar, and J. Zhang (2014): "Saving Europe?: The Unpleasant
 Arithmetic of Fiscal Austerity in Integrated Economies," National bureau of economic
 research working paper no. 20200.

Monacelli, T. and R. Perotti (2008): "Openness and the Sectoral Effects of Fiscal
 Policy," Journal of the European Economic Association, 6, 395­403.

------ (2010): "Fiscal Policy, the Real Exchange Rate, and Traded Goods," Economic
  Journal, 120, 437­461.

                                         40
Mukhin, D. and O. Itskhoki (2016): "Exchange Rate Disconnect," Tech. rep.

Muller, G. J. (2008): "Understanding the Dynamic Effects of Government Spending on
 Foreign Trade," Journal of International Money and Finance, 27, 345­371.

Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogoff (1995): "Exchange Rate Dynamics Redux," Journal of
 Political Economy, 103, 624­660.

Pavlova, A. and R. Rigobon (2007): "Asset Prices and Exchange Rates," Review of
  Financial Studies, 20, 1139­1180.

Priftis, R. and S. Zimic (2018): "Sources of Borrowing and Fiscal Multipliers," Bank of
 Canada manuscript.

Rabanal, P. and J. F. Rubio-Ramirez (2015): "Can International Macroeconomic
 Models Explain Low-Frequency Movements of Real Exchange Rates?" Journal of Inter-
 natonal Economics, 96, 199­211.

Rabanal, P., J. F. Rubio-Ramirez, and V. Tuesta (2011): "Cointegrated TFP Pro-
 cesses and International Business Cycles," Journal of Monetary Economics, 58, 156­171.

Ravn, M., S. Schmitt-Grohe, and M. Uribe (2012): "Consumption, Government
 Spending, and the Real Exchange Rate," Journal of Monetary Economics, 59, 215­234.

Schmitt-Grohe, S. and M. Uribe (2003): "Closing small open economy models," Jour-
  nal of International Economics, 61, 163­185.

Smets, F. and R. Wouters (2007): "Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A
 Bayesian DSGE Approach," American Economic Review, 97, 586­606.

Uhlig, H. (2010): "Some Fiscal Calculus," American Economic Review, 100, 30­34.

Woodford, M. (2011): "Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure Multiplier,"
 American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3, 1­35.




                                          41
