                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           TO WHAT EXTENT ARE TARIFFS OFFSET BY EXCHANGE RATES?

                                         Olivier Jeanne
                                         Jeongwon Son

                                      Working Paper 27654
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27654


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020




This paper is a revised version of Jeanne (2020). The earlier version benefited from comments by
Egor Gornostay, Eva Zhang, and research assistance by Gloria (Xiecun) Li. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Olivier Jeanne and Jeongwon Son. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
To What Extent Are Tariffs Offset By Exchange Rates?
Olivier Jeanne and Jeongwon Son
NBER Working Paper No. 27654
August 2020
JEL No. F31,F41

                                          ABSTRACT

In theory, we should expect tariffs to be partially offset by a currency appreciation in the tariff-
imposing country or by a depreciation in the country on which the tariff is imposed. We find,
based on a calibrated model, that the tariffs imposed by the US in 2018-19 should not have had a
large impact on the dollar but may have significantly depreciated the renminbi. This prediction is
consistent with a high-frequency event analysis looking at the impact of tariff-related news on the
dollar and the renminbi. We find that tariffs explained at most one fifth of the dollar effective
appreciation but around two thirds of the renminbi effective depreciation observed in 2018-19.


Olivier Jeanne
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
582 Wyman Bldg.
3400 N. Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21218
and NBER
ojeanne@jhu.edu

Jeongwon Son
Johns Hopkins University
json8@jhu.edu
1 Introduction
In 2018-19 the US imposed new taris of 15.1 percent on average on its imports from China                                                                                                                                                                     1

but the renminbi depreciated by 7.0 percent against the dollar (see Figure 1). Indeed, a
common argument against taris is that their eect is likely to be mitigated by endogenous
movements in exchange rates (Stiglitz, 2016). Of course, the appreciation of the dollar and
the weakness of the renminbi could have resulted from other factors, such as the lift-o of
the Fed policy rate in the US and slowing growth in China.
                                                                             1          2        3                                                                               4         5                              6
 110

 108

 106

 104

 102

 100

  98

  96
       12-2017
                 01-2018
                           02-2018
                                     03-2018
                                               04-2018
                                                         05-2018
                                                                   06-2018
                                                                             07-2018
                                                                                       08-2018
                                                                                                 09-2018
                                                                                                           10-2018
                                                                                                                     11-2018
                                                                                                                               12-2018
                                                                                                                                         01-2019
                                                                                                                                                   02-2019
                                                                                                                                                             03-2019
                                                                                                                                                                       04-2019
                                                                                                                                                                                 05-2019
                                                                                                                                                                                           06-2019
                                                                                                                                                                                                     07-2019
                                                                                                                                                                                                               08-2019
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         09-2019
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10-2019
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             11-2019
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12-2019
  1: US implements 25% tariff on $34 bn Chinese goods. China implements 25% tariff on $34 bn US goods.
  2: US implements 25% tariff on $16 bn Chinese goods. China implements 25% tariff on $16 bn US goods.
  3: US implements 10% tariff on $200 bn Chinese goods. China implements 5 to 10% tariff on $60 bn US goods.
  4: US increases tariff on $200 bn Chinese goods to 25%.
  5: China increases tariff on $60 bn US goods by 5 to 15%.
  6: US implements 15% tariff on $112 bn Chinese goods. China implements 5 to 10% tariff on $75 bn US goods.


Figure 1:  End-of-month CNY/USD exchange rate and main tari events (Dec. 2017=100,
Source: BIS)

The question in this paper is the extent to which we should expect taris to be oset
by countervailing movements in exchange rates. The answer is based on both theory and
empirical evidence. We rst present a simple model of an open economy applying a tari on
its imports or being imposed a tari on its exports. The authorities have domestic objectives
in terms of ination and employment and pursue these objectives through a Taylor rule.
In general the taris change both the supply of and demand for the home good. Domestic
producers respond by raising or lowering the home currency price of the home good, and
  1 The   data underlying the estimate of the average tari can be found in Appendix B.

                                                                                                                        2
the home monetary authorities in turn respond to the change in ination by adjusting the
nominal interest rate. Importantly, the change in the exchange rate results from the fact
that the central bank pursues domestic objectives in terms of ination and employment and
not that it tries to oset the taris per se (the central bank does not target the exchange
rate or the trade balance). We call the fraction of the tari that is oset by a change in the
exchange rate the "exchange rate oset."
We derive closed-form expressions for the exchange rate osets in our model in the special
case where permanent taris are introduced in a steady state. In this case, the exchange rate
jumps to a new steady state level and there are no transition dynamics. We also study the im-
plications of changing the model assumptions, such as replacing the assumption of Producer
Currency Pricing (PCP) by Dominant Currency Pricing (DCP) or looking at temporary or
expected taris. These cases give rise to transition dynamics, which we characterize and
quantify in a calibrated version of the model.
The main results from the model can be summarized as follows. First, the exchange rate
moves in a way that osets the impact of the tari (a tari on imports appreciates the home
currency and a tari on exports depreciates it). Second, the exchange-rate oset tends to be
larger for a tari on exports than for a tari on imports. Under our benchmark calibration,
a 10 percent import tari appreciates the home currency by about 3 percent but an export
tari of the same size depreciates the currency by about 10 percent. Third, transitory
and expected taris have a smaller impact than permanent taris as expected. Finally,
the exchange rate osets tend to be larger under DCP than PCP because of exchange rate
overshooting.
We then calibrate the model to the US and to China in order to quantify the impact of the
taris introduced in 2018 and 2019 on the dollar and renminbi eective exchange rates. For
this calibration we take into account all the taris introduced in 2018 and 2019 on the two
countries' exports and imports, including those imposed by third countries. Average tari
                                                                                    2

rates increased for both exports and imports of the U.S. and China so that it is unclear a
priori whether their currencies should have appreciated or depreciated.
Based on this calibration exercise, we nd that the taris introduced in 2018-19 should have
left the eective exchange rate of the dollar broadly unchanged. The dollar's lack of response
comes from the fact that taris on exports and imports oset each other in the case of the
US. The average tari rate increased by about three times more for US imports than for
US exports, which left the eective exchange rate of the dollar unchanged since it responds
three times more to taris on exports than to taris on imports according to the model.
By contrast, we nd that the taris should have depreciated the renminbi by more than 3
percent. This dierence reects that in China the average tari increased more for exports
than for imports.
The last part of the paper then compares the model predictions with the results of a high-
frequency event study. This exercise is model-free and provides an independent benchmark
for comparison with the predictions of our calibrated model. We look at how the dollar and
  2 Most   of the taris, however, were imposed on each other by the US and China.



                                                    3
the renminbi responded to tari-related news in 2018-19. We construct nominal eective
                                                             3

exchange rates (NEERs) for the US dollar and the renminbi at the ten-minute frequency and
measure the impact of tari news on these eective exchange rates at time horizons of a few
hours. For this exercise we restrict the attention to taris imposed by the US and China on
each other.
We nd that the impact of tari news crucially depends on whether the news were about
US taris or Chinese taris. On the one hand, the estimated impact of US taris is quite
consistent with the predictions of the model. We nd that news about US taris appreciated
the dollar and depreciated the renminbi and that their impact was larger on the renminbi
than on the dollar by a factor of more than two. On the other hand, news about Chinese
taris did not have a statistically signicant impact on the dollar or the renminbi eective
exchange rates. Perhaps this is due to the fact that the Chinese authorities resisted the
depreciation of the renminbi induced by their own tari announcements.
Finally, we estimate the cumulative impact of tari news on the dollar and renminbi eective
exchange rates implied by our regression results. For this exercise we consider only news
about US taris since news about Chinese taris were found to be statistically insignicant.
We estimate that the tari news that occurred in 2018-19 appreciated the dollar by about
one percent and depreciated the renminbi by two percent. This represents more than one
fth of the dollar eective appreciation, and around two thirds of the renminbi eective
depreciation observed during that period.
Literature The paper is related to several lines of literature. On the theoretical side, an
older literature dating back to the 1980s examined the macroeconomic impact of taris
(Eichengreen,1981; Krugman, 1982; Dornbusch, 1987). More recent papers have followed
the resurgence of interest in that topic (see e.g. Erceg et al, 2018, and Lindé and Pescatori,
2019). The main dierence between the older and more recent literatures is that in the new
      4

models, demand is determined by the intertemporal optimization of rational agents rather
than an old-style Keynesian IS curve.
On the empirical side, some recent papers have compared the impact of exchange rates and
of taris on trade ows. There is evidence that trade ows are more responsive to taris
than to exchange rate movements (see e.g. Fontagné et al, 2018, for France). Benassy-
Quéré et al (2018) nd that exports are more responsive to a tari cut in the destination
country than to a real depreciation of the same amount in the source country. Using impulse
response functions estimated over a large sample of countries, Furceri et al (2018) nd that
taris result in real exchange rate appreciations. There is evidence that the United States
experienced complete passthrough of the recent taris into domestic prices of imported goods
(Amiti et al, 2019 and Fajgelbaum et al, 2019).
Finally, there is a large literature on the impact of news on exchange rates (see for example
Faust et al, 2006, Andersen et al, 2007, or Rogers et al, 2014). In a closely related study, Li
(2019) nds evidence that the oshore yuan depreciated relative to the dollar when the U.S.
  3 Our benchmark news sample was constructed using Bloomberg News. We also use another sample of
news constructed by Bown and Kolb (2020) for robustness analysis.
  4 See Eichengreen (2019) for a review.




                                               4
imposed or announced taris and appreciated when trade talks result in the delay of taris.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents the model and some calibration
exercises. Section 3 presents the high-frequency analysis of the impact of tari news on the
dollar and reminbi exchange rates. Section 4 concludes.
2 Theory
This section presents a model of the exchange-rate oset and explores its quantitative im-
plications for the US dollar and the Chinese renminbi. Section 2.1 presents the assumptions
and main equilibrium conditions. We look at the impact of permanent taris on imports and
exports on the exchange rate in section 2.2. Section 2.3 discusses alternative assumptions.
Section 2.4 calibrates the model to the dollar and the renminbi.
2.1 Model
The model features a small open economy that consumes goods that are produced at home
and abroad like in Gali and Monacelli (2005). There is nominal stickiness because domestic
rms must pay a cost to change their prices like in Rotemberg (1982). For the baseline model
we assume that prices are set in the currency of the producer (the PCP assumption). This
assumption is relaxed in section 2.3. The model is in continuous time.
Households. The economy is populated by atomistic identical innitely-lived households.
The representative household has preferences represented by the utility function
                                                                                                (1)
                                       +    1-1/ i                     1+1/
                                           Ct      -1  N
                         U=                           - t                         e-rt dt,
                                   0        1 - 1/ i   1 + 1/

where C is the level of consumption, N is labor, is the elasticity of intertemporal sub-
stitution and is the Frisch elasticity of labor supply. Consumption is a CES index of the
        t                                         t                i


consumption of home good (H ) and imported foreign good (F ),
                     C = 
                     t
                              1/
                              H   Cm   ( m -1)/
                                       Ht   +     m
                                                   C
                                                          1/
                                                          F
                                                               m   ( m -1)/
                                                                   Ft   ,     m
                                                                                         (2)
                                                                                   m /( m -1)




where  +  = 1. We call the import elasticity because it determines how the level of
imports responds to change in the terms of trade.
        H    F                     m



The country is integrated to the global nancial market where real bonds denominated in
the foreign good and yielding a xed return r are traded. The foreign currency price of the
foreign good is exogenous and denoted by P . The home currency price of the bonds, thus,
                                                       

is given by E P , where E is the nominal exchange rate. The exchange rate is dened as
                  
                                                      t


the price of foreign currency in terms of home currency, so that an increase in the exchange
             t   t        t


rate means a depreciation of the home currency.

                                                      5
The home country applies a tari  on imports, implying that the home-currency price of
the foreign good is
                                                t


                                    P = (1 +  )E P .Ft                            t       t(3)        t
                                                                                                       


The representative household's budget constraint can be written in terms of the foreign good
as
                   B +
                      ·
                         P
                        EP
                          t
                                Ht
                              C + (1 +  )C =
                                           Ht
                                                   WN
                                                   EP
                                                         + Z + D + rB ,
                                                             t           Ft                (4)t
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                        t
                                                                                                                  t      t   t


where B is the household's holding of real bonds, W is the home currency nominal wage,
                               t t                                                        t           t


D is the prot of home rms, and Z is the lump-sum rebate of taxes.
         t                                                                                            t
 t                                                  t

Firms. The home good is a CES index of a continuum of dierentiated goods indexed by
j  [0, 1]. Each dierentiated good is produced by a monopolistic rm using a linear produc-
tion function, Y = N . We assume an employment subsidy to correct for monopolistic
                Hjt           jt

distortion in production. We denote by  = P /P the rate of ination in the price of
                                                                              ·




the home good and assume that rms must pay a quadratic adjustment cost à la Rotemberg
                                                                 t                Ht              Ht


(1982) from deviating from an ination target    ^.
Under these assumptions the rate of ination satises the New Keynesian Phillips curve,
                               = r ( - 
                                       ·

                                           ^) - 
                                           t
                                                    P
                                                      W
                                                        -1 ,
                                                        t                                  (5)Ht
                                                                                                      t



(see Appendix A1 for the derivation). Integrating forward, the Phillips curve can be rewritten
as
                                                                                           (6)
                                                            +
                                              W                               t                               -r(t -t)
                           =    ^+ t               -1 e         dt .
                                             P                            Ht

Home producers raise their prices at a faster rate than the ination target if their markup
                                                        t


is expected to be lower than desired.
Demand for Home Good. The home terms of trade are equal to the price of the home
good in terms of foreign good,
                                         S =
                                               P
                                              EP
                                                    .        t
                                                                               Ht

                                                                              t t
                                                                                 
                                                                                           (7)
The total demand for the home good is equal to the sum of home and foreign demands for
the home good
                              Y = C + [(1 +  )S ] M ,
                                           Ht           Ht                            t
                                                                                      
                                                                                           (8)    t
                                                                                                          -   x   
                                                                                                                  t

where M is foreign imports,  is the tari imposed by foreign countries on home exports,
                                           

and is the elasticity of substitution between the home good and foreign goods in foreign
         t                                 t


markets (the export elasticity). We assume that the export elasticity is larger than 1,
     x



                                              > 1.                   x                     (9)
Monetary Policy. The domestic monetary authorities implement a Taylor rule to achieve
the ination target  ^,
                             i = r + (1 - ) 
                                       t      ^ +  ,  > 1.                                (10)
                                                                                          t


                                              6
By arbitrage domestic currency bonds must yield the same return as foreign bonds. The
nominal interest rate i must be equal to the real interest rate in terms of foreign good, r,
plus the rate of ination in the home currency price of the foreign good, E P = P /S .
                       t
                                                                                                         

Hence
                                                                                                    t   t        Ht   t

                                                                              ·



                                      i =r+ - .
                                                   S
                                                   S
                                                        t                t
                                                                                  t

                                                                                  t
                                                                                       (11)
Using the Taylor rule to substitute out i from this equation gives,
                                                             t
                                                ·

                                                St
                                                St
                                                   = - ( - 1) (t - ^) .               (12)
The home central bank raises the interest rate if ination is higher than the target. Like
in the Dornbusch model, this appreciates the currency and implies that it depreciates over
time.
Linearized model. We derive the equilibrium conditions and linearize the model in Ap-
pendices A2 and A3. The linearized model (with rst-order deviations from the steady state
denoted in lower case) is as follows,
                      ct =  - i (H st + F t ) ,                                          (13)
                     yHt = H ct - F [H m (st - t ) + x (st + t )] ,                      (14)
                      ·

                       t = r ( t - ^) - 
                                         yHt ct
                                             + - F (st - t ) ,
                                                                                  i
                                                                                         (15)
                       ·

                        s = - ( - 1) ( - 
                           t                   ^) .              t                       (16)
Equation (13) characterizes the intertemporal allocation of home consumption. Consumption
is lower when the terms of trade or the tari on imports are higher. Variable  is endogenous
and must be chosen so as to satisfy the country's intertemporal budget constraint,
                                                                                         (17)
                                                +
                                                                                          -rt
                             b +   0    (y - c +  s ) e dt = 0
                                                            Ht       t       F t
                                            0

(see Appendix A3).
Equation (14) gives global demand for the home good. The demand for the home good
increases with home consumption (c ) and decreases with the relative price of the home
good in home markets (s -  ) and foreign markets (s +  ).
                                                    t
                                                                                                
                               t       t                                              t         t

Equation (15) is the linearized Phillips curve. The markup decreases with home production,
home consumption and the price of home consumption in terms of home good. Equation
(16) is the linearized version of (12).
For exogenous tari paths ( ,  ) , one can solve for the endogenous paths (c , y ,  , s )
                                           

using the system of equations (13)-(17). The question of interest is how the exchange rate
                                           t t0
                                   t                                                                t   Ht   t    t t0


responds to the introduction of taris. In the next section we study the case where the taris
are permanent, and then proceed to discuss dierent circumstances in section 2.3.
                                               7
2.2 Permanent taris
In this section we study the impact of permanent constant taris on imports or exports that
are unexpectedly introduced in a steady-state equilibrium. Other things equal, the taris
aect demand and supply in the market for the home good, which generates inationary or
deationary pressures. The monetary authorities would respond to the change in ination,
if it materialized, by raising or lowering the interest rate. With constant taris, however, the
interest rate does not need to change in equilibrium: the exchange rate immediately jumps
to a level such that the economy stays in a steady state where ination remains equal to the
target.
We dene the exchange-rate oset for a tari on imports as the amount by which the home
currency appreciates following the unexpected but permanent imposition of a 1 percent
uniform tari on all imports. For example, an oset of 1 means that the exchange rate
appreciates one-for-one in response to the tari, so that the net price of imports does not
change at home. A tari on imports makes them less competitive at home if and only if the
exchange-rate oset is lower than one.
Setting  = 
         t     ^ in the Phillips curve (15) gives
                                      y  H   c
                                         + =  (s -  ) .
                                                 i
                                                         F                                 (18)
In steady state the intertemporal budget constraint (17) with b    0   =0     implies
                                             c = yH + F s.                                (19)
Using this expression to substitute out c in (14) and (18) gives the following two expressions
for home output,
                       yH  = - [ -  (1 - )] s + 
                                     x       H           m    -  ,
                                                             H m       x
                                                                           
                                                                                          (20)
                       yH  =     F
                                  ( - 1) s - 
                                     1+ /
                                         i

                                                 i
                                                  .
                                                     i
                                                                                          (21)
Equation (20) is the steady state demand for the home good. Demand is lowered by an
increase in the terms of trade s, which makes the home good less competitive abroad and
at home. Although this eect is partially oset by the fact that higher terms of trade raises
home income and consumption, the expenditure-switching eect dominates the income eect
because > 1. Demand for the home good increases with the tari on imports but decreases
with the tari on exports because of expenditure-switching in the home and foreign markets.
         x



Equation (21) gives the steady state supply of home good. Supply increases with the terms
of trade s if and only if > 1. On the one hand, a stronger currency raises the purchasing
power of the wage in terms of imports, which increases the supply of labor. On the other
                            i


hand, it raises consumption, which decreases the supply of labor. The rst eect dominates
if and only if > 1. Supply unambiguously decreases with the tari on imports, which
lowers the purchasing power of the wage.
                i




                                                     8
Solving for s by equating demand to supply gives
                                                                                                                      (22)
                                              -1                                                            -1
              - H - F / (1 + i / )
               x                                                        m    -1                 -1 i
  s= 1+                                             - 1 + H                          + F                          .
              H m + F i / (1 + i / )                                         x             (1 + i / )   x


Equation (22) gives the change in the terms of trade that is caused by the unexpected
introduction of taris  and  in a steady state. The terms of trade jump to this permanent
                                   

level when the taris are introduced. The nominal prices being xed in equation (7), the
adjustment in the terms of trade comes from a jump in the nominal exchange rate. Denoting
the log value of the exchange rate by e, it follows from equation (7) that
                                          de
                                          d
                                              =-
                                                  ds
                                                  d
                                                                                     (23)
with a similar equation for  . There is a negative sign because a currency appreciation
                                   

corresponds to an increase in s but a decrease in e. It then follows from (22) that the
exchange-rate oset for a permanent tari on imports is
                                                                                     (24)
                                                                                          -1
                         de              -  -  / (1 + / )
                                              x           H      F               i
                            =- 1+                                   .
                         d                    +  / (1 + / )
                                               H m             F i               i


A tari on imports leads to an appreciation of the home currency. The intuition is as
follows. The tari increases demand for the home good as it shifts home demand away from
the foreign good, and reduces supply because it lowers the purchasing power of the wage in
terms of imports. The currency must appreciate so as to bring demand back in line with
supply. The appreciation decreases the demand for the home good by increasing its relative
price in both home and foreign markets.           5

Equation (24) implies that the magnitude of the exchange-rate oset increases with the
import elasticity and decreases with the export elasticity. A larger import elasticity mag-
nies the impact of the tari on home demand for the home good and requires a larger
osetting appreciation. Conversely, a larger export elasticity means that a smaller currency
appreciation is required to oset the increase in demand for the home good induced by the
tari.
Similarly, one can look at the endogenous response of the exchange rate to a permanent
tari imposed on the country's exports. Because the tari reduces foreign demand for the
home good, it is oset by a depreciation (rather than an appreciation) of the home currency.
Using (22) the oset coecient is now given by,
                                                                                                                      (25)
                                                                                          -1
                            de                 m      -1                 i-1
                               = 1 + H                        + F                              .
                            d                         x              (1 + i / )       x

   5 The  appreciation could increase or decrease supply, as discussed above. However, it always decreases
supply, if it does, less than demand. To see this, note that the lowest possible level for yH /s in the supply
equation (21), obtained for i = 0, is -F . The highest possible level for yH /s in the demand equation
(20), obtained for x = 1, is -(F + H m ).


                                                           9
If = = 1 (the Cole-Obstfeld case) the exchange-rate oset is equal to 1, i.e., the
exchange rate depreciates one-for-one with a tari on exports. This is because in this case
    m      i


the exchange rate aects neither home demand for the home good nor its supply. The                 6

only thing that the exchange rate needs to do is to oset the impact of the tari on foreign
demand for the home good. This is achieved by a depreciation of the same size as the tari.
If > 1 and/or > 1 a depreciation increases home demand for the home good and/or
reduces its supply. The depreciation then does not need to be as large as when = = 1
   m                   i


to bring back demand in line with supply.
                                                                                             m        i



Calibration. We conclude this section by exploring the quantitative implications of equa-
tions (24) and (25) under a plausible calibration of the parameters. The baseline calibration
is given in Table 1. The parameters that determine the exchange rate osets are the weight
of the home good in home consumption,  , and the elasticities , , and .
                                                   H                        i   m   x

We assume  = 0.85, which is approximately equal to one minus the share of imports in
GDP in the US. We assume a logarithmic utility ( = 1). The elasticities for imports and
               H


exports are taken from Feenstra et al (2018). We adopt a Frisch elasticity of labor supply
                                                                i
                                                       7

of .
   1


With these values, the exchange-rate oset implied by equation (24) for a uniform tari on
   3


all imports is 0.296, i.e., a ten percent tari on imports appreciates the currency by about 3
percent. Since = = 1 the exchange-rate oset for a tari on exports is 1. The exchange
rate impact of a tari, thus, is more than three times larger if the tari is on exports than
                   i       m


if it is on imports.
The last three columns of the Table 1 report the values of the real interest rate, the coecient
on ination in the Taylor rule and the markup coecient in the Phillips curve. These
parameters are necessary to compute the transition dynamics of the model, which play a
role in the extensions of the model presented in the next section. We assume a real interest
rate of 5 percent. The Taylor rule puts a weight of 1.5 on ination. The value for  ensures
that the Phillips curve has the same slope as in the Calvo model where rms can change
their price every year on average.       8


                                         Table 1: Calibration
                               H                                r        
                               0.85 1              1 3 0.05 1.5 1.05
                                     i             m        x
                                             1/3

   6 The  impact of the exchange rate on the home demand for the home good is captured by the term in
H (1 -    m ) in equation (20). The impact of the exchange rate on the supply of home good is captured by
the term in ( i - 1) in equation (21).
   7 These authors nd that the price elasticity between the goods exported by dierent countries is signif-
icantly higher than the elasticity between home goods and imports in a given country. Their estimates for
the import elasticity are close to 1 whereas those for the export elasticity are close to 3.
   8 In the continuous time Calvo model the Phillips curve is given by (5) with  = (r + ) where  is the
ow probability that a rm can change its price. If the average duration of sticky prices is one year, then
 = 1, which gives  = 1.05.




                                                       10
2.3 Alternative assumptions
We discuss the sensitivity of our results to changes in the assumptions.
Transitory or expected taris. What is the impact of transitory or expected taris? In
Appendix A4 we analyze the case where the taris  and  are applied during a limited
                                                                         

period T , or are announced at time 0 but implemented at a future time T . In both cases the
economy settles in a steady state at time T . Before time T there are transition dynamics in
which the country accumulates foreign assets or liabilities.
The tari on imports acts as an intertemporal tax that decreases home consumption when
it is applied. If = (which is true under our benchmark calibration) the intertemporal
eect and the expenditure switching eect exactly oset each other so that demand for home
                    m      i


goods is constant over time. In this case, there are no transition dynamics in ination or the
nominal interest rate and the exchange rate jumps to a constant level in period 0.
Transitory or expected taris on exports give rise to transition dynamics. The central bank
responds to ination deviating from the target by changing the interest rate, which leads the
exchange rate to overshoot or undershoot the long-run adjustment. With a transitory tari
on exports, home producers respond to lower demand by adjusting their prices downward.
The home central bank lowers the interest rate which depreciates the currency more in the
short run than in the long run (overshooting). By contrast an expected tari on exports
depreciates the currency and stimulates the demand for the home good before the tari is
introduced. The central bank raises the interest rate, which mitigates the exchange rate
depreciation (undershooting).




                              Variation of exchange rate oset with T
                        Figure 2:
Figure 2 shows how the exchange rate oset varies with T . The upper panels show the case
                                                                     9

  9A   range of 2 years was used for T because the empirical exercises presented in Section 3 uses 2 years of

                                                     11
of transitory taris on imports (left-hand-side panel) and on exports (right-hand side panel).
As expected, transitory taris have a smaller impact than permanent taris. The exchange
rate impact of taris on imports is reduced by a factor of ten if they are expected to last
two years instead of being permanent. By contrast, the exchange rate impact of a tari on
exports is reduced by a factor of less than two. This dierence is explained by overshooting
in the case of a tari on exports.
The lower panels of Figure 2 are about expected taris. They show how the exchange-
rate oset varies with the lag between the announcement and the imposition of the tari.
The case T = 0 corresponds to the permanent taris analyzed in the previous section. We
observe that the impact of an expected tari on imports does not decrease very fast with
the lag. A tari on exports, by contrast, loses more of its impact if it is delayed because of
undershooting.
Dominant Currency Pricing (DCP). The baseline model assumes producer currency
pricing (PCP). Gopinath (2016) argues that a more realistic assumption for many countries
is that the prices of imports and exports are xed in terms of foreign currency (mostly the
US dollar).
How does DCP change our results about the exchange rate oset? With DCP there are
dierent Phillips curves for the home and foreign markets for the home good. Even with
permanent taris, it is no longer possible to have producers achieve their desired markups
in both markets simultaneously by letting the exchange rate adjust to a new constant level
when constant taris are introduced. We characterize the transition dynamics in Appendix
A5 and summarize the main results here.
A permanent tari on imports raises the demand for the home good at home. Home pro-
ducers raise their prices both in home currency in the home market and in dollar in exports
markets. The increase in home ination leads the monetary authorities to raise the local
currency interest rate. As a result, the home currency appreciates by more under DCP than
under PCP. This is because the increase in the home interest rate leads the exchange rate
to overshoot in the short run. Under our benchmark calibration this increases the exchange
rate oset for a tari on imports to 0.35 (instead of 0.30 under PCP).
The exchange rate oset for a permanent tari on exports is also higher under DCP than
under PCP, and for similar reasons. The tari on exports reduces foreign demand for the
home good, leading home producers to decrease their prices at home and abroad and to a
relaxation of home monetary policy. The home currency now overshoots in the direction of
depreciation. Under our benchmark calibration the exchange rate oset is 1.22 for a tari
on exports (instead of 1.0 under PCP).
The results that we have just described apply to a small open economy that does not use
the dollar as its own currency. The impact of taris under DCP is dierent, and more
complicated to analyze, in the case of the US. One can no longer maintain the small open
economy assumption in this case because changes in the dollar exchange rate aects trade
ows and consumption in the rest of the world. We summarize the analysis of the US case
                                                         10


data.
  10 The issue is not that the US is a large economy, it is that the dollar is used to invoice trade between all



                                                      12
under DCP in Appendix A5 and give further details in Appendix C. The upshot is that the
exchange rate osets are also larger than under PCP and about the same as when the home
economy is not the US (0.35 for a tari on imports and 1.19 for a tari on exports).
To summarize the analysis so far, the imposition of a tari on imports leads to an appreciation
of the home currency and a tari on exports has the opposite eect. Under PCP the
exchange-rate oset is 30 percent for a permanent tari on imports and 100 percent for
a permanent tari on exports for our benchmark calibration. The exchange rate osets are
lower for temporary or expected taris and higher under DCP than under PCP.
2.4 Application to the dollar and the renminbi
The renminbi depreciated against the dollar in 2018-19. As shown by Figure 3, this reected
both an eective appreciation of the dollar and an eective depreciation of the renminbi.
To which extent can these developments be explained by the taris introduced by the US,
China and their trading partners in 2018-19?
In this section we use the model to quantify the implications of the taris introduced in
2018-19 for the dollar and the renminbi. We estimate the average taris on imports and
exports for the US and China, and then use equations (24) and (25) to derive the impact on
the dollar and the renminbi predicted by the model under the calibration of Table 1.
Since the beginning of 2018, the US administration has imposed taris on various grounds
such as safeguarding domestic industries, national security threats, and unfair trade prac-
tices. This started in February 2018, when the US imposed a 30% tari on imports of solar
panels and washing machines, and the following month added taris on steel and aluminum
imports. Most of the US taris, however, were imposed in the context of the trade war
with China, based on alleged Chinese unfair trade practices for technology and intellectual
property. Table B1 in Appendix B reports the list of the US taris imposed in 2018-19.
In the context of the US-China trade war the US administration imposed taris on pre-
determined dollar amounts of imports from China. For example, in the summer of 2018
it decided to impose a 25 percent tari on $50bn of Chinese goods. This was achieved by
imposing the tari on a list of goods whose import from China had amounted to $50bn in
the previous year (2017). Thus, we compute the average tari on US imports by taking the
average of the taris weighted by the 2017 import values.
Because the tari is averaged over import values that were observed before the tari was
imposed, it does not take into account the fact that US importers substituted away from the
goods that were subjected to the taris. At the end of this section we discuss how taking
into account this substitution eect would change our results.

countries. A multilateral dollar appreciation reduces trade ows and consumption in the rest of the world.
Hence, global imports and the global real interest rate cannot be taken as exogenous to the dollar eective
exchange rate.

                                                   13
            108

            106

            104

            102

            100

             98

             96
                  12-2017
                            01-2018


                                                03-2018
                                                          04-2018
                                                                    05-2018


                                                                                        07-2018
                                                                                                  08-2018
                                                                                                            09-2018


                                                                                                                                11-2018
                                                                                                                                          12-2018
                                                                                                                                                    01-2019


                                                                                                                                                                        03-2019
                                                                                                                                                                                  04-2019
                                                                                                                                                                                            05-2019


                                                                                                                                                                                                                07-2019
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          08-2019
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    09-2019


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        11-2019
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12-2019
                                      02-2018




                                                                              06-2018




                                                                                                                      10-2018




                                                                                                                                                              02-2019




                                                                                                                                                                                                      06-2019




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10-2019
                                                                                                                            USD                           CNY


Figure 3:  End-of-month USD and CNY eective exchange rates (Dec. 2017=100, Source:
BIS). An increase in the index means an eective appreciation of the currency.
Based on this approach, we nd that the taris introduced by the US in 2018-19 amounted to
3.7 percent of the value of US imports of goods on average. Most of the taris (3.3 percent)
were imposed on goods from China. This number is much smaller than the headline tari
rates (which varied between 15 and 25 percent, as reported in Table B1) because it is an
average taken over all US imports. The share of China in US imports was 21.9 percent in
2017 and one third of this amount was not subjected to new US taris in 2018-19.
The rest of the world imposed countervailing taris on the US. For example, the EU imposed
an average tari of 25 percent on $3.2 billion of US goods in retaliation to the steel and
aluminium taris. Turkey and India also retaliated, imposing an average tari of 13 percent
and 10 percent on $1.6 billion and $1.3 billion of US goods respectively. Like for imports,                                                                                                                                          11

however, most of the taris on US exports came from the trade war with China. We nd
that the average tari on US exports amounted to 1.3 percent, almost entirely due to the
Chinese taris. Although the headline tari rates imposed by China on US exports were
high, the average tari on US exports was much lower because the US sends only 10 percent
of its exports to China.
In summary, we estimate the average tari rates to be  = 3.7% and  = 1.3% for the                                                                                                                                                              

US. The implications of these values for the dollar are reported in the second row of Table
2. The third column reports the multilateral appreciation of the dollar caused by the tari
on imports, as predicted by the model under the calibration of Table 1. The fth column
reports the dollar depreciation caused by the taris on US exports and the last column
reports the net impact. These estimates are calculated by multiplying the exchange rate
osets from equations (24) and (25) by the average taris reported in the second and fourth
columns. Under the benchmark calibration, the dollar should appreciate by 0.3 percent for
each percent of tari on imports and depreciate by 1 percent for each percent of tari on
 11 The   list of taris on US exports introduced in 2018-19 is given in Appendix B, Table B2.


                                                                                                                                 14
exports.
Table 2 shows that according to the model, the taris introduced in 2018-19 had virtually
no impact on the dollar because the taris on imports and the taris on exports oset each
other. The taris on US exports were about three times smaller than the taris on US
imports but the exchange rate is about three times more sensitive to a tari on exports than
a tari on imports, according to the model.
The third row of Table 2 reports the results of the same exercise conducted for the renminbi.           12

The average taris on Chinese imports and exports were computed in the same way as for
the US (details can be found in Appendix B). The Chinese average tari rates are the mirror
image of the US taris, in the sense that the taris on Chinese exports are more than three
times larger than the taris on Chinese imports. The exchange rate being more sensitive to
taris on exports than to taris on imports, the model unambiguously predicts an eective
depreciation of the renminbi, to the tune of 3.2 percent.
As mentioned earlier, our estimated values of average taris may be biased due to substitution
eects. Taking the arithmetic average of taris weighted by pre-tari import or export value
would be correct if the elasticity of substitution between the goods were equal to zero.
In reality, there will be substitution between goods and the average eective tari will be
lower than our estimated average tari. We estimate the resulting bias in Appendix A6,
and nd that the eective tari rates are between one fourth and one third lower than the
simple averages that we have used for Table 2. The exchange rate impact of taris should
accordingly be reduced by one fourth to one third.         13


    Table 2: Impact of taris on dollar and renminbi eective exchange rates
           Tari on               Appreciation Tari on                   Depreciation Net appreciation
          imports,                due to      exports,           
                                                                         due to    

 Dollar     3.7%                    1.1%         1.3%                      1.3%           -0.2%
 Renminbi 1.0%                      0.3%         3.5%                      3.5%           -3.2%

3 Tari News, the Dollar and the Renminbi
In this section we attempt to identify the impact of taris on the dollar and renminbi
exchange rates using high-frequency news about taris during the period 2018-19. The
question is whether exchange rates respond to news about taris in a way that is consistent
with the theory presented in Section 2.
Our main sample of tari news was constructed using Bloomberg News. Bloomberg News
Search was used to identify news related to the tari war between the US and China and
  12 ForChina we set the value of H to 0.81, which is approximately equal to one minus the share of imports
in Chinese GDP.
  13 Assuming DCP would lead to an adjustment in the opposite direction. If we assume both substitution
eects and DCP, the model-predicted impact of taris on the dollar and reminbi eective exchange rates are
-0.1 and -3.0 percent respectively, almost the same as the estimates reported in Table 2.

                                                    15
record the exact time of their release. We kept only the news related to the imposition
                                                 14

of taris by the US on China or by China on the US. For reasons explained in section 2.4,
we expect the dollar and the renminbi to have been moved by the taris between these
two countries much more than by sectoral taris (on steel, solar panels, etc.) or by taris
imposed by third countries.
Even with this narrow denition we obtained a relatively large sample of 112 pieces of news,
which over two years implies a frequency of about one event per week on average. The news
were mainly announcements of future trade policies, with some news headlining changes in
the US-China trade relation. The source of these announcements varied: some were ocial
statements by the US or Chinese government, others were tweets by the US president. The
news were spread relatively evenly over time in 2018 and 2019. We then classied the news
according to whether the tari-imposing country was the US or China, and whether the news
were about an increase or a decrease in taris. The news were relatively evenly distributed
between these categories, although there were more news about US taris than Chinese
taris, and news tended to be more about tari increases than decreases.
The impact of the tari news on the exchange rate was then measured rst by regressing
the change in the yuan per dollar exchange rate on dummy variables for the tari news in
non-overlapping time windows of dierent lengths (one, two, three, four and ve hours). The
regression specication is
                              E -E
                                E
                                   t     t-k
                                        =+ U + C + ,
                                       t-k
                                                               u   t   c   t   t        (26)
where E is the oshore CNH/USD exchange rate at time t, k is the length of the time
window, and U and C are dummy variables for news about US taris and Chinese taris
           t


respectively. The dummy variables U and C take value 1 (-1) if there were news about a tari
                   t      t


increase (decrease) during the time window (t - k, t), and value 0 otherwise. The regression
                                             t        t


was run with 2018-19 data on the CNH/USD exchange rate at the ten-minute frequency. We
used the oshore exchange rate rather than its onshore counterpart (CNY/USD) because
the latter is not traded during the day in US time, when most of the news took place.               15

The results are reported in the rst row of Figure 4. The gure shows how the point estimates
of  and  in regression (26) vary with the length of the time windows reported on the
horizontal axis. The dashed lines show the 95 percent condence intervals. Two results
    u          c


stand out. First, the renminbi depreciates against the dollar in response to an increase in
US taris on Chinese exports. This eect is statistically signicant at all horizons and seems
  14 The  Bloomberg Terminal categorizes Bloomberg News by topics and by importance. One category is
"Trade Taris, Wars" and the label "Hot" is attached to breaking news headlines with global impact as
determined by editorial judgement. We used both sets of keywords, "Trade Taris, Wars" and "Hot," to
identify the news in our sample. Bloomberg usually reports the news within two minutes after being released
by an ocial source.
  15 We do not have exchange rate data from Friday 5:00pm to Sunday 4:50pm US eastern time because
currency markets are closed on weekends. Thirteen pieces of news in our sample occurred during weekends.
In our benchmark regression we treat weekends as if they were ten-minute intervals. In the robustness
exercises at the end of this section we run regression (26) for weekends and weekdays separately and nd
similar results.


                                                          16
quite persistent. The reminbi depreciates by about 0.2 percent after 5 hours. Second, and
by contrast, the Chinese taris do not have a statistically or economically signicant impact
on the bilateral exchange rate.
Do these results reect that the dollar appreciated or that the renminbi depreciated in
response to tari news? To answer this question we look separately at the nominal eective
exchange rates (NEERs) of the dollar and the renminbi. We run regression (26) where E
is now the NEER of the dollar or the renminbi. This is more consistent with the model
                                                                                                             t


presented in section 2, which makes predictions about the NEER of a small open economy
rather than bilateral exchange rates.
We constructed high frequency series for the NEERs of the dollar and the renminbi with
pared-down versions of the currency baskets used by the Bank for International Settlements
(BIS) for its NEER daily series. The NEERs are measured in such a way that an increase
                                      16

in the NEER corresponds to an eective appreciation of the currency. The regression results
are reported in the second and third rows of Figure 4 for the dollar NEER and the renminbi
NEER respectively for the same one to ve hour time windows.
The second row of Figure 4 shows that news about US taris lead to an eective appreciation
of the dollar, as predicted by theory. This response builds up over time and is statistically
signicant for all horizons. By contrast, news related to Chinese taris have no statistically
signicant impact on the dollar.
The third row of Figure 4 shows that the renminbi signicantly depreciates following news
of an increase in US taris, also consistent with theory. This eect is, again, statistically
signicant for all time windows. The impact of news about US taris is about three times
larger for the reminbi than for the dollar.
The response of the bilateral exchange rate to US tari news shown in the rst row of Figure
4, thus, reects both an eective depreciation of the renminbi and an eective appreciation
of the dollar, though the magnitude of the depreciation of the renminbi is larger. This
is consistent with the calibrated model, which predicted a larger impact of taris on the
renminbi than on the dollar. News related to Chinese taris have no statistically signicant
eect on the renminbi NEER. Thus, the Chinese taris do not seem to aect bilateral or
multilateral eective exchange rates.
A crude way of estimating the cumulative impact of tari news in 2018-19 is to add up the
impact of all the news observed in those two years. We implement this exercise using only
news about US taris. We measure the impact of increasing US tari news by averaging
                           17

the estimated  over the 3, 4 and 5 hour time windows. Based on this estimate, each
piece of news appreciated the dollar NEER by about 0.08 percent and depreciated the CNH
                   u


NEER by about 0.17 percent (see Figure 4). Cumulatively, the US tari news resulted in
a 0.9 percent appreciation of the USD NEER and a 2.0 percent depreciation of the CNH
  16 Our  currency baskets are composed of the top-ten currencies used in the BIS baskets. The BIS uses
much broader baskets of 51 currencies. We limited ourselves to the top ten currencies because of limitations
in the availability of high-frequency exchange rate data for the large number of currencies in the BIS basket.
Our currency baskets are described in more detail in Appendix C2.
   17 We leave Chinese tari news aside since our regressions show that their impact is not statistically
signicant.

                                                     17
NEER over 2018-19. This estimated impact is not negligible if one compares it with the 4.2
percent multilateral appreciation of the US dollar and 3.1 percent multilateral depreciation
of the renminbi observed in 2018-19. According to this computation, the US taris explain
65 percent of the renminbi depreciation and 22 percent of the dollar appreciation observed
in 2018-19.
Even though it is based on a very dierent methodology our news-based analysis provides
estimates of the exchange rate impact of taris that are of the same order of magnitude
as those predicted by the model. Table 3 compares the appreciation of the dollar and
the renminbi observed in 2018-19 (rst row), the model predictions (second row), and the
estimates from the event study analysis (third row). For the model predictions and event
study analysis we consider only the US taris (which explains why the model predictions
are not the same as in Table 2). The dollar appreciation predicted by the model is nearly
the same as the estimate from the event analysis. The model predicts a somewhat larger
eective depreciation of the renminbi than measured by the event analysis.
                       Table 3: Comparison of theory and empirics
                                            Dollar Renminbi
                                 Observed 4.2% -3.1%
                                   Model 1.1% -3.5%
                                   News 0.9% -2.0%
Robustness. Our empirical results are robust to a number of changes in the data or
regression specications. First, we used a dierent source, Bown and Kolb's (2020) trade
                            18

war timeline, to identify tari related news. This led to a dierent news sample (hereafter
the BK sample) which is described in more detail in Appendix C3. There is some overlap
but also dierences between the two samples of news. About thirty percent of the news in
the BK sample are not in the Bloomberg sample. Some news are in both samples but appear
with dierent timing if they were reported by sources other than Bloomberg News rst.                  19

The empirical results using the BK sample turned out to be almost the same as those using
Bloomberg News. US tari news appreciate the USD NEER and depreciate the CNH NEER
and the results are statistically signicant for all time windows except for the 3 hour and 4
hour time windows for the USD NEER. Chinese tari news have no statistically signicant
impact on the USD NEER and CNH NEER at all time windows. One might have expected
the impact of news to be larger with the BK sample, which includes fewer and more selective
news data than the Bloomberg sample. However, this is not the casethe magnitude of the
exchange-rate impact of tari news is similar with the two samples.
We also checked for dierences between weekdays and weekends in the impact of tari news.
We ran separate regressions for weekday and weekend news. The results were similar to
                                                                      20

  18 More  details about the robustness exercises summarized here can be found in Appendix C4.
  19 Bown  and Kolb (2020) report only the day of the event. We use the Bloomberg Terminal to nd the
release time of the rst news about the event, which includes news sources such as Twitter, Dow Jones news,
reports from the ministry of commerce in China as well as Bloomberg News.
  20 We regress the rate of change in the NEER between Friday 16:50 and Sunday 17:00 on a constant and



                                                   18
those obtained before for both currencies and for all time windows. We also tested for an
asymmetry between increasing and decreasing taris by using separate dummies for each
type of event. We did not nd any evidence of asymmetry.
Finally we ran the regression using overlapping time windows and the Newey-West standard
errors to correct for the bias in statistical signicance caused by the autocorrelation of
observations. Again, the results were qualitatively equivalent to our benchmark results for
both currencies and for all time windows. US tari news statistically signicantly appreciate
the dollar and depreciate the renminbi. Chinese tari news have no statistically signicant
eect on both currencies.
4 Conclusions
This paper started with the observation that the taris implemented by the US in 2018-19
were partially oset by a concomitant depreciation of the renminbi against the dollar. We
presented a calibrated model in which the depreciation of the reminbi results from the taris.
Our model furthermore suggests that taris may explain a substantial fraction of the changes
in the dollar and renminbi eective exchange rates observed during that period. This result
is robust to various changes in the assumptions of the model.
The simple textbook model on which these conclusions are based does not incorporate all
the relevant channels, for example the global supply chain disruption induced by the taris.
It is not clear, however, how these other channels would change the results. Taris are
similar to a negative productivity shock for the rms involved in the global supply chain.
Other things equal, taris should depreciate the currencies of the countries that own the
production factors (both capital and labor) used in the global supply chain. This is an
interesting question left for further research.
On the empirical side, we looked for evidence of an impact of tari news on the dollar and
the renminbi using a high-frequency event study. We found that US taris had a statistically
signicant impact on the dollar and the renminbi. Approximately 22 percent of the dollar
appreciation and 65 percent of the renminbi depreciation observed in 2018-19 can be ascribed
to the taris implemented by the US (at least through the channels considered in this paper).
By contrast, we found that taris implemented by China did not have a signicant impact
on the dollar or the renminbi. The order of magnitude of these eects is consistent with the
model predictions.




dummies that take non-zero values if there were news during this time interval.

                                                    19
Figure 4:   u(left-hand side panel) and  (right-hand side panel) for CNH/USD (rst
row), USD NEER (second row) and CNH NEER (third row)
                                       c




                                       20
Appendix A. Model Solution
A1. Phillips curve.
As mentioned in the text, the home good is a CES index of a continuum of varieties j  [0, 1]
produced by monopolists. Each rm j chooses its price to maximize the present discounted
value of its prots net of the price adjustment cost,
                                                                                                        ·
                            +                        t
                                                                                                        P jt
                                 exp -                   it dt             t (Pjt ) - t                                dt.
                        0                        0                                                      Pjt
The rm's nominal prot and adjustment cost are respectively given by
                                                                                                                                   (A1)
                                                         -                                                         -
                                            Pjt                                                             Pjt
                   t (Pjt ) = Pjt                                YHt - (1 - 1/) Wt                                         YHt ,
                                            PHt                                                             PHt
and                                         ·                              ·               2
                                            P jt                          P jt
                                 t                           =                 -^              PHt YHt ,
                                            Pjt                2          Pjt
where ^ is the target ination rate, is the elasticity of substitution between the varieties of
home good, and  is the price adjustment cost parameter. Equation (A1) includes a subsidy
on the rm's labor cost to correct the monopolistic distortion.
Firms optimally choose prices, resulting in the Phillips Curve
                                                                  ·



                       ( - ^) i -  -
                            t
                                          Y
                                          Y
                                            t    =
                                                        W
                                                        P
                                                         t  -1 + ,
                                                                      Ht

                                                                      Ht
                                                                                         (A2)   t

                                                                                               Ht
                                                                                                                   ·

                                                                                                                       t


where  is dened by,                            -1
                                                                                   .
                                                                               
Using (11) to substitute out the interest rate from the Phillips curve gives
                                                     ·            ·

                                   S t Y Ht                                                Wt                      ·

                       (t - ^) r -    -                                           =            - 1 + t.
                                   St   YHt                                                PHt

The product ( -                                 is dropped because it is second order, whence the Phillips
                            ·        ·

                            St       Y Ht
               t^)          St
                                 +   YHt

curve (5).
A2. Equilibrium conditions
The optimal allocation of home consumption between the home and foreign goods is given
by
                                                                                 (A3)
                                                         -   m                                                 -   m
                              P             Ht        S                                             t
                   C = Ht            HC = p  c
                                                               C,     t        H       H                                     t
                               P            t       1+                                                  t


                                                                          21
                                                                                                                                       (A4)
                                               -       m                                                   -   m
                                     PF t                                                    St
                          CF t = F                         C t =  F pF                                             Ct ,
                                     Ptc                                                   1 + t
where                                     1- m      1- m 1/(1- m )
                                Ptc = (H PHt   + F PF t )          ,
is the CPI, and
                                                                                                       1/(     m -1)
                                                                                               m -1
                               St                                               St
                      pH                   =           H + F                                                           ,
                             1 + t                                            1 + t
                                                                                  1-                   1/(     m -1)
                                                                                       m
                               St                                     St
                      pF                   =           H                                    + F                        ,
                             1 + t                                  1 + t

are respectively the prices of the home and foreign goods in term of home consumption.
Solving for the optimal household choices of consumption and labor supply gives the Euler
equation,
                               d
                              dt
                                  u (C )
                                         1+
                                           1
                                              pt
                                                   1+
                                                     S
                                                           = 0,
                                                                t
                                                                     F
                                                                                  t
                                                                                     (A5)
                                                                                       t

and the labor supply condition,
                                                                                     (A6)
                                                                         1/
                                         W      N           t            t
                                             =        .     c
                                         P     u (C )      t                  t

The balance of payment (BoP) identity is
                                                                                     (A7)
                                                                                                   -   m
                  ·
                                   -        1-           S                                 t
                  B = (1 +  ) S
                      t           t
                                       x
                                         M - p
                                            t
                                                   x
                                                            t    C + rB .F F                                   t           t
                                                        1+                                     t

The balance of payment identity is derived from (4), (7), (8), (A4), Y = N and                                      Ht         t

                                            1 Wt YHt            1
                           Zt = t CF t -           
                                                     + t (t )       ,
                                              Et Pt           Et Pt
                                                 -1                                                     1
                           Dt =      PHt YHt -       Wt YHt - t (t )                                         .
                                                                                                       Et Pt
The cost of adjusting prices is a transfer to households so that it does not aect the country's
budget constraint.
A3. Linearization
We linearize the model around the steady state with M =  , B = 0, and  =                                                           
                                                                                                                                       . It
                                                                                                                                      =0
is easy to see that the equilibrium conditions are satised for the following values,
                                                                                                   F



                                           S = C = YH = N = 1,

and i = r + ^.

                                                                    22
First-order deviations from steady state are denoted with lower-case letters. The level of
foreign assets B is rst-order but for notational consistency we redenote it with a lower-case
letter, b = B . Linearizing the Euler equation (A5) gives,
                 t
       t     t

                                               ·

                                 c + ( s +   ) = 0,t   i
                                                                 ·

                                                                H t                     (A8)
                                                                                         F
                                                                                             ·

                                                                                                 t


which implies (13).
Using (A3) to substitute out C in (8) and linearizing gives equation (14).
                                          Ht

Linearizing the BoP identity (A7) gives:
                     ·

                     bt = -F [ct + H m (st - t ) +                                               x (st        + t ) - st ] + rbt ,
                        = yHt - ct + F st + rbt ,                                      (A9)
where the second line was derived by using (14). Integrating this equation forward and using
the transversality condition gives equation (17).
The labor supply condition (A6) and Y = N imply        Ht                    t

                                                                 1/
                              Wt    Ptc Nt
                                  =             ,
                              PHt   PHt u (Ct )
                                                                                                             1/
                                                        1         YHt
                                              =                           ,
                                                pH (St /(1 + t )) u (Ct )
                                                    yHt ct
                                               1+        + - F (st - t ) .
                                                                                     i

Using the last expression to substitute out W /P in (5) gives (15).      t           Ht



A4. Transitory and expected taris.
We now assume that the tari rates can change at some time T ,
                            =  for t  T and  =  for t > T,
                              t           0                                          t                   T


and a similar assumption for  . This specication allows us to study the impact of a
                                           

transitory tari ( > 0 and  = 0) or an expected tari ( = 0 and  > 0).
                     0                T
                                           t
                                                                                                                   0           T

We solve for the equilibrium as follows. From T onwards the economy is in a steady state
as characterized above. This steady state can be derived conditional on b .                                                        T

Equation (A8) implies
                       c + ( s +   ) = c + ( s +   )
                          t       i       H t              F 0                   T  (A10)            i       H T       F T


for t < T . We can derive the paths for s ,  before T by shooting backwards on equations
(15) and (16), using (14) and (A10) to substitute out y and c , and using the fact that s
                                                            t        t
                                                                                                             Ht        t               t




                                                                     23
and  are continuous at time T , and                             =^      . Finally, we derive b from the intertemporal
budget constraint
     t                                                      T                                        T



                              T
            b0 =  F               [ct + H      m ( st   - t ) +             x (st   + t ) - st ] e-rt dt + e-rT bT .
                          0


We numerically solve for the value of b that satises this equation for b                                           = 0   . We then
derive the paths for c , s , e , y ,  , and b .
                                                            T                                                  0
                      t           t   t   Ht     t                  t




                   Figure A1:     Transitory 1 percent tari on imports
Figures A1 and A2 show the paths of c , s , e , y ,  , and b when T = 1 for the transitory
and expected tari on imports respectively. Figures A3 and A4 show the paths for the same
                                                        t       t       t    Ht      t        t


variables under transitory and expected tari on exports.
A temporary tari on imports has ambiguous eects on the demand for the home good. On
the one hand, it is an intertemporal tax that reduces consumption. On the other hand, it
shifts home demand towards the home good. Our benchmark calibration assumes = ,
which implies that the intratemporal and intertemporal substitution eects exactly oset
                                                                                                                            i   m


each other. Thus there is no ination, the nominal interest rate and the terms of trade stay
constant. The home currency appreciates because the country accumulates a trade surplus
while the tari is in place.
A similar analysis applies to an expected tari (Figure A2). The currency appreciation
induced by the expected tari tends to depress home demand, but the expectation of a tari
also stimulates home consumption. The two eects exactly cancel each other (under our
benchmark calibration) so that there are no transition dynamics in the terms of trade. The
appreciation is mitigated by the fact that the country accumulates trade decits before the
tari is introduced.
                                             24
                      Figure A2:     Expected 1 percent tari on imports
Taris on exports require analyzing the transition dynamics. A transitory tari on ex-
ports reduces foreign demand for home goods and home income while it is in place. Home
households smooth their consumption by borrowing, and the accumulated foreign liabilities
depreciate the home currency in real terms in the long run. In addition, home producers
                                                                  21

respond to lower demand by lowering their prices. Ination falls below target, inducing the
home authorities to reduce the interest rate. As a result the real exchange rate overshoots
the long-run real depreciation in the short run (see Figure A3).       22

Home households smooth their consumption in anticipation of a tari on exports by saving
before the introduction of the tari. Thus the economy accumulates net foreign assets,
which slightly mitigates the depreciation of the currency when the tari is introduced (s
decreases by slightly less than 1 percent in the long run, as can be seen in Figure A4). The
home currency depreciates before the introduction of the tari, which through expenditure
switching stimulates the demand for the home good. Home rms respond to increased
demand by raising their prices faster than the ination target and the home central bank
raises the interest rate. This mitigates the depreciation of the home currency in the short
run.


  21 The home currency appreciates in nominal terms in the long run because of home deation while the
tari is in place.
  22 In addition the dynamics exhibit a low-frequency oscillatory component when T is high. We do not
observe these oscillations in Figures A3 and A4 because they do not appear for T = 1.

                                                 25
Figure A3:   Transitory 1 percent tari on exports




Figure A4:   Expected 1 percent tari on exports

                       26
A5. Dominant currency pricing
For a country that is not the US, the dierence between DCP and PCP is that under DCP
exports are priced in terms of foreign currency. Denote by P the foreign currency price                    

of home exports and by S = P /P the terms of trade in exports markets. We assume
                                                           
                                                                                                           H


constant taris.                                   H


The home good market clearing condition (8) becomes
                                                                       -   m
                                                        St
                              YHt = H pH                                       Ct + [(1 +   )St ]- x Mt ,
                                                       1+

or, after linearization (using M              
                                              t   = F      )
                                 yHt = H ct - F [H                              (A11)
                                                                           m ( st   - ) +             
                                                                                                  x (st   +   )] .

By the denition of S and using  to denote the rate of ination in the foreign currency
                                                       

price of exports,                                      t


                                     s = -  ^.
                                                               ·

                                                                   t
                                                                   
                                                                               t
                                                                               
                                                                                (A12)
The balance-of-payments equation becomes,
                                                                                                          -    m
                  ·
                                                                                                 St
                 B t = (1 +  )        -       x
                                                  (St )1-      x
                                                                   Mt       - F pF                                 Ct + rBt ,
                                                                                                1+

or, after linearization
                                                                                                                                    (A13)
                      ·
                                                                                            
                      bt = -F [ct + H                      m (st       - ) +            x (st   +   ) - st ] + rbt .


Equations (16) and (A8) imply
                                                   ·

                                                   ct = H i ( - 1)(t - ^ ).          (A14)
Under DCP we have two Phillips curves, one for the home market and one for the export
market. The Phillips curve for the home market is still given by equation (15). The Phillips
curve for the export market is
                                       ·                                                 Wt
                                        t = r (t -^) -                                      
                                                                                               -1 ,
                                                                                        Et PHt

or, after linearization,
                          ·    
                       t = r ( t -^) - 
                                                                   yHt
                                                                            +
                                                                                   ct
                                                                                    i
                                                                                        + H st + F  - st .                          (A15)
Using (A11) to substitute out y from equations (15), (16), (A12), (A13), (A14), and (A15)
we obtain a rst-order dierential linear system in six variables: c , s , s ,  - ^,  - 
                                              Ht
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                        ^                           t   t   t   t   t


                                           27
          Figure A5:        Impulse responses to 1 percent tari on imports under DCP
and b . We solved this system with Dynare to obtain the transition dynamics reported in
Figures A5 and A6. The gures are discussed in the text.
      t
                       23


DCP in the US. In the US, DCP implies that both exports and imports are invoiced in
dollars. Hence, the dierence between DCP and PCP is that under DCP imports are priced
in dollars rather than in foreign currency. As mentioned in the text, the impact of taris
under DCP is more complicated to analyze for the US because one can no longer maintain
the small open economy assumption. One needs to solve for the transition dynamics both
in the US and in the rest of the world. The details are reported in Appendix C.
To summarize, there are three Phillips curves to consider: one for the dollar price of US
producers, one for the local currency prices and one for the dollar export price of non-US
countries. The rest of the world is assumed to have the same type of Taylor rules as the US.
The main ndings are similar to the case of DCP for a non-US country. A tari on US
imports appreciates the dollar whereas a tari on US exports depreciates the dollar. These
eects are larger than under PCP because of exchange rate overshooting. The main dierence
with the case of a non-US country is that exporters in the RoW adjust their dollar prices in
response to the changes in the dollar eective exchange rate.
  23 We discretized the dierential equations with a time increment of 0.02, corresponding to about one week
given that a unit of time is one year. We also introduced a very small adjustment cost on external assets to
make bt stationary. We used Dynare in the same way to compute the other impulse response functions in
the rest of the paper. See Adjemian et al (2011) for a presentation of Dynare.




                                                    28
          Figure A6:      Impulse responses to 1 percent tari on exports under DCP
A6. Average eective taris
One discrepancy between the model and reality is that neither the US nor China imposed a
uniform tari on all their imports. Each country imposed taris at dierent rates on dierent
lists of imported goods. More formally, rather than a uniform tari  , we should consider a
tari schedule (µ ,  )        where g indexes the lists of goods that are imposed the same
tari  , and µ is the import value share of goods in list g before the imposition of the
                   g   g g =1,...,G


taris.
      g        g



The home-currency price of imports is
                                                                               1


                                                                                     (A16)
                                                                              1-

                                  PF =             µg ((1 + g )EP  )1-             ,
                                               g

where is the elasticity of substitution between imported goods. This can be rewritten
                                      P = (1 +   ~)EP
                                                   F
                                                                    
                                                                                     (A17)
where ~ is dened by                                                       1


                                                                                     (A18)
                                                                         1-
                                                                    1-
                              1+  ~=        µ (1 +  )       g.  g
                                                        g

Variable ~ is the average eective tari that should be used in equation (24). It is equal to
the average tari  = µ  in the limit case where the elasticity is equal to zero. If
  > 0 the average eective tari   ~ is lower than  .
                              g   g g



Similarly the taris on exports were not uniform. Rather than a uniform tari  , we should
                                                                                       

consider a tari schedule (µ ,  )      x
                                          
                                           where x indexes the export markets that impose
                                          x x=1,...,X


                                              29
the same tari  , and µ is the share of these export markets in total exports before the
                

imposition of the taris.
                x           x



Foreign demand for the home good is then given by,
                                 x
                                            -   x
                         µ [(1 +  )S ] M = [(1 + 
                                        x
                                                     
                                                    ~ )S ] M ,            -   x
                                                                                 (A19)
                                                                                  

                        x

where the eective tari on exports is given by,
                                                                    -1/

                                                                                     (A20)
                                                                          x
                                                           -
                                 1+~ =          µx (1 +   x )   x
                                                                              .
                                            x



                                Table A1: Average eective tari
                        ~ US         ~ China         ~
                                                          US        ~     China
                         2.8% 0.7% 0.9%                    2.7%
Table A1 shows the estimated average eective tari rates for the US and China assuming
  = 3 as in Feenstra et al (2018). The data used to compute the average eective taris
are given in Tables B1, B2, B3 and B4. The eective tari rates reported in Table A1 are
between one fourth and one third lower than the simple averages that we have used for Table
2. The exchange rate impact of taris should accordingly be reduced by one fourth to one
third.




                                                    30
Appendix B. US and Chinese Taris
The average taris in Table 2 are constructed using data from the International Trade Centre
(ITC) and various publications from the Peterson Institute for International Economics
(PIIE). We include all the taris implemented in 2018-19 that are reported in the US
           24

tradewar timeline of Bown and Kolb (2020).
Table B1 reports the tari rates, the value of imports aected by these taris, and the time of
implementation for the various import taris introduced by the US in 2018-19. As explained
in the text, we use the 2017 import values to compute the average tari rate. The US rst
introduced a 30 percent tari on solar panels and washing machines. Following this, in
                                                                                25

March 2018 the US imposed a 25 percent and 10 percent tari on steel and aluminum imports
respectively following investigation results reporting a threat to "national security" as dened
by Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962. Most of the taris implemented in 2018-
19 were on goods imported from China, however. The Trump administration imposed a
25 percent tari on $50 billion of Chinese goods in the summer of 2018, followed by a 10
percent tari on an additional $200 billion worth of Chinese goods in September which was
later raised to 25 percent in May 2019, and 15 percent on $112 billion of Chinese goods in
September 2019. The last row shows total US imports of goods in 2017 and the computed
average tari rate US imports face.
Table B2 reports the taris applied by the rest of the world on US exports in 2018-19. Most
of these taris were implemented by China. In July 2018, China imposed a 25 percent tari
on $34 billion of US goods and in August 2018 additionally imposed a 25 percent tari on
$16 billion of US goods. In September 2018, China imposed another round of taris on $60
billion of US goods, with an average tari rate eventually reaching 13 percent. In September
2019, China imposed an additional 6 percent average tari on $29 billion of US goods. In
2018-19 China increased the average tari rate on US goods by a total of 15 percent. The
last row shows total US exports in 2017 and the computed average tari rate US exports
face.26

Similarly, Tables B3 and B4 report the taris on Chinese imports and exports respectively
imposed in 2018-19. The taris included in Tables B3 and B4 are with the US. The only
other changes in the Chinese tari rates were related to changes in the most favored nation
(MFN) status granted to non-US trade partners.
We mentioned in the introduction that the US imposed new taris of 15.1 percent on average
on its imports from China. For this estimate we need to know the bilateral trade ows
  24 For total imports and exports, we use data from ITC and for tari rates and import and export values
for each tari, we use data from the PIIE publications.
  25 The actual tari schedule is more complicated than reported in the table. Tari rates on washing
machines start at 20 percent for the rst year and decrease by 2 percent for the next two years while tari
rates on solar panels start at 30 percent and decrease by 5 percent for the next three years. The rates
also dier according to how many washing machine units are imported and the gigawatt of solar cells. For
simplicity we approximate the tari rate to be 30 percent for solar panels and washing machines.
  26 Total US exports to China amounted to $154.8 billion in 2017. We disregard changes to Most Favored
Nation (MFN) tari rates by China and include only the changes in taris reported in Bown and Kolb
(2020).

                                                   31
between the US and China. Table B5 reports the trade ows for goods between the US,
China and the rest of the world (RoW) in billions of US dollars, based on the 2017 ITC
import and export data. The table shows the ow of exports from the column entity to the
row entity. For example, the ow of exports from the US to the rest of the world amounted
to $1,546.5 bn whereas the ow of exports from the rest of the world to the US (i.e., US
imports) amounted to $2,406.4 bn.
                            Table B1: US taris on imports
        2017 import value Tari rate            Imports                 Initiation Date
          (billion USD)
                10.3                         Solar Panels
                               30% and Washing                            2/7/2018
                                                      Machines
                                                 Steel
                19.5           25%       (excluding Canada,              3/23/2018
                                         Mexico, and Turkey)
                                              Aluminum
                 9.7           10%       (excluding Canada,              3/23/2018
                                         Mexico, and Turkey)
                 1.3           50%          Steel (Turkey)               8/10/2018
                 0.1           20%       Aluminum (Turkey)               8/10/2018
                                                                   7/6/2018 ($34 bn 25%)
                250            25%       Imports from China       8/23/2018 ($16 bn 25%)
                                          $50 bn + $200 bn        9/24/2018 ($200 bn 10%
                                                               raised to 25% on 5/10/2019 )
                112            15%       Imports from China               9/1/2019
       2017 Total US imports: $2406.4 bn
       Average taris on US imports: 3.7%
                            Table B2: Taris on US exports
          2017 export value Tari rate        Exports               Initiation Date
            (billion USD)
                   2.4           22%          China                   4/2/2018
                   3.2           25%           EU                    6/22/2018
                   50            25%          China              7/6/2018 ($34 bn)
                                                                8/23/2018 ($16 bn)
                   1.6           13%         Turkey                  8/14/2018
                   60            13%          China                  9/24/2018
                                                              6/1/2019 Rate increased
                  14.3          -24% China suspension of tari         1/1/2019
                   1.3           10%          India                  6/15/2019
                  28.7            6%          China                   9/1/2019
         2017 Total US exports: $1546.5 bn
         Average taris on US exports: 1.3%




                                                32
                  Table B3: Chinese taris on imports
 2017 import value Tari rate               Imports                 Initiation Date
   (billion USD)
          2.4           22%            Imports from US                4/2/2018
          50            25%            Imports from US           7/6/2018   ($34 bn)
                                                                8/23/2018 ($16 bn)
          60            13%            Imports from US               9/24/2018
                                                              6/1/2019 Rate increased
         14.3          -24% Suspension       of taris against
                                       US auto and parts              1/1/2019
         28.7            6%            Imports from US                9/1/2019
2017 Total Chinese imports: $1841.0 bn
Average taris on Chinese imports: 1.0%



                  Table B4: Taris on Chinese exports
 2017 export value Tari rate             Exports                 Initiation Date
   (billion USD)
                                                             7/6/2018 ($34 bn 25%)
        250              25%                  US             8/23/2018  ($16 bn 25%)
                                                            9/24/2018 ($200 bn 10%)
                                                            5/10/2019 ($200 bn 25%)
        112              15%                  US                    9/1/2019
          1              25%           US tari on steel            3/23/2018
         1.8             10%        US tari on aluminum            3/23/2018
         0.9             30%       US  tari on Solar Panels         2/7/2018
                                    and Washing Machines
 2017 Total Chinese exports: $2271.8 bn
 Average taris on Chinese exports: 3.5%



                    Table B5: Trade ows ($bn, 2017)
                              RoW US China
                       RoW · 2,406.4 1,841.0
                        US 1,546.5 · 154.8
                       China 2,271.8 525.8 ·

                                         33
Appendix C. Supplementary material (not for publication)
C1. Model: US DCP
This appendix considers the case of dominant currency pricing when the home economy is
the US. We continue to assume that the home economy is a small open economy in the sense
that its size is atomistic relative to the rest of the world (RoW). However the dollar eective
exchange rate is special because it aects trade ows in the RoW. We assume constant tari
rates. The RoW applies the tari  on US exports only. 


For simplicity we assume that the non-US countries in the RoW are identical. Each non-US                        27

country has its own currency but the exchange rate between all non-US currencies is equal
to one.
Denote by Y and C the output and consumption of the representative non-US country.
                             

Denote by P the dollar price at which non-US goods are traded internationally, and by P
               Ht            t
                                                                                                                      

the non-US currency price of the same goods (the price at which non-US goods are traded
               Ft                                                                                                    t


domestically). The associated ination rates are denoted by  and  .                                 Ft
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                            t

The Taylor rules need to be amended because we can no longer suppose that the world real
interest rate in terms of foreign good is constant. We denote by  the psychological discount
rate of all consumers (US or not). The Taylor rules in the US and in the representative
non-US country are
                                             it =  + (1 - )  + t ,
                                             i                 
                                              t =  + (1 - )  + t .



US. The terms of trade relevant both for home and foreign markets are St = PHt /PF t .Thus
                                        s = - .
                                                          ·

                                                              t               t    Ft (C1)
Since the relative price of US and foreign goods is the same in US and foreign markets, the
demand for US goods is given by equation (8) like in the PCP case. The only dierence with
PCP is that we no longer assume RoW imports to be constant, so that linearized demand
for US goods is given by,
                    y =  c -  [
                            Ht       H t   (s -  ) + (s +  )] +  m ,
                                                 F       H m              t           (C2)
                                                                                        x   t
                                                                                                
                                                                                                        F
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                            t

where M =  (1 + m ). The Euler equation for the US consumer is
           
           t        F
                                 
                                 t
                                                     ·
                                                                            c
                                                     ct =         i   (it - t - ) ,

where  =  -  s is the US CPI ination rate. Using the Taylor rule and (C1) to
           c
                             ·




substitute out i and s gives
           t        t       F t
                             ·

                        t        t
                                     ·

                         c = [( - 1)( - ^ ) +  ( -  )] .
                                         t   i                        t(C3)             F   t   Ft

 27 To   avoid any ambiguity we call countries US and non-US rather than home and foreign.

                                                                              34
The Phillips Curve for US goods sold at home is still given by (15). The US BoP equation
is given by (A9).
RoW. The terms of trade relevant for the representative non-US country is the price of its
home good in terms of foreign good (both expressed in terms of dollars),
                                                                                    (C4)
                                                                                                  
                                            EP                                           t       t
                                      S =        ,                      t
                                             P                                               Ft

where E is the price of non-US currency in terms of dollars. Using interest parity
           t
                                                                                         ·

                                                                   it = it + E t /Et ,

one gets                                                ·   
                                                       st = it - i     
                                                                  t +  t - F t ,

and using the Taylor rules to substitute out i - i                               t
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                 t
                                                ·      
                                            st =  (t - t     
                                                         ) + t - F t .               (C5)
The demand for the output of the representative non-US country is the sum of home demand
and foreign demand
                              
                             YHt = H [pH (St )]- m Ct + F [pF (St )]- m Ct .
Linearizing this expression gives                                                            
                                       y =c .
The Euler equation for the non-US consumer is
                                                                            Ht               t



                                                            ·   
                                                            ct =        i   (i    c
                                                                              t - t -  ) ,

where  =  - s =   + [ -  ( -  )] is CPI ination in the non-US country.
       c       
                        · 
                                                                                                     

Using the Taylor rule to substitute out i gives
       t       t       F t       H t                F              Ft             t                  t
                                                                        
                                                                        t
                   ·   
                c = [( -  ) ( -  ) -  ( -  ) +   ( -  )] .
                       t     i              H               t
                                                            
                                                                 (C6)                F            Ft          F    t
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                       t


The non-US country's demand for imports is
                                                    Mt = F [pF (St )]- m Ct .
Linearizing this equation gives
                                                                m     
                                                                 t = ct + H    (C7)                     
                                                                                                     m st .

The non-US country has two Phillips curves, one for home markets and one for exports
markets
                                 ·                                                                   Et Wt
                                  F t =  ( F t - ^) -                                                       -1 ,
                                                                                                       PF t
                                     ·                                                               Wt
                                      t = (t -^) -                                                       -1 ,
                                                                                                     Pt

                                                                                 35
where the nominal wage is given by
                                                1/
                                    Wt = Ptc (YHt ) (Ct )1/ i .

Linearizing these equations and using y    
                                           Ht   = ct   gives
                      ·

                      F t = (F t - ^) - 
                                                        1
                                                            +
                                                                1
                                                                    i
                                                                        c        
                                                                         t +  H st ,                                (C8)
                          ·     
                           t = (t -^) - 
                                                       1
                                                            +
                                                                1
                                                                i
                                                                        c       
                                                                         t - F st .                                 (C9)
Solving for the equilibrium.       Using (C2) and (C7) to substitute out y and m we have                        

a rst-order dierential linear system in 8 variables (s , c ,  , s , c , b ,  ,  ) with the
                                                                                                  Ht            t
                                                                                                            

following 8 equations: (C1), (C3), (15), (C5), (C6), (A9), (C8) and (C9). We solved this
                                                                    t    t       t   t    t   t        Ft   t


system with Dynare to obtain the transition dynamics reported in Figures C1 and C2.
As shown by Figure C1, the tax on US imports lead US producers to adjust their price
upwards in the home market. The resulting increase in ination induces the US central bank
to raise the interest rate, which appreciates the dollar. The appreciation of the dollar can
be seen in the initial fall in S and E (using the fact that P and P are sticky in equation
                                                                              

(C4)). The dollar appreciates by 0.35 percent, more than under PCP. Observe that exporters
                                                                             t           Ft


in the RoW adjust their dollar prices downward ( goes below target) as the appreciation
of the dollar increases their markups.
                                                            F



Figure C2 shows similar responses in reverse. The tax on exports leads US exporters to adjust
their prices downward at home, and induces a US monetary relaxation which depreciates
the dollar. The dollar overshoots, with a 1.19 percent depreciation (against 1 percent under
PCP). Exporters in the RoW adjust their dollar prices upward as the dollar depreciation
reduces their markups.
C2. Event study: the NEERs
For the high-frequency event study we construct NEER series for the US dollar and the
Chinese renminbi at the 10-minute frequency. As explained in the text we use the BIS
currency baskets pared down to the top-ten currencies. The BIS weights are calculated
based on manufacturing trade ows, capturing both direct bilateral trade and third-market
competition and adjusted for re-exports for China (see Klau and Fung, 2006, for a description
of the methodology). The top-ten currencies amount to approximately 85 percent of the
BIS basket for the dollar and 80 percent in the case of the renminbi. The weights are
reported in Table C1. The exchange rate data are from Bloomberg. There are a total of
72118 observations for the USD NEER, 74449 observations of the CNH NEER, and 74449
observations for the CNH/USD bilateral exchange rate.


                                                  36
Figure C1:   Impulse responses of 1 percent tari on US imports under DCP




Figure C2:   Impulse responses of 1 percent tari on US exports under DCP

                                   37
                  Table C1:    Weights for USD NEER and CNH NEER
                        USD NEER                   CNH NEER
                       Renminbi        0.27 United States dollar 0.25
                         Euro          0.20        Euro          0.23
                    Mexican peso 0.16 Japanese yen 0.15
                   Canadian dollar 0.14 South Korean won 0.11
                    Japanese yen 0.08 New Taiwan dollar 0.08
                  South Korean won 0.04 Pound sterling 0.04
                    Pound sterling 0.04 Singapore dollar 0.04
                  New Taiwan dollar 0.03 Mexican peso 0.03
                     Indian rupee 0.02 Indian rupee 0.03
                      Swiss franc 0.02           Thai baht       0.03
C3. Event study: the Bown-Kolb news sample
Table C2 reports the events relevant to the US-China tradewar provided by Bown and
Kolb (2020) as well as our coding of the news. There are a total of 37 events that include
information about an increase or decrease of US or China taris. We identify 19 of these
events to be related to an increase in US taris on imported goods from China, 5 to be
related to a decrease in US taris on imported goods from China, 14 to be related to an
increase in Chinese taris on imported goods from the US, and 3 to be related to a decrease
in Chinese taris on imported goods from the the US.
Figure C3 shows the point estimates and 95 percent condence intervals of coecients  and
 in regression (26) using the BK sample. The solid line reports the estimated coecient
                                                                                    u


when the length of time windows increased from one to ve hours and the dashed line reports
 c


the condence intervals. The gures show similar qualitative results as Figure 4, except for
the statistical insignicance of US tari news on the USD NEER for the three and four hour
times windows.
C4. Event study: robustness
Figure C4 shows the point estimates and 95 percent condence intervals of coecients  and
 in regression (26) using only tari news that occurred on weekdays. The results are close
                                                                                    u


to our benchmark results in Figure 4. US tari news appreciate the dollar and depreciate
 c


the renminbi for all time windows. Chinese tari news have no statistical signicance for
both currencies across all time windows.
Table C3 shows the 95 percent condence intervals of coecients  and  using only tari
news that occurred on weekends. Again, the results are similar to our benchmark case.
                                                                 u      c



To check for asymmetry between increasing and decreasing taris, we run regressions that

                                           38
Figure C3:  (left-hand side panel) and  (right-hand side panel) for USD NEER (rst
row) and CNH NEER (second row) using BK news sample
             u                         c




                                       39
include separate dummies for each type of event,        28


                           Et - Et-k
                              Et-k
                                     =  + u Ut + c Ct + u+ Ut+ + t ,                               (C10)
and                        Et - Et-k
                              Et-k
                                     =  + u Ut + c Ct + c+ Ct+ + t .                     (C11)
The 95 percent condence intervals are reported in Figure C5. The null  = 0 cannot be
rejected for both currencies and all time windows. The same is true for  = 0 except for
                                                                                     u+


the renminbi in the 4-hour time window. These results show no evidence of asymmetry.
                                                                                     c+



We also run regression (26) using overlapping time windows and the Newey-West standard
errors to correct for the autocorrelation of observations. The regression results are reported
in Figure C6. The results are similar to our benchmark results. US tari news appreciate
the dollar and depreciate the renminbi for all time windows. Chinese tari news have no
statistically signicant impact on both currencies for all time windows.




  28 U and Ct are dened as in regression (26). Ut+ (Ct+ ) is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if
         t
there were news about US (Chinese) tari increases during the time window (t - k, t) and 0 otherwise.

                                                   40
Figure C4:  (left-hand side panel) and  (right-hand side panel) for USD NEER (rst
row) and CNH NEER (second row) using weekday data
             u                         c




                                       41
Figure C5:  (left-hand side panel) and  (right-hand side panel) for USD NEER (rst
row) and CNH NEER (second row)
             u+                        c+




                                       42
Figure C6:   Regression results using overlapping time windows with Newey-West standard
errors




                                          43
             Table C2:  Bown and Kolb (2020) US-China tradewar timeline
    Date                                        Event                                 Ut   Ct
  2/4/2018                  China investigates US exports of Sorghum                  0     1
 3/22/2018                  Unfair trade practices investigation results              1     0
  4/3/2018                                China retaliates                            0     1
  4/3/2018                              US threatens taris                            1     0
  4/4/2018        China threatens retaliation on autos, aircraft, and agriculture     0     1
  4/5/2018                US considers additional taris on $100 billion               1     0
 4/17/2018              China imposes preliminary taris on US Sorghum                 0     1
 5/17/2018            China ends taris on US Sorghum during negotiations              0    -1
 5/29/2018                   White house plans taris after brief hold                 1     0
 6/15/2018                        US revises $50 billion tari list                    1     0
 6/15/2018                        China's revised retaliation list                    0     1
 6/18/2018                         Trump asks for more taris                          1     0
  7/6/2018             US and China impose rst phase of June 15 tari list             1     1
 7/10/2018                USTR announces $200 billion taris on China                  1     0
 7/20/2018              Trump threatens taris on all imports from China               1     0
  8/1/2018                       Trump wants 25% and not 10%                          1     0
  8/3/2018                      China threatens $60 billion taris                     0     1
  8/7/2018                   USTR nalizes second tranche of taris                     1     0
  8/8/2018            China revises its $ billion tari list, removing crude oil       0     1
 8/23/2018           US and China impose second phase of $50 billion taris            1     1
 9/17/2018                    Trump nalizes $200 billion tari list                    1     0
 9/18/2018               China nalizes taris on $60 billion of US goods               0     1
 9/24/2018                     Next phase of taris goes into eect                     1     1
 12/1/2018                             US-China tari truce                            -1   -1
 2/24/2019                             Tari increase delayed                          -1    0
  5/5/2019                         Trump renews tari threats                          1     0
 5/10/2019                     US raises tari rate on previous list                   1     0
 5/13/2019                        China plans to hike tari rate                       0     1
  6/1/2019                        China raises retaliatory taris                      0     1
  8/1/2019       US announces taris on almost all remaining imports from China        1     0
 8/13/2019              Trump plans two major rollouts of fall 2019 taris             1     0
 8/23/2019                                China retaliates                            0     1
 8/23/2019                        Trump announces more taris                          1     0
 9/11/2019                          China removes a few taris                         0    -1
 9/11/2019                            Trump moves tari date                           -1    0
10/11/2019    Trump cancels October taris, points to "Phase One" of deal with China   -1    0
12/13/2019            Trump calls o December taris in anticipation of deal            -1    0

                                         44
               NEER                          
                USD [0.146 0.268] [-0.058 0.091]
                             u               c


               CNH [-0.557 -0.381] [-0.132 0.084]
Table C3: 95 percent condence interval for  and  using weekend data
                                         u       c




                                 45
                                   REFERENCES

Adjemian, Stéphane; Bastani, Houtan; Juillard, Michel; Karamé, Frédéric; Maih, Junior;
Mihoubi, Ferhat; Perendia, George; Pfeifer, Johannes; Ratto, Marco and Sébastien Villemot.
2011. Dynare: Reference Manual, Version 4. Dynare Working Papers 1, CEPREMAP.
Amiti, Mary, Redding, Stephen and David Weinstein. 2019. The Impact of the 2018 Taris
on Prices and Welfare. Journal of Economic Perspectives 33(4), 187-210
Andersen, Torben G., Bollerslev, Tim, Diebold, Francis X. and Clara Vega. 2007. Real-time
price discovery in global stock, bond and foreign exchange markets. Journal of International
Economics 73(2), 251-277.
Bénassy-Quéré, Agnès, Bussière, Matthieu and Pauline Wibaux. 2018. Trade and Currency
Weapons. CESifo, Working Paper Series 7112.
Bown, Chad, and Melina Kolb. 2020. Trump's Trade War Timeline: An Up-to-date Guide.
Peterson Institute for International Economics https://piie.com/system/les/documents/trump-
trade-war-timeline.pdf
Dornbusch, Rudiger. 1987. External Balance Correction: Depreciation or Protection?
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 249-269.
Eichengreen, Barry. 1981. A Dynamic Model of Taris, Output and Employment Under
Flexible Exchange Rates. Journal of International Economics 11, 341-359.
Eichengreen, Barry. 2019. Trade Policy and the Macroeconomy. IMF Economic Review 67,
4-23.
Erceg, Chris, Prestipino, Andrea, and Andrea Rao. 2018. The Macroeconomic Eects of
Trade Policy." FRB International Finance Discussion Paper No.1242, Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System.
Fajgelbaum, Pablo D., Goldberg, Pinelopi K., Kennedy Patrick J. and Amit K. Khandelwal.
2019. The Return to Protectionism. NBER Working Paper 25638.
Faust, Jon, Rogers, J., Wang, S., and J. Wright. 2006. The High Frequency Response of
Exchange Rates and Interest Rates to Macroeconomic Announcements. Journal of Monetary
Economics 54, 1051-1068.
Feenstra, Robert C., Luck, Philip, Obstfeld, Maurice and Catheryn Russ. 2018. In Search
of the Armington Elasticity. Review of Economics and Statistics 100(1), 135-150.
Fontagné, Lionel, Martin, Philippe, and Gianluca Orece. 2018. The International Elasticity
Puzzle is Worse Than You Think. Journal of International Economics vol. 115(C), 115-129.
Furceri, Davide, Hannan, Swarnali, Ostry, Jonathan and Andrew Rose. 2018. Macroeco-
nomic Consequences of Taris. NBER Working Paper 25402.
                                           46
Gali, Jordi, and Monacelli, Tommaso. 2005. Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Volatility
in a Small Open Economy. Review of Economic Studies 72, 707-734.
Gopinath, Gita. 2016. The International Price System. Jackson Hole Symposium Proceed-
ings.
Jeanne, Olivier. 2020. To What Extent Are Taris Oset by Exchange Rates? Peterson
Institute Working Paper.
Klau, Marc, and Fung, San Sau. 2006. The New BIS Eective Exchange Rate Indices. BIS
Quarterly Review, March 2006.
Krugman, Paul. 1982. The Macroeconomics of Protection with a Floating Exchange Rate.
Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 16, 141-182.
Li, Gloria. 2019. Onshore and Oshore RMB Response to Recent RMB Announcements.
Johns Hopkins University. Manuscript (Senior Thesis).
Lindé, Jesper, and Andrea Pescatori. 2019. The Macroeconomic Eects of Trade Taris:
Revisiting the Lerner Symmetry Result. Journal of International Money and Finance 95(C),
52-69.
Rogers, John H., Scotti, Chiara and Jonathan H. Wright. 2014. Evaluating Asset-market Ef-
fects of Unconventional Monetary Policy: a Multi-country Review. Economic Policy 29(80),
749-799.
Rotemberg, Julio. 1982. Sticky Prices in the United States.Journal of Political Economy
90(6), 1187-1211.
Stiglitz, Joseph. 2016. A Nobel Laureate Explains How Trump Could Nuke the Economy.
Vanity Fair, December 27 2016.




                                           47
