                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


                            TAKING IT TO THE LIMIT:
             EFFECTS OF INCREASED STUDENT LOAN AVAILABILITY ON
              ATTAINMENT, EARNINGS, AND FINANCIAL WELL-BEING

                                        Sandra E. Black
                                       Jeffrey T. Denning
                                         Lisa J. Dettling
                                        Sarena Goodman
                                        Lesley J. Turner

                                      Working Paper 27658
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27658


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020



Any views or interpretations expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views, opinion, or official position of the Federal Reserve Board of
Governors. The conclusions of this research do not necessarily reflect the opinion or official
position of the Texas Education Research Center, the Texas Education Agency, the Texas Higher
Education Coordinating Board, the Texas Workforce Commission, or the State of Texas. We
thank Andrew Barr, Judy Scott-Clayton, Jasmine Santana and seminar participants at Brigham
Young University, Duke University, Vanderbilt University, SOLE/EALE/AASLE 2020 World
Conference, E-con of Education virtual seminar, the Association for Education Finance and
Policy 2020 annual meeting, the National Tax Association 2019 annual meeting, and the Western
Economic Association International 2019 conference for helpful comments and suggestions. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27658.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Sandra E. Black, Jeffrey T. Denning, Lisa J. Dettling, Sarena Goodman, and Lesley J.
Turner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Taking It to the Limit: Effects of Increased Student Loan Availability on Attainment, Earnings,
and Financial Well-Being
Sandra E. Black, Jeffrey T. Denning, Lisa J. Dettling, Sarena Goodman, and Lesley J. Turner
NBER Working Paper No. 27658
August 2020
JEL No. D14,H52,H81,I21,I22,I23,I26,I28,J24

                                         ABSTRACT

Growing reliance on student loans and repayment difficulties have raised concerns of a student
debt crisis in the United States. However, little is known about the effects of student borrowing
on human capital and long-run financial well-being. We use variation induced by recent
expansions in federal loan limits, together with administrative schooling, earnings, and credit
records, to identify the effects of increased student borrowing on credit-constrained students'
educational attainment, earnings, debt, and loan repayment. Increased student loan availability
raises student debt and improves degree completion, later-life earnings, and student loan
repayment while having no effect on homeownership or other types of debt.


Sandra E. Black                                 Sarena Goodman
Department of Economics and                     Federal Reserve Board of Governors
School of International and Public Affairs      20th & Constitution Ave., NW
Columbia University                             Washington, DC 20551
420 West 118th Street                           sarena.f.goodman@frb.gov
New York, NY 10027
and NBER                                        Lesley J. Turner
sblack@columbia.edu                             Department of Economics
                                                Vanderbilt University
Jeffrey T. Denning                              VU Station B, Box #351819
Department of Economics                         2301 Vanderbilt Place
Brigham Young University                        Nashville, TN 37235
435N CTB                                        and NBER
Provo, UT 84602                                 lesley.j.turner@vanderbilt.edu
and NBER
jeffdenning@byu.edu

Lisa J. Dettling
Federal Reserve Board of Governors
20th & Constitution Ave., NW
Washington, DC 20551
Lisa.J.Dettling@frb.gov



A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27658
1.         Introduction 

       Concern of a student debt crisis in the United States is growing. Outstanding student loan 

debt now exceeds $1.5 trillion (Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 2019), and more than half of 

U.S. undergraduates rely on federal student loans to finance college.2 Research suggests that 

attending college is generally a good investment (Card, 1999; Barrow and Malamud, 2015) and 

that, on average, borrowing to finance college should be more than offset by higher lifetime 

earnings (Avery and Turner, 2012). Nevertheless, the resulting debt may influence borrowers' 

postcollege behavior (e.g., by affecting future earnings) or harm borrowers postcollege 

financial wellbeing (e.g., by reducing homeownership or by leading to unmanageable debt 

payment burdens). Despite the importance of the question, surprisingly little is known about 

the effects of increased borrowing--holding college prices and students' other resources 

constant--on human capital accumulation, earnings, and financial wellbeing. 

       Our study helps to resolve this tension between the potential costs and benefits of student 

borrowing by leveraging policydriven expansions in federal student loan limits that led to 

staggered increases in loan availability across entry cohorts. We use this variation, together with 

administrative panel data on borrowers' educational attainment, earnings, and credit outcomes, 

to provide a comprehensive picture of the short and longerrun effects of increased student 

borrowing. Among individuals whose borrowing is likely constrained by federal student loan 

limits, increases to loan limits boost borrowing and lead to improvements in degree completion, 

postcollege earnings, and student loan repayment.  Importantly, these effects all occur without 

negative effects on homeownership or repayment of other types of debt. Our findings challenge 

concerns that student debt harms longrun outcomes, underscoring that the correct 

counterfactual for evaluating these concerns asks where those with student debt would be 

without access to the underlying loans.  

       The economics literature has a longstanding interest in the importance of credit constraints 

for individuals' educational investment decisions. Young adults who expect a positive return 

would like to invest in their human capital but lack resources to do so. Because human capital 


                                       
2
    Authors' calculations obtained using College Scorecard data (available at: https://collegescorecard.ed.gov/data/).


                                                            2
cannot be offered as collateral for a loan, the private market will underprovide credit 

(Friedman, 1955). Hence, classic models of human capital investment predict that increasing 

access to credit should also increase human capital. Evidence on the presence and magnitude of 

credit constraints is mixed.3 Our paper advances this line of research by providing a test of the 

existence and importance of borrowing constraints for investments in higher education. The 

policy variation we use for identification directly affects students' liquidity without changing 

any other factors that might also affect higher education investment decisions (e.g., the price of 

college or access to grant aid), allowing us to document the comprehensive consequences of 

relaxing borrowing constraints--the first of this sort for a broad population.4 

    A key challenge in identifying the effect of increased student loan access in the United States 

is that eligibility is essentially universal.5 We overcome this limitation by studying the only 

recent policy changes to federal undergraduate loan limits, which occurred in the fall of 2007 

and 2008. These increases resulted in variation in the maximum amount a student can borrow 

by entry cohort and years since college entry. Our differenceindifferences identification 

strategy compares differences in the outcomes of students who entered college before and after 

the loan limit increases between two groups: (1) students who were likely constrained in their 

borrowing by statutory limits, and (2) those who were likely unconstrained by loan limits based 

on their firstyear borrowing decisions.6 A complementary set of analyses using a doseresponse 

specification to look at effects of the size of loan limit increases on differences in outcomes 

between constrained and unconstrained students provides similar results. Finally, we provide 




                                     
3
   See Carneiro and Heckman (2002); Cameron and Taber (2004); Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner (2008); Lochner
and Monge-Naranjo (2011); Brown, Scholz, and Seshadri (2012); and Belzil, Maurel, and Sidibe (2018).
4
   Past research examines attainment effects of increased credit access in Chile (Solis, 2017; Card and Solis, 2020),
South Africa (Gurgand, Loresnceau, and Melonio, 2011), and for U.S. community college students (Dunlop, 2013;
Weiderspan, 2016), or examines effects on a broader set of outcomes using smaller policy discontinuities (Denning
and Jones, forthcoming) or a more narrow population (Goodman, Isen, and Yannelis, 2018; Chu and Cuffe 2020). 
5
   For undergraduate students, loan limits vary only by three broad categories of class standing (first year, second
year, and upper level) and two broad categories of dependency status.
6
   A large number of students borrow at the statutory federal limit each year, suggesting many would borrow more if
subject to higher limits, which guides classification of students as constrained or unconstrained within our analysis.
Students considered constrained in our framework may be credit constrained, or they may perceive the limit as a
guideline or recommendation (e.g., Marx and Turner, 2019). We refer to all such students as "constrained" for
expositional convenience.


                                                          3
instrumental variables estimates of the effects of an additional dollar of student debt on longer

run attainment, earnings, and financial wellbeing. 

    An additional challenge to examining the full effects of student loan borrowing is access to a 

sufficiently long and detailed panel of borrowers, which we overcome by leveraging two large 

administrative data sets that together provide information on education, income, and credit 

outcomes. The first data set includes studentlevel records from the universe of public colleges 

and universities in Texas linked to administrative earnings records. The second is a panel of 

credit records drawn from the universe of U.S. consumers with credit histories.7  

    We take advantage of the large changes in loan limits, combined with these detailed data 

sets, to provide a comprehensive analysis of the effects of increased loan limits (holding other 

factors fixed) on both short and longrun outcomes for a broad population of students. 

Importantly, in addition to identifying the effect on educational attainment and on inschool 

labor supply, we provide estimates of longrun effects on earnings and financial wellbeing. As 

a result, we can address the question of whether student debt has negative effects on post

college loan repayment, homeownership, and other sources of debt. 

    Our empirical strategy relies on the key identifying assumption that, in the absence of policy 

changes to federal loan limits, differences in the outcomes of constrained and unconstrained 

students would have been similar for cohorts affected and unaffected by the two loan limit 

increases.8 Balance tests across a range of baseline demographic and socioeconomic 

characteristics, as well as parallel trends in outcomes for constrained and unconstrained 

borrowers belonging to cohorts that were unlikely to be affected by loan limit increases, support 

this assumption. Additionally, the timing of limit increases matches the increase in borrowing 




                                      
7
  Where possible, we validate the results from the Texas data using the national credit record data and vice versa.
This approach enables us to overcome concerns about the representativeness of the Texas sample and omitted
variables excluded from credit records (e.g., income, demographics, education).
8
  In our main analyses, we classify students who entered college before fall 2005 as unaffected by the loan limit
increases and those who entered from fall 2005 to fall 2007 as exposed to higher borrowing limits. In theory,
students in cohorts we classify as unaffected could have experienced higher loan limits if they remained in college
for five or more years. While a non-negligible share of students in the Texas data are still enrolled at this point, we
find no evidence that students belonging to the 2004-05 or earlier entry cohorts took advantage of the loan limit
increases by borrowing more. We expand upon this point in Section 4.


                                                           4
and attainment. Specifically, increases in yeartoyear borrowing and reenrollment only occur 

for in the years in which affected cohorts that gained access to additional loans. 

    Focusing on dependent students, who represent the majority of undergraduate students in 

recent years (Fountain, 2019), we first show that loan limit increases significantly raised the 

amount borrowed by constrained students who first entered public institutions in Texas. In the 

four years following college entry, fouryear entrants' cumulative borrowing rose more than 

$1,800, while community college entrants accumulated approximately $1,000 more in student 

debt.9 Increases in federal Stafford Loans drive these effects, and we can rule out all but small 

changes in other types of student debt. At the same time, fouryear entrants were significantly 

less likely to work in the two years after college entry, suggesting that this increased liquidity 

allowed students to reduce their inschool labor supply. Loan limit increases led to significant 

reductions in credit card use among constrained students early in their college careers, 

indicating that access to additional student loans reduced reliance on (typically higher cost) 

credit card debt. 

    The increase in loan availability also significantly raised fouryear entrants' educational 

attainment and postcollege earnings. Constrained borrowers in cohorts exposed to limit 

increases were significantly more likely to reenroll in college after their first year and, eight 

years after entry, had spent significantly more time in college and had attempted significantly 

more credits. Importantly, up to eight years after entry, these students were significantly more 

likely to have earned a bachelor's degree and had significantly higher annual earnings.10  

    The rich credit report data enable further examination of the effect of increased loan 

availability on borrowers' financial wellbeing. We find that borrowers who gained access to 

higher loan limits had significantly lower student loan default rates eight years after we first 

observe them borrowing--roughly four years after a fouryear student graduating "on time" 

                                     
9
  The effect of loan limit increases on borrowing overwhelmingly occurs in the first four years after college entry in
the Texas data. In contrast, loan balances continue to increase in the Federal Reserve Bank of New York Consumer
Credit Panel/Equifax sample for the duration of our panel. The latter is likely due to graduate school borrowing and
loan consolidations (including any outstanding interest capitalized into the loan principal), which cannot be
distinguished from undergraduate loan originations. In general, the Texas data measure federal borrowing more
precisely, especially beyond the four years following college entry.
10
   Although we find some evidence of increased attainment among community college entrants, we do not find
evidence that these students have higher earnings.


                                                          5
would complete college. Thus, despite having higher student debt, these borrowers appear to 

be better able to keep up with their payments, suggesting that the estimated positive effects on 

earnings outweighed increased debt payment burdens.  

     All else being equal, higher levels of student debt will increase one's debttoincome ratio 

and, thus, could reduce one's ability to finance other investments, such as home and vehicle 

purchases. Indeed, in recent years, policymakers and the popular press have voiced concerns 

that rising student debt has reduced homeownership among young adults. However, despite 

accumulating more student debt, constrained borrowers exposed to higher loan limits have 

postcollege mortgage and autoloan takeup rates that are statistically indistinguishable from 

those of their unconstrained peers.11 Additionally, these borrowers are no more likely to be 

delinquent or in collections on other types of debt. Overall, these findings suggest increased 

student borrowing did not have spillover effects on debtfinanced asset purchases or repayment 

rates on other types of debt, which are key concerns in debates over the potential threats to 

financial stability and economic growth stemming from student loans.12  

     Our research builds on several literatures in economics. First, a small but growing body of 

empirical research examines the shortrun effects of student loans using credible experimental 

or quasiexperimental variation. Findings suggest when borrowing increases because of 

changes in loan offers, messages, and eligibility, borrowers experience shortrun attainment 

gains.13 Our study looks beyond shortrun educational outcomes, linking increases in shortrun 

attainment generated by student loans to improvements in longerterm outcomes, including 

degree receipt, earnings, and postcollege financial wellbeing.14  


                                     
11
   Two studies use credible quasi-experimental variation to examine the effect of student borrowing on
homeownership (Goodman et al., 2018; Mezza et al., 2020). In both cases, the research designs entail minimal
changes in human capital investment, and results, therefore, reflect whether the identifying variation affected student
debt through an increase or decrease in liquidity. Specifically, Mezza et al. (2020) show that changes in tuition
prices increased student debt and reduced homeownership, whereas Goodman et al. (2018) show that changes in
grant aid and loan limits that occur when a student is classified as financially independent increase homeownership,
with evidence effects driven by increased borrowing. In our setting, student loans are used to finance constrained
students' human capital investment and have very little effect on homeownership, at least over the medium run.
12
   For example, Feiveson et al. (2018) provide an overview of student lending and possible threats to the
macroeconomy and financial stability.
13
   See, for instance, Dunlop (2013); Wiederspan (2016); Solis (2017); Barr, Bird, and Castleman (2019); Denning
(2019); and Marx and Turner (2019).
14
   While many papers examine one or two of these outcomes, we are unique in our ability to examine all of them.


                                                          6
     Another  branch  of  literature  examines  the  effects  of  student borrowing  on  labor  market  and 

other  lifecycle  outcomes  after  college.  In  all  of  these  studies,  however,  variation  in  student  debt 

is not driven solely by changes in student loan availability but by changes in college prices, grant 

aid,  other  sources  of  financing  for  college,  bankruptcy  protections  for  student  loans,  or  a 

combination  of  these  factors.15  In  contrast,  we  examine  the  effects  of  loan  limitdriven  increases 

in  student  borrowing,  holding  constant  these  other  factors.  As  a  result,  we  provide  the  first 

evidence  on  the  comprehensive  short  and  longrun  effects  of  increased  liquidity  from  student 

debt for a broad population.16   

     Our findings suggest that many U.S. students face important credit constraints. Among 

students at fouryear institutions, increased access to credit while in college leads to increased 

college completion and higher earnings, with little if any negative effects on financial wellbeing 

later in life. These findings directly inform policy debates concerning future changes in federal 

loan limits. More than half of all students receiving Stafford Loans in recent years borrowed at 

the statutory limit, and, thus, policy changes affecting loan limits would affect millions of U.S. 

undergraduates.17 Our estimates, obtained from administrative records covering more than 100 

colleges and universities and from a nationally representative sample of undergraduate 

borrowers, are the first to characterize comprehensive effects of loan limit increases on student 

outcomes. Altogether, our findings suggest that an additional dollar of student loan debt 

improves borrowers' education, earnings, and financial wellbeing, thus implying increases in 

U.S. human capital accumulation and negligible negative spillovers to other financial markets. 

      



                                      
15
   Increases in student loans have been linked to post-college job choice (Rothstein and Rouse, 2011), co-residence
with parents (Dettling and Hsu, 2018), graduate education (Chakrabarti et al., 2020), entrepreneurship (Krishnan and
Wang, 2019), homeownership (Goodman et al., 2018; Mezza et al., 2020) and family formation (Goodman et al.,
2018). Gervais and Ziebarth (2019) provide suggestive evidence that borrowing leads to higher wages, but this
finding is sensitive to the specification and time frame considered, and the underlying analysis sample is selected
based on a potentially endogenous outcome (college graduation).
16
   Goodman et al. (2018) and Denning (2019) analyze the effects of a change in federal loan limits (and, potentially,
Pell Grant awards) that occurs when a student becomes old enough to be considered financially independent (age
24) and, thus, focus on a relatively specialized population (i.e., traditional students that take longer than four years to
complete college or nontraditional students). Further, the increased liquidity generally occurs when students are
close to completing their undergraduate studies.
17
   Approximately 4.5 million students borrowed at the statutory limit in 2011­12 (Woo and Horn, 2016).


                                                            7
2.       Overview of U.S. federal student loan programs  

     Student debt is an increasingly important component of household balance sheets, reflecting 

rising postsecondary enrollment and college costs. The vast majority of these loans were 

originated under one of two federal lending programs established under Title IV of the Higher 

Education Act--the Federal Direct Loan Program and the (now defunct) Federal Family 

Education Loan (FFEL) Program.18 

     Undergraduate Stafford Loans, the main type of federal loan, feature standardized terms 

and interest rates.19 Unlike most other forms of credit, any student who meets the basic 

eligibility criteria for federal financial aid is eligible for a Stafford Loan, even students with thin 

or adverse credit histories. Stafford Loans come in two varieties: (1) subsidized loans, which are 

need based and do not accrue interest while the borrower is attending college on at least a half

time basis, and (2) unsubsidized loans, which are not need based.20 

     To qualify for federal grants and loans, students must complete the Free Application for 

Federal Student Aid (FAFSA), which collects demographic, asset, and income information for 

students and their households. The FAFSA inputs are used to generate a student's Expected 

Family Contribution (EFC). In combination with the cost of college, the EFC determines the 

amount of subsidized loan aid students may receive, as well as eligibility for the federal Pell 



                                      
18
   Nonfederal student loans represent a relatively small share of student debt--less than 10 percent in recent years
(Baum et al., 2019) and no more than 25 percent at the peak of their usage in the mid-2000s. Private loans make up
the largest component of the nonfederal student loan market. The vast majority of students who finance their
education with private student loans also use federal loans (Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, 2012). In
contrast to federal student loans, private student loan eligibility and pricing are generally determined by anticipated
ability to pay.
19
   Federal student loan interest rates are set by federal law. Private student loan interest rates are generally higher.
Starting in 2013, federal student loan interest rates were pegged to the rate for the 10-year Treasury note plus 2.05
percent, with a cap of 8.25 percent. From 2007 to 2012, interest rates were set by Congress and ranged from 3.4 to
6.8 percent. Before 2007, in-school interest rates were set based on the 91-day Treasury note plus 1.7 percent and
interest rates in repayment equaled the 91-day Treasury note plus 2.3 percent (in both cases, capped at 8.25 percent).
Federal loan interest rates have been fixed at origination starting in 2007 and were variable rate before 2007. See
Appendix A and Tables A.1 and A.2 for additional details.
20
   From 2008 to 2013, subsidized loans had slightly lower interest rates than unsubsidized loans (Appendix Table
A.1). The value of the in-school interest subsidy depends on interest rates and the length of time between borrowing
and repayment (Appendix Table A.3). For example, a student in the 2004 entry cohort who borrows in her first year
and enters repayment one year later would pay $34 less in interest for a $1,000 subsidized loan compared with a
$1,000 unsubsidized loan. In contrast, a student who entered college in 2001 would pay $82 less in interest for a
$1,000 subsidized loan compared with a $1,000 unsubsidized loan.


                                                           8
Grant, but does not affect the overall amount students can borrow or their unsubsidized loan 

eligibility. Continuing students must resubmit a FASFA each year. 

     Importantly for our research design, statutory annual Stafford Loan limits can be changed 

only by federal legislation and vary only with academic level and whether a student is classified 

as financially independent by U.S. Department of Education guidelines.21 The difference in the 

amount that dependent and independent undergraduate students can borrow in a given year 

remained unchanged during the period we examine.22 

     Only two changes to undergraduate Stafford Loan limits have occurred in recent history. 

The Higher Education Reconciliation Act of 2005 raised annual Stafford Loan limits for first 

and secondyear students beginning in the 2007­08 (hereafter, 2008) academic year, and the 

Ensuring Continued Access to Student Loans Act of 2008 increased the unsubsidized Stafford 

Loan limit for all levels of undergraduate students beginning in 2009. These policy changes, 

coupled with the staggered way they affected the amount students in different entry cohorts 

could borrow based on academic level, generate our identifying variation. 

     Table 1 summarizes annual borrowing limits, the maximum amount students can borrow in 

subsidized and unsubsidized loans, for dependent students by college entry cohort and level. 

The maximum amount students could borrow in their first year of college increased from $2,625 

in the 2007 and earlier academic years to $3,500 in 2008 and again to $5,500 in 2009. Secondyear 

students could borrow up to $3,500 before 2008, $4,500 in 2008, and $6,500 in later academic 

years. The maximum amount upperlevel students could borrow did not change until 2009, 

when the $5,500 limit increased to $7,500. Appendix Table A.4 displays the corresponding 

increase in subsidized loan limits (which were affected only by the 2008 legislation). We focus 

on the increase in aggregate borrowing limits because of the small price difference between 

subsidized and unsubsidized loans (see Appendix Table A.3). 



                                     
21
    Independent students are 24 or older, have children or other dependents, are married, or are veterans; students who
do not meet these criteria are considered dependent students. Whether or not a student is claimed as a dependent for
the purposes of income tax filing does not affect their classification for the purpose of student loan limits.
22
    Freshman and sophomore independent students can borrow an additional $4,000 in unsubsidized loans above the
dependent student limit, and upper-level independent students can borrow an additional $5,000 more than the
dependent limit.  


                                                          9
     Table 2 shows the cumulative effect of these policy changes on aggregate borrowing limits 

by entry cohort. Even though loan limits did not increase until 2008, students in the 2006 entry 

cohort who persisted into their fourth year would have experienced a $2,000 increase in their 

aggregate limit. Students in the 2007 entry cohort who returned for a second year saw a $1,000 

increase in their loan limits and by their fourth year, would have been able to borrow $5,000 

more than fourthyear students who entered college in 2005. Students who entered college in 

2008 saw a cumulative increase in loan limits of $7,875, and those who entered in 2009 and later 

years saw a $9,875 increase.23  

     Theoretically, students in the 2005 entry cohort could have been "treated" with higher loan 

limits if they remained in school through their fifth year. As we discuss in Section 4, in practice, 

we find no evidence that students in the 2005 and earlier cohorts borrowed more in response to 

limit increases that occurred five or more years after they entered college. 


3.       Data and sample 

     Our analysis uses two separate sources of administrative data: Texas education data and 

credit report data. These two data sets act as complements, allowing us to explore an array of 

outcomes and document important mechanisms linking increased liquidity to longerrun 

outcomes. Unfortunately, because of the data agreements, we cannot link these two data sets.  

A. Texas education and earnings data 

     Our first data set comes from the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board (THECB) and 

includes the population of students who entered a public higher education institution in Texas 

between 2001 and the most recent completed academic year.24 Texas provides a nearideal 

setting to study the effects of student loans because of the large size of the highereducation 

sector, diversity of institutions, and similarities in student and school characteristics to national 

averages. Specifically, Texas is the secondlargest state in terms of college enrollment, 

containing 8 percent of all postsecondary students in the United States (U.S. Department of 

                                     
23
   As we discuss in Section 3, our main analyses focus on students who entered college before the start of the Great
Recession (i.e., those who entered in fall 2007 or earlier).
24
   We obtained access to the Texas administrative data through the University of Houston Education Research
Center. Appendix B.1 contains additional details.


                                                         10 
Education, 2019). The state's large public college system has 60 public community colleges and 

37 public universities which, combined, served more than 1.2 million students in fall 2018 

(Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board, 2019). Additionally, Texas is similar to the 

country as a whole in terms of undergraduate tuition, household income, educational 

appropriations per student, and educational attainment but has slightly lower graduation rates 

and a higher fraction of Hispanic enrollees (see Appendix Table B.1).  

     In the Texas data, we observe studentlevel information on college enrollment, credits 

attempted, degree receipt, and financial aid (grants; student loans, including private and other 

nonfederal loans; and workstudy aid).25 Importantly, we observe whether and how much each 

student borrows on an annual basis and can distinguish among loans from different sources. 

Studentlevel records are linked to Texas Workforce Commission (TWC) data, which include 

quarterly earnings for individuals employed in jobs covered by unemployment insurance (UI) 

in Texas.26  

     Our main analysis sample includes firsttime college students who entered college in the 

2001 through 2008 academic years.27 We focus on dependent students. Independent students are 

subject to higher maxima, and, as we discuss in Section 5, few independent students appear to 

be constrained by loan limits. Furthermore, independent students constrained at college entry 

do not appear to borrow more in response to higher loan limits.  

B. National credit report data 

     Our second data set is the Federal Reserve Bank of New York Consumer Credit Panel 

(CCP/Equifax).28 The CCP/Equifax is an individuallevel panel data set of consumer credit 

reports obtained from Equifax--one of the three main credit bureaus in the United States. The 


                                      
25
   Beginning in 2004, a subset of information is available for students enrolled in private, non-profit universities.
Our main specification excludes nonprofit students, but we show that our estimates are robust to their inclusion.
26
   UI records cover employers who pay at least $1,500 in gross wages to employees or who have at least one
employee during 20 different weeks in a calendar year. We winsorize earnings at the 99th percentile.
27
   Although the administrative data contain an indicator for first time in college (FTIC) status, this information is
incomplete. Our sample includes students listed as FTIC when they first appear in the data set and a subset of
students who are never flagged as FTIC. Among students in the latter group, we include those classified as first-year
students and not listed as transfer students when first observed and who first enroll after the first year in our data set
(2001). Our estimates are robust to limiting our sample only to students listed as FTIC at entry.
28
   For additional information, including sampling and methodology, see Lee and van der Klaauw (2010).


                                                           11 
data are reported quarterly and consist of a 5 percent random sample of all U.S. consumers with 

credit histories.29 The data include detailed information drawn from credit reports, including 

loan balances and payment status on mortgages, credit cards, student loans, auto loans and 

other miscellaneous debt, geographic identifiers for current residence, and year of birth. 

Appendix B.2 contains additional information on the CCP/Equifax data.  

     Because we do not observe school enrollment directly in the credit data, we use the date of 

loan origination and the amount borrowed at origination for each student loan to create a 

borrowerbyacademicyear data set.30 We assume that the first year of observed borrowing is 

the first year the individual attended school and restrict the sample to those borrowing at or 

below the firstyear Stafford Loan limit for that year. We also exclude borrowers older than 20 at 

entry from the CCP/Equifax sample. These restrictions help us omit upperlevel, graduate, 

financially independent, and private market student borrowers and ensure we primarily 

capture new students in our analysis.31  We focus on cohorts that began borrowing (and 

presumably entered college) in the 2004 through 2008 academic years because 2004 is the first 

cohort for whom we can reliably observe firstyear borrowing in the CCP/Equifax data set.32 We 

use the panel structure of the CCP/Equifax data to assemble information on student loan and 

other credit outcomes up to eight years after a borrower likely entered college.33   

                                    
29
   The sampling frame is based on Social Security numbers so that once a consumer establishes a credit history and
enters the sample, the consumer remains in the sample continuously until death (even in the absence of credit
activity). The sample is refreshed each quarter as new individuals establish credit records for the first time.
30
   We define academic-year borrowing as including loans that originated in July through June of the academic year
in question (e.g., June 2003 through July 2004 for the 2004 academic year). We winsorize academic-year borrowing
at the 99th percentile. We cannot distinguish between federal and private loans in the CCP/Equifax data. Because of
concerns regarding delays and infrequency of servicers' reporting of student loans to credit bureaus, we utilize
retrospective information on student borrowing amounts by academic year. The data do not include retrospective
information on loan payment status, and thus, we do not reliably observe student loan delinquency and default until
four years after a student first borrows (at which point all borrowers in our sample have had at least one loan with
payment status information on their record for an entire year). All other outcomes are available throughout the
sample. 
31
   Most college students who borrow began borrowing in their first year. Using the 2016 National Postsecondary
Student Aid Study, we estimate that 73 percent of all dependent undergraduates who ever borrowed and graduated
in 2016 borrowed in their first year of college (authors' calculations via National Center for Education Statistics
PowerStats, available at https://nces.ed.gov/datalab/powerstats).
32
   Before 2004, there was incomplete coverage of student loans in credit reports.
33
   To ensure comparability over time, all of our analyses use a balanced panel of borrowers who remain in the credit
report data through the eighth year after we first observe them borrowing. Because the CCP/Equifax sampling is
based on Social Security numbers, this step removes individuals who pass away over this period. This process also
removes any incorrectly duplicated records, which can appear (typically for a limited period) when new accounts are
opened and have not yet been linked to an existing credit record.


                                                        12 
C. Identifying constrained borrowers 

     Our identification strategy compares changes in outcomes for those students who would 

have been constrained before loan limit increases with the changes in outcomes for 

unconstrained students. To implement this approach, we must identify those students who 

would be constrained by the prepolicy change loan limits.  

     Our empirical approach to identifying these students is motivated by a high degree of 

bunching at the federal loan limit. Figure 1 shows the distribution of firstyear borrowing by 

cohort in the Texas data (Panels A and B) and CCP/Equifax data (Panels C and D). Vertical lines 

indicate statutory limits. Panels A and C show the distribution for 2001 through 2007 entry 

cohorts in the Texas data and 2004 through 2007 cohorts in CCP/Equifax--years in which the 

dependent limit equaled $2,625. Panels B and D show distributions for the 2008 entry cohort in 

each data set, when the limit was $3,500.34 In both samples, we find clear evidence of bunching 

at the dependent student limit. Conceptually, constrained students are those who would 

optimally borrow more if they faced higher federal loan limits (regardless of whether such 

behavior results from liquidity constraints or other factors). 35 Thus, an assumption is that many 

of the students who borrowed exactly the loan limit in their first year of college would have 

borrowed more if they had faced higher loan limits after their first year.  

     For years before the loan limit increases, we consider students borrowing an amount exactly 

equal to the federal limit ($2,625 for dependent students) in their first year of college to be 

                                      
34
   All four panels highlight the statutory limit for financially independent student borrowers, equal to $6,625 for
students entering before 2008 and $7,500 for 2008 entrants. A non-negligible minority of dependent students appear
to be borrowing amounts exactly at the independent student limit. In the Texas data, this pattern could result from
misclassification of independent students as dependents in the administrative data or from the fact that dependent
students whose parents' are denied a Parent PLUS loan due to poor credit are allowed to borrow at the independent
limit (see Appendix A for additional details). In the CCP/Equifax data, this group could also include students
younger than age 20 who do not meet the age criteria for being classified as independent but either are married or
have dependents. Irrespective of the reason, our main analysis samples exclude students who borrow more than the
federal limit in their first year.
35
   While we classify all such students as "constrained," some may not be credit constrained in the classical sense.
For instance, Marx and Turner (2018, 2019) show that students may also be inclined to borrow the "packaged"
amount of loan aid (i.e., the amount listed on their financial aid award letter) because of information and salience
effects. Thus, the bunching at the federal limit shown in Figure 1 could partially result from almost all four-year
institutions and half of all community colleges choosing to package the maximum available Stafford Loan. To the
extent that students who borrow the maximum available loan because it is packaged continue to borrow at the limit
in future years, higher federal loan limits will lead to additional borrowing, and our identification strategy will still
uncover a causal estimate of the effects of borrowing on student outcomes. Furthermore, as we show later, estimated
effects on human capital accumulation support the interpretation that this group is, on average, credit constrained.


                                                           13 
constrained. For 2008 entrants, who faced a higher firstyear limit, we consider students to be 

constrained if they borrowed an amount between the prioryear limit (adjusted for inflation) 

and the new limit ($3,500 for dependent students).36 Unconstrained students are those who 

borrowed an amount less than the prepolicy limit in their first year of college.  

D. Summary statistics 

     Table 3 displays baseline characteristics of constrained and unconstrained students by entry 

cohort, separately for students who initially enrolled in a fouryear public institution in Texas 

(Panel A), those who entered a community college in Texas (Panel B), and the CCP/Equifax 

sample (Panel C).37 We group entry cohorts that were potentially affected by loan limit increases 

(those who entered from 2006 through 2008) and cohorts that entered college early enough that 

students' statutory borrowing limits would have remained unchanged over their first four years 

of college (those who entered before 2006).38   

     Constrained and unconstrained students are quite similar in many respects, although we find 

small  differences  in  characteristics  along  a  few  dimensions.  Interestingly,  constrained  fouryear 

entrants  in  the  Texas  sample  are  more  likely  to  be  White  and  less  likely  to  be  classified  as  an 

underrepresented  minority  (Black,  Hispanic,  American  Indian,  or  Native  Alaskan)  than 

unconstrained  fouryear  entrants.  Constrained  borrowers  also  have  higher  average  EFCs, 

suggesting that they come from families with slightly higher incomes.39 By definition, constrained 


                                      
36
    Results are quite similar if we do not adjust the prior-year limit for inflation. In the Texas data, the loan amount
reported by higher education institutions to THECB is sometimes net of origination fees (see Appendix Table A.5).
To allow for this measurement error in the Texas data, students within $50 of the statutory limit are classified as
constrained. The CCP/Equifax data are not subject to this issue, and, thus, only students borrowing at the limit are
considered constrained in this sample.
37
    Federal law prohibits lenders from discriminating against applications on the basis of race, ethnicity, sex, marital
status, national origin, religion, or receipt of public assistance, so the CCP/Equifax data contain no demographic
characteristics except age.
38
    Appendix Table B.2 replicates Panel C for borrowers in Texas using the CCP/Equifax data. Ages and amounts
borrowed are quite similar. Texas borrowers are slightly more likely to have a credit report before origination of
their first loan but otherwise have comparable credit market outcomes to borrowers nationwide.
39
    The relatively small differences in EFCs between constrained and unconstrained students could be due to
differences in grant aid or differences in the cost of attendance, as unconstrained students receive slightly higher
amounts of grants and face slightly lower costs of attendance than their constrained counterparts. However, we find
no evidence of differential changes in Pell Grant aid for constrained versus unconstrained in treated versus untreated
cohorts. Furthermore, the models we estimate using the Texas data include school fixed effects and, thus, make
comparisons between students that faced similar costs. Nonetheless, point estimates are similar when school effects
are excluded. 


                                                          14 
borrowers  have  more  student  debt,  but  they  receive  similar  levels  of  federal  and  state  grants 

compared with unconstrained students. Although students may receive loans from other federal, 

state, and private sources, a comparison of average total loans and average federal Stafford Loans 

shows that the vast majority of student debt is issued through the Stafford Loan Program.40 In the 

CCP/Equifax  sample,  constrained  borrowers  are  less  likely  to  have  a  credit  report  or  other  debt 

before  their  first  student  loan  origination.  Entryyear  borrowing  is  similar  for  students  in  the 

Texas and CCP/Equifax samples.41  


4.       Empirical Strategy 

     Our identification strategy relies on a comparison between the outcomes of constrained and 

unconstrained borrowers who entered college in cohorts affected and unaffected by the 

expansion of federal loan borrowing limits (Table 1). We focus on student outcomes that occur 

after the first year of enrollment, as we define our treatment and control groups based on first

year borrowing. Students who entered after 2005 experienced substantial increases in 

cumulative loan limits (Table 2). We use this variation in a differenceindifferences 

framework.42 Our definition of affected and unaffected cohorts is based on a comparison of 

cumulative borrowing over time for constrained and unconstrained students. While 2005 

entrants theoretically could have been affected by loan limit increases that would have occurred 

in their fifth year of college, the following section shows no differences in cumulative 




                                     
40
   We restrict our sample to students who borrowed at or below the first-year limit in their year of entry. Thus, the
very low use of non-Stafford student loans is partially mechanical because most students exhaust their federal
Stafford Loans before taking up other student loans. Appendix Table C.1 shows characteristics of non-borrowers
and students who borrowed above first-year Stafford Loan limits in their year of entry. Appendix Table C.2 shows
the breakdown of first-year borrowing by loan type for those who are constrained, those who are unconstrained, and
those who borrow more than the federal limit.
41
   The fraction of the Texas sample classified as constrained is relatively constant before 2007 and increases in both
2007 and 2008. In the CCP/Equifax sample, the fraction of borrowers classified as constrained is constant over all
entry cohorts.
42
   Lucca, Naduald, and Shen (2019) use variation in institutional exposure to loan limit increases (based on
institution-wide borrowing before the policy change) to examine effects on net tuition. They conclude that increases
in loan limits were partially passed through to institutions via increased prices. This behavior will not affect the
internal validity of our results as long as tuition increases are equally applied to constrained and unconstrained
borrowers. If price increases are larger for constrained students, it should bias us against finding effects of student
loans on long-term outcomes.


                                                          15 
borrowing for any cohorts that entered from 2001 to 2005 in the Texas sample, and, thus, we 

consider 2005 entrants to be the final "control group" cohort.43  

         The second increase in loan limits coincided with the Great Recession.44 We address 

concerns about differential selection into college enrollment and borrowing brought on by the 

sizable change in economic conditions by focusing on cohorts that entered college before the 

Great Recession (i.e., those who first enrolled in fall 2007 or earlier).45  

        It is important to note that our identification strategy limits us to examining the effect of 

increased access to student loans among students already enrolled in and borrowing to attend 

college.46 This limitation inherently excludes students who were sufficiently credit constrained 

that they did not enter college at all. It also prevents us from examining effects of loan limit 

increases on choice of college at entry (i.e., whether higher loan limits cause students to attend 

more selective or more expensive colleges).47 Additionally, students unconstrained at college 

entry may become constrained over time if their income or expenses change. As a result, our 

results likely do not capture the full effect of access to additional loans. 

        We start by estimating eventstudy models of the following form: 

                                                                                               ,                 1  


where   is an outcome for student i in entry cohort c who first enrolled in school or state s, 

  is an indicator for being constrained at entry (i.e., whether a student borrows at the first

year federal Stafford Loan limit in her first year),    is a vector of baseline characteristics (which 


                                      
43
   In the CCP/Equifax sample, we find evidence that 2005 entrants borrow significantly less than 2004 entrants in
their fifth year, the opposite of what would be predicted if constrained students in the 2005 cohort were affected by
the loan limit increase.
44
   The legislation that led to the second increase in federal loan limits primarily sought to address concerns that the
large number of private lenders exiting from the FFEL guaranteed loan program during the financial crisis would
reduce overall access to federal loans by allowing the U.S. Department of Education to purchase FFEL loans.
Increases in loan limits were secondary to this purpose. See Smole (2009) for details.   
45
   The Great Recession led to an approximately 3 percentage point increase in college enrollment (Barr and Turner,
2013). Appendix D contains estimates from alternative specifications that include all post-Great Recession entry
cohorts or include all but the cohorts directly affected by the recession (2009, 2010, and 2011).
46
   Marx and Turner (2019) can rule out all but very small effects of student loan offers on enrollment in an
anonymous U.S. community college, but Solis (2017) shows large increases in enrollment when students gain access
to loan aid in Chile.
47
   However, we can examine whether increases in loan limits affect the probability that community college entrants
transfer to a four-year institution (or vice versa). We discuss these results in Section 5.


                                                          16 
necessarily vary across data sets),   are entry cohort fixed effects, and   are entry school fixed 

effects (when examining outcomes in the Texas data) or state fixed effects (when examining 

outcomes in the CCP/Equifax data).48 The "treatment" of interest is the interaction between 

belonging to a specific entry cohort and being constrained at entry ­                                    . 

Estimates of   will represent the difference in the outcome between constrained and 

unconstrained students by cohort relative to the 2005 cohort.  

     The eventstudy framework is critical for assessing the key identifying assumption of 

parallel trends in outcomes between constrained and unconstrained borrowers in the absence of 

limit increases. While this assumption is inherently untestable, it generates testable 

implications, specifically that trends in outcomes for constrained and unconstrained students in 

cohorts unaffected by the increase in loan maxima should be similar. This approach also allows 

us to remain agnostic about the relationship between increases in loan limits and increases in 

borrowing by constrained students. To motivate our focus on students who entered college 

before the Great Recession and to provide as complete a picture as possible, we include 

students who entered after 2008 when we estimate eventstudy models.  

     Our second specification, shown below, pools the three treated and all untreated cohorts. 49  

                        2006,2007,2008                                                                             2  

 We present clusterrobust standard errors (clustered by entry institution for the Texas sample 

and state of entry for the CCP/Equifax sample) as well as pvalues from the wild cluster 

bootstrap, where clusters are defined based on entry cohort by constrained status.50  

                                     
48
   Models estimated using the CCP/Equifax data do not include school fixed effects as identifying what school a
student was enrolled in when she borrowed is not possible in these data. When estimating models using the Texas
data, baseline characteristics include race (white versus underrepresented minority versus other), age at entry, EFC
at entry, and gender. Baseline characteristics in the CCP/Equifax data include age at entry fixed effects (aged 17 and
18, 19, and 20); fixed effects for the number of quarters from initial borrowing before creation of a credit report;
indicators for having a credit card, auto loan, or mortgage before entry; number of credit accounts (secured or
unsecured) before initial borrowing; and credit score before initial borrowing.
49
   For most outcomes, we cannot reject the hypothesis that the estimated (null) effects of being constrained in the
pre-period are equal. This approach can be thought of as estimating the treatment of being constrained in one of
three treated cohorts. Estimated effects on loans (and other outcomes) will represent a weighted average of the
effects for each treated cohort. We obtain similar estimates from a less parsimonious specification that pools the
untreated cohorts but allows loan limit expansions to have different effects for the three treated cohorts. These
results are available in Appendix E.
50
   There are only a small number of entry cohort by constrained clusters (16 for the Texas sample, 10 for the CCP).
Inference based on clustered standard errors can over-reject the null when the number of clusters is small (Bertrand,


                                                         17 
    Next, we present results from a doseresponse specification that takes advantage of the 

differently sized limit increases faced by different cohorts:  

                                                                                                         3  

In equation (3),   is the aggregate amount available to borrow if a student borrowed 

the maximum for four consecutive years (Table 2) and    includes the main effect of 

 .51 This approach allows the effect of the loan limit increase to vary with the size of 

the increase but imposes the additional assumption that loan limits have a linear effect on 

student outcomes.   

    Finally, we present estimates from instrumental variables (IV) models that relate student 

borrowing to later outcomes. The endogenous variable is the cumulative amount borrowed, 

 , and the interaction between entry cohort and being constrained for the affected cohorts 

(i.e., 1   2006,2007,2008                      ) serves as the excluded instrument in a firststage 

equation that takes the form of equation (2).  The secondstage equation is  

                                                                                                4  

Under the assumption that loan limit increases only affect constrained students' outcomes visà

vis effects on the amount borrowed, estimates of  will represent the causal effect of student 

loan debt on student outcomes. Estimates from equation (4) also allow us to compare our 

results with existing estimates of the effect of student loans and other sources of financial aid on 

educational attainment, labor market, and financial outcomes. 

A. Evaluating the key identifying assumptions   

    We rely on observed borrowing in a student's first year to proxy for constrained status. If 

the composition of students who borrow the maximum is changing relative to the composition 

of those who borrow less than the maximum in ways that would lead these students to have 

systematically better or worse outcomes at the same time as loan limits increase, our approach 

would yield biased estimates of the effects of changes in borrowing limits.  


                                     
Duflo, and Mullainathan, 2004). Thus, we do not report standard errors clustered at this level and instead report p-
values from a test of the null from the wild cluster bootstrap procedure (Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller, 2008).
51
   Estimates that look at effects of limit increases over a student's first five years produce similar results.


                                                         18 
     To address this concern, we show that observable characteristics of constrained students 

relative to unconstrained students do not change differentially after the expansion of loan limits 

in the Texas and CCP/Equifax samples. First, to avoid concerns related to multiple hypothesis 

testing, we generate a linear prediction of the probability of graduation within eight years of 

entry based on the full set of observed baseline characteristics in the Texas sample. We then 

estimate "treatment effects" on this outcome. Point estimates from equation (1) and 

corresponding 95 percent confidence intervals are displayed separately for students who 

initially enrolled in a fouryear public institution (indicated by dark circles) and community 

colleges (indicated by the light gray Xs) in Figure 2.52 We find no evidence of differential 

changes in characteristics for the constrained students relative to the unconstrained students.53   

     Table 4 presents the estimated effects for individual baseline characteristics in the Texas 

sample and the predicted probability of graduation, as well as credit outcomes in the CCP 

sample, all estimated using equation (2).54 Panel A displays estimates for students who initially 

enrolled in a fouryear public institution in Texas, Panel B shows estimates for community 

college entrants in Texas, and Panel C displays the CCP estimates.55 For fouryear college 

entrants, we find no significant differences in baseline characteristics, including race, gender, 

age, EFC, or the predicted graduation rate. For community college students, we find a small, 

marginally significant decrease in the predicted graduation rate and significantly lower EFCs 

for constrained students in treated cohorts. This finding suggests that results pertaining to 

community college students may represent an underestimate of the effect of limit increases (if 

constrained students were more likely to be negatively selected after the policy change) and that 

estimates for this population should be viewed with caution.56  In the CCP/Equifax sample, we 

                                      
52
   We exclude the vector of baseline characteristics (  ) from these models; estimates are robust to their inclusion.
53
   Appendix Figure C.1 displays similar figures for individual baseline characteristics.
54
   The credit report outcomes in the CCP are measured in June before a student's likely college entry (e.g., before
the first student loan origination), whereas the Texas sample outcomes are measured at entry. We measure credit
report outcomes before student loan origination because those characteristics could be endogenous to treatment if
they are measured contemporaneously (e.g., originating a larger student loan could affect the students' credit score
or their decisions about other types of borrowing).
55
   Appendix Table C.3 contains pooled estimates for the Texas sample.
56
   We document changes in other financial aid in Appendix Tables C.3 (pooled sample) and C.4 (separately for
four-year and community college entrants). Focusing on financial aid in a student's first year, we find no changes in
Pell Grant aid, TEXAS (Towards EXcellence, Access and Success) Grant aid (the largest state aid program), other
grant aid, or work study that are significant at the 5 percent level for four-year college entrants. Overall, our results


                                                           19 
find no significant differences in most baseline characteristics, including having a credit report 

before entry, having a credit score, the number of accounts, and having an auto or mortgage 

loan. We do, however, find evidence of statistically significant, albeit small, differences in age 

and the probability of having a credit card at entry. We control for these baseline characteristics 

in our regressions to account for any differences. 

     We also assess the assumption of parallel trends for constrained versus unconstrained 

students by presenting event studies of the outcomes (Figures 4 through 10). Fouryear entrants 

(in black) and community college students (in grey) are shown separately for the Texas sample. 

We find that outcomes for constrained and unconstrained students trend similarly in entry 

cohorts assumed to be unaffected by the loan limit expansions, whereas outcomes diverge for 

cohorts exposed to the limit increases.  


5.   Results 

     We first document how student borrowing to finance college changes for constrained 

students when loan limits increase. Figure 3 presents point estimates of the constrained versus 

unconstrained differential cumulative borrowing by cohort (relative to the 2005 cohort) for up 

to six years after college entry in the Texas sample. Borrowing among constrained students in 

2005 and earlier entry cohorts is, if anything, trending downward relative to unconstrained 

students.57 Borrowing among constrained students in cohorts that entered after 2005 who had 

access to increased loan limits significantly increased, and increases are larger for cohorts 

exposed to larger limit increases.58 Importantly, we see no effects on cumulative borrowing for 


                                      
suggest that for this population, loans increased while other sources of financial aid did not. In 2004, Texas gave
institutions more latitude to set tuition. Andrews and Stange (2019) show this increased tuition and need-based
financial aid for programs with higher predicted earnings. This policy change does not affect the internal validity of
our results, as it was not concurrent with the increase in loan limits. However, to the extent that differential tuition
across programs interacts with loan limits, it may affect the extent to which our findings can be generalized to
settings where tuition is fixed across programs.
57
   This downward trend is likely mechanical. We adjust amounts borrowed for inflation, so constrained students'
borrowing is declining in real dollars because the maximum is fixed over these years. If unconstrained students
borrow the same amount in real dollars, we should find a downward trend in constrained students' inflation-adjusted
borrowing relative to that of unconstrained students.
58
   Appendix Figure C.2 displays similar estimates for independent students, a group for whom loan limit increases
did not appear to have any significant effect on cumulative borrowing. Appendix Figure C.3 shows separate
estimates for four-year and community college entrants in the dependent student sample.


                                                          20 
2006 and 2007 entrants until the years in which the loan limit increases occurred (one year after 

entry for 2007 entrants and three years after entry for 2006 entrants). We find similar patterns in 

the CCP/Equifax sample (Appendix Figure C.4).  

     We next turn to our main specification--equation (2), estimated on the cohorts that entered 

before the start of the Great Recession. Table 5 presents the effects of loan limit increases on 

constrained students' cumulative borrowing at entry and the six following years. Four years 

after entry, constrained students exposed to loan limit increases who initially entered a four

year public institution in Texas had approximately $1,800 more in cumulative student debt 

(Panel A). Similar to the patterns shown in Figure 3, increased borrowing largely occurs in the 

first four years after entry.59 Impacts on constrained community college student entrants follow 

a similar pattern (Panel B), with smaller increases in borrowing, amounting to around $1,000 in 

additional debt. Effects on cumulative borrowing in the CCP/Equifax sample are similar in 

magnitude to the Texas sample (Panel C), with impacts approaching $1,600, although loan 

balances continue to grow in the fifth and sixth years after college entry.60 The increase in 

borrowing potentially reflects two forces at work: (1) borrowing more in each year of education 

because of higher loan limits, and (2) increased borrowing in later years if higher limits increase 

persistence.61    



                                      
59
   It may be surprising that we observe continued increases in cumulative borrowing four years after entry (i.e., in a
student's fifth year) for the 2006 through 2008 entrants in the CCP/Equifax sample but see no differences in
cumulative borrowing between constrained and unconstrained students in the 2005 entry cohort (who would have
been exposed to a $2,000 increase in borrowing limits in their fifth year). However, these two results are consistent
with access to additional liquidity in earlier years increasing persistence into later years, which we show to be the
case for constrained students exposed to loan limit increases.
60
   These differences potentially reflect three factors: (1) borrowing for graduate education (which is observed only
for graduate school enrollment within public Texas institutions in the Texas sample), (2) debt consolidation loans in
which interest is capitalized and a new loan is originated to replace several previous loans, and (3) differences in the
types of students represented in the CCP/Equifax versus Texas data. We cannot distinguish between graduate and
undergraduate borrowing in the CCP/Equifax sample nor can we identify consolidation loans and, thus, view the
initial years (during which increases in loan balances in the CCP/Equifax sample are most likely to represent
increased undergraduate borrowing) to be most comparable between the samples.
61
   Appendix Table C.5 shows estimated effects of loan limit increases on the probability of any student loan take-up
by years since entry. The probability of borrowing increases 4 to 5 percentage points in the first three years after
entry among four-year Texas entrants and 2 to 3 percentage points among Texas community college entrants.
Appendix Table C.6 shows that increases in cumulative total loans for Texas borrowers are due to increases in
federal Stafford Loans. We find no statistically significant changes in state loans (Appendix Table C.7). These
results highlight that variation in borrowing is driven by changes in federal policy rather than by (potentially
endogenous) changes in the availability of other types of loan aid.


                                                          21 
     Our results for student borrowing are notable: Access to additional student loans 

substantially increases constrained students' borrowing, all other factors, including tuition costs 

and grants, held constant. This result is prima facie evidence of binding credit constraints. 

Having established that increasing borrowing limits leads to increases in borrowing, we next 

investigate effects on constrained students' human capital accumulation. 

A. Effects of loan limit increases on educational attainment 

     Figure 4 previews our findings on the effects of raising loan limits on cumulative years of 

enrollment. We continue to break out effects by type of college at entry and separately examine 

effects on enrollment in fouryear institutions (Panel A) versus community colleges (Panel B). 

Eight years after entry, constrained students who initially entered a fouryear institution in 2007 

and 2008 spent significantly more years enrolled in fouryear institutions compared with 

students in earlier entry cohorts. Loan limit increases do not affect the number of years 

community college entrants spent in fouryear institutions. Panel B shows that the increase in 

years of enrollment for constrained fouryear entrants did not come at the expense of a 

reduction in community college attendance. The significant pretrends in community college 

entrants' enrollment suggest that we should view estimates for this population with caution.  

     Effects on cumulative credits attempted follow similar patterns (Figure 5), with constrained 

fouryear entrants in cohorts affected by loan limit increases attempting significantly more 

credits within fouryear institutions than those in earlier entry cohorts (Panel A). Effects on 

credits earned in community colleges for fouryear entrants are negative but not significant at 

the 5 percent level for 2007 and 2008 entrants (Panel B). We again see evidence of significant 

pretrends among constrained community college entrants.  

     Finally, Figure 6 shows the effects of loan limit increases on constrained students' degree 

receipt within eight years of entry. Fouryear entrants were significantly more likely to 

complete a bachelor's degree (Panel A) and slightly less likely to complete an associate degree 

(Panel B). For community college entrants, estimates are relatively noisy, and we find no 

evidence of significant increases in degree receipt.62 

                                      
62
  We find no evidence of loan limit increases resulting in significant effects on certificate receipt for either four-
year or community college entrants (Appendix Figure C.5).


                                                           22 
    The effects on borrowing and educational attainment provide evidence of binding 

constraints for human capital investment for fouryear college entrants. The lack of significant 

effects on community college entrants' attainment could be explained by the smaller borrowing 

response to loan limit increases in this population (around 60 percent the size of the increase 

among fouryear entrants). Higher loan limits did not increase the likelihood that community 

college entrants "upgrade" to a fouryear program, as we find no effect of loan limit increases 

on these students' probability of enrolling in a fouryear institution, number of credits 

attempted at fouryear institutions, or bachelor's degree receipt. Given evidence of significant 

pretrends in this group's attainment outcomes, we focus on estimated effects for fouryear 

entrants for the remainder of the paper. Appendix C contains estimates for the community 

college sample.  

    Table 6 shows the effect of increased loan limits on constrained fouryear entrants' 

educational attainment, estimated using equation (2). Constrained students are significantly 

more likely to (re)enroll in college every year, up to three years after entry, with effects that 

range from a 4 to 5 percentage point increase. As a result, these students spend an additional 

0.15 year enrolled in college (Panel B) and attempt 5.5 additional credits (Panel C). The timing of 

enrollment effects aligns with the timing of loan limit increases (Appendix Figures C.6 and C.7). 

Specifically, constrained students in the 2007 and 2008 cohorts--who saw their loan limits 

increase within one year of enrollment--are significantly more likely to reenroll one and two 

years after entry (Panels A and B of Appendix Figures C.6 and C.7). In contrast, 2006 entrants--

who did not experience access to higher loan limits until three years after entry--have only 

(marginally) significant enrollment gains three years after entry and no changes in the 

likelihood of enrollment in earlier years (Panel C of Appendix Figures C.6 and C.7). The timing 

of these effects suggests that increased access to loans, rather than some omitted variable 

affecting constrained students in the later entry cohorts, led to their attainment gains.  

    Higher federal loan limits also increased students' probability of earning a degree within six 

years of entry by around 5 percentage points. These gains are driven by an approximately 6 

percentage point increase in the probability of bachelor's degree receipt combined with small, 

negative effects on associate degree receipt. The effects on cumulative years of enrollment, 



                                                  23 
cumulative credits attempted, and degrees are all statistically significant and persist until the 

end of our panel when only 11 percent of students are still enrolled. This finding suggests that 

loan limit increases led to a lasting increase in graduation rates rather than simply a retiming of 

degree receipt.63 

B. Effects of loan limit increases on other sources of college financing 

     We next examine whether expanded loan limits affected other potential sources of financing 

for college--earnings and credit card usage. As shown in Table 7, when constrained students 

gain access to higher federal loan limits, they are also significantly less likely to have a credit 

card in the year following entry.64 Credit card holders also carry significantly lower balances 

over the same period. Specifically, credit card use falls 2 percentage points (4 percent) in the 

year after entry, while cardholders' monthly balances fall $82 (5 percent).65 

     Constrained fouryear entrants are significantly less likely to receive any earnings in each of 

the first two years after initial enrollment (Panel B of Table 7), suggesting that additional 

student loans may allow students to spend less time working while in college. Among 

employed students, earnings are 3 to 5 percent lower, although these effects are statistically 

significant only one and three years after entry.66 Taken together, the reduction in credit card 




                                      
63
   Estimates for community college entrants suggest this group also experienced increases in educational attainment,
although evidence of pre-trends in Figures 4 through 6 lead us to view these estimates with caution. Appendix Table
C.8 shows cumulative increases of approximately 0.2 years of enrollment and 5.5 credits attempted eight years after
entry. Loan limit increases do not affect constrained community college entrants' likelihood of earning a bachelor's
degree but do have positive, marginally significant effects on associate degree receipt. Appendix Tables C.9 and
C.10 presents estimated effects on additional measures of attainment, including enrollment by type of institution and
cumulative credits earned by type of institution.
64
   Appendix Figure C.9 shows that the effects on credit card use one year after entry are driven by the two cohorts
exposed to loan limit increases at this point. Note that Table 4 indicates a small negative effect on credit card
holding in the year before entry by constrained borrowers who faced higher limits; estimates in Table 7 are net of
this effect, as we control for baseline credit card holding. It also worth noting that the Credit Card Accountability
Responsibility and Disclosure Act of 2009 (which became effective in 2010) restricted credit card availability for
those under age 21. This restriction could have affected credit card availability for the youngest members of the
2008 cohort, who would have still been under age 21 for some of their second year from entry in 2010. 
65
   Balances are reported at an arbitrary point in the monthly billing cycle and thus reflect a combination of new
spending and revolving debt. In the years we study, approximately 60 percent of households with student loan debt
and credit cards revolved debt on a credit card (authors' calculation from 2004-2010 Survey of Consumer Finances).
66
   Estimates for community college entrants suggest that these students experience a statistically significant 6
percent decrease in earnings three years after entry and statistically significant increases in the probability of having
nonzero earnings two and three years after entry.


                                                           24 
utilization and earnings from employment indicates that greater student loan availability 

reduces constrained students reliance on other sources of liquidity during school. 

C. Effects of loan limit increases on constrained students' earnings, employment, and credit outcomes 

     Given that loan limit increases result in constrained students having both more debt and 

more human capital, we next consider impacts on credit and labor market outcomes using the 

CCP/Equifax data and Texas data, respectively. We focus on these outcomes beginning four 

years after entry--a point when many students have left college.  

     We first consider how additional borrowing affects student loan repayment. While the 

increases in federal loan limits resulted in higher average loan balances--which could lead to 

increased difficulty in making minimum payments--constrained students also acquired more 

human capital. As shown in Figure 7, constrained students who entered in 2008 were 

significantly less likely to be delinquent with their loan payments (more than 180 days late) at 

any point four through eight years after entry (Panel A). Panel A of Table 8 shows that the 

reductions in delinquency rates are similar in each of these years, with estimates ranging from a 

1.4 percentage point (15 percent) reduction four years after entry to a 0.9 percentage point (8 

percent) reduction eight years later.  

     We define student loan default as at least 360 days of missed payments.67 Constrained 

students facing higher limits are significantly less likely to default on their loans at any point 

over the four through eight years after college entry (Panel B of Figure 7). Yearbyyear effects 

range from a 1.2 percentage point (18 percent) reduction in default rates four years after entry to 

a 0.9 percentage point (10 percent) reduction eight years after entry. Taken together, the 

significant reductions in delinquency and defaults suggest that even with higher student debt, 

the increase in human capital experienced by constrained students who were able to obtain 

access higher loan limits outweighed any increases in student loan payment obligations.68 

                                      
67
   Servicers are not required to report a federal loan as in payment delinquency until at least 90 days (one quarter) of
payments are missed, and loans are considered in default once 270 days of payments are missed. However, servicers
are not required to (and generally do not) report default until 360 days of missed payments. See
https://studentaid.ed.gov/sa/repay-loans/default and https://www.gao.gov/assets/670/665709.pdf.
68
   Barr, Bird, and Castleman (2019) also find a negative relationship between student debt and student loan default
in an experiment in which community college borrowers were randomly assigned to receive information and
guidance about student loan decisions through a text messaging campaign. However, the authors examine effects on


                                                          25 
    Higher loan limits do not appear to affect labor force participation in later years, when most 

students would have left college (Panel C of Table 8 and Figure 8).69 However, they enable 

constrained students to earn significantly more six through eight years after entry, with 

estimates implying an increase of 4 to 6 percent (Panel B of Table 8 and Figure 8).70 This result is 

again consistent with binding credit constraints preventing students from making beneficial 

investments in human capital when loan limits are lower.71 

    We next examine effects of loan limit increases on other types of debt, which can address the 

question of whether borrowers might substitute ontime student loan payments at the expense 

of other debt payments. The potential spillovers from student loan debt to other credit products 

is also a key concern with respect to financial stability. Because the federal government provides 

most student loans, direct effects of student loan debt on the financial system are limited. 

However, if increased student borrowing results in higher default rates on other types of debt, 

federal loans could pose an indirect threat to the U.S. financial system more broadly. We find no 

evidence of effects on the likelihood of having any delinquent debt (60 or more days past due) 

or debt that has been placed in collections (Panel A of Table 9 and Figure 9).72 Thus, the larger 

student loan balances induced by the limit increases do not appear to have had negative 

spillovers to payment behavior on other types of loans.  



                                     
student loan payment difficulties over the short run, while we show that the relationship between student debt and
repayment persists over a longer period.
69
   Since we proxy for labor supply with whether a student has any earnings reported to the Texas UI system, a
differential probability of observing earnings could reflect differences in employment or differences in the
probability of leaving the state or being self-employed. We find small, statistically insignificant effects on the
likelihood of having earnings in later years, which suggests that these concerns are unlikely to affect our results.
70
   Estimated effects on (unconditional) earnings levels show similar patterns (Appendix Table C.11). We find no
significant effects on community college entrants' earnings or employment in later years (Appendix Table C.12). 
71
   Consistent with our result that higher loan limits have positive effects on constrained students' earnings in later
years, we also find evidence that students who were able to borrow more were also able to live in more affluent
neighborhoods after college. We observe address information (Zip code, state, county, census tract, census block)
from CCP/Equifax, which we use to merge time-varying neighborhood characteristics from other sources (e.g., Zip
code house prices from Zillow and Zip code incomes from Internal Revenue Service Statistics of Income records) to
examine as outcomes. Specifically, Appendix Table C.13 shows that constrained borrowers who gain access to
higher loan limits live in neighborhoods with significantly higher average wage income and average adjusted gross
income, as well as significantly higher housing values.
72
   According to the CCP/Equifax data documentation, before 2011, the "delinquency on any debt" measure could
reflect student loan delinquencies as well, but upon inspection of the data through 2011, individuals delinquent on
student loans were equally, if not more, likely to have a value of zero for this measure, suggesting student loans are
not included in the measure throughout our sample period.


                                                         26 
     All else equal, higher levels of student debt could reduce borrowers' ability to finance other 

investments, such as home and vehicle purchases.73 Thus, we next examine the effect of loan 

limit increases on other aspects of constrained borrowers' balance sheets. We examine effects on 

mortgage debt (Panel B of Table 9 and Panel B of Figure 9) and auto loan debt (Panel C of Table 

9 and Panel C of Figure 9), which, among young adults who borrowed to attend college, 

provide reasonable proxies for ownership of those assets. We find no effect on the probability of 

having a mortgage.74 Higher limits generate small increases in the probability of having an auto 

loan in the fourth and fifth year after entry.75 Altogether, we find no evidence that additional 

borrowing adversely affects constrained students' financial wellbeing after college.76  

C. Doseresponse estimates of sizeoflimit increases 

     Table 10 presents estimates from the doseresponse specification (equation (3)). The 

coefficient of interest is the interaction of an indicator for constrained status interacted with the 

cumulative loan limit increase.77 The interpretation of the coefficient is the effect of a $1,000 

increase in aggregate statutory loan limits within the first four years of college for constrained 

students relative to unconstrained students, relative to the 2005 cohort. For brevity, we present 


                                      
73
   Based on our findings thus far, the predicted effects on mortgage and auto ownership are ambiguous. Since debt-
to-income ratios are used in underwriting, higher levels of student debt could reduce borrowers' ability to qualify for
such purchases and we do find small, marginally significant, negative effects on credit cardholding up to eight years
after entry (Panel A of Appendix Table C.14). On the other hand, improved student loan repayment, coupled with
the earnings effects, suggest payment-to-income ratios likely fell. Home and auto loans also often require access to
upfront collateral (e.g., down payments), which should be more plentiful among higher earners, unless higher debt
payment burdens reduce savings rates. 
74
   Panels B and C of Appendix Table C.14 show estimated impacts on additional mortgage-related outcomes. Higher
loan limits have small, statistically insignificant effects on mortgage size at origination (conditional on having a
mortgage). We do find a significant decrease in a "pseudo" loan-to-value ratio (mortgage size scaled by Zip code
median house prices) four years after entry, but the magnitude of this effect is small and applies only to 4 percent of
borrowers who have mortgages at this point.
75
   We find no evidence that higher loan limits affected auto loan amounts (Panel D of Appendix Table C.14).
76
   Although credit score algorithms are proprietary, many of our outcomes are typical inputs into credit score
calculations, and our results thus far imply a likely improvement in credit scores. Indeed, we find statistically
significant positive effects of loan limit increase on Equifax Risk Scores (a type of credit score) and negative effects
on the probability of having a score in the bottom quintile (Panels E and F of Appendix Table C.14). For context, the
magnitude of this effect is around a quarter of the estimated effect of having a bankruptcy flag removed from one's
credit report (Dobbie et al., forthcoming). However, these results may be driven by the fact that 2004 constrained
entrants have significantly lower scores relative to unconstrained students when they are early in their college
careers, and, thus, we view these results with caution.
77
   The benefit (and drawback) of this specification is that it imposes more structure on the relationship between loan
limits and the outcome, allowing the size of the effect to vary with the limit increase, which is particularly useful for
the CCP/Equifax data where there are relatively few pre-policy years.


                                                           27 
estimates pertaining to fouryear entrants in the Texas data; Appendix E contains additional 

results, including estimates for community college entrants.  

     Panel A estimates suggest that for every $1,000 increase in statutory loan limits over a 

student's first four years, constrained fouryear entrants in the Texas sample increase borrowing 

by $339 and constrained students in the CCP/Equifax sample increase borrowing by $461. 

Effects on cumulative borrowing six years after entry are of a similar magnitude for Texas four

year entrants ($342) but grow to $624 per $1,000 limit increase for the CCP/Equifax sample. 

     Panel B shows that estimated effects on attainment and earnings from this specification 

yield similar conclusions to our earlier findings, with higher loan limits resulting in significant 

increases in years of enrollment, credits attempted, degree receipt, and earnings. Estimates for 

the CCP data (Panel C) also yield similar conclusions to results presented thus far, with higher 

loan limits leading to a significant reduction in student loan delinquency and defaults and no 

evidence of effects on repayment of other debt, having a mortgage, or having an auto loan.  

D. Instrumental variables estimates of the effect of student debt 

     Finally, we present estimates from IV models (equation (4)) in which the interaction 

between being constrained and being in a cohort exposed to loan limit increases serves as the 

excluded instrument for student debt.78 Under the assumption that loan limit increases only 

affect constrained students' outcomes visàvis effects on the amount borrowed, the coefficient 

on amount borrowed will represent the causal effect of student loan debt on student outcomes. 

Even if this assumption is not met, this scaling allows for comparison with estimated effects of 

other sources of financial aid or student loans in other settings. 

     Table 11 reports estimated effects of student debt on fouryear entrants' attainment and 

earnings eight years after college entry.79 In addition to significantly increasing years of 

enrollment and cumulative credits attempted, an additional $1,000 of student debt increases 

                                     
78
   IV models using the interaction between constrained and the aggregate limit increases as the excluded instrument
provide similar estimates (see Appendix E).
79
   Appendix Table C.15 displays IV estimates for community college entrants. Results suggest that a $1,000 increase
in student loan debt results in just under 0.2 more years of enrollment and approximately 5 additional credits earned.
Constrained community college entrants are approximately 2 percentage points more likely to complete an associate
degree per $1,000 increase in student debt. While we do not find statistically significant increases in community
college entrants' earnings eight years after college enrollment, estimates are too imprecise to rule out modest effects.


                                                          28 
fouryear entrants' bachelor's degree receipt by 2.6 percentage points and their annual earnings 

by 2.5 percent. These effects are similar in magnitude to the estimated effect of similarsized 

increases in grant aid on degree receipt and earnings found by Bettinger et al. (2019) and  

Denning, Marx, and Turner (2019), further supporting the interpretation that increased access to 

student loans facilitate human capital investment by easing liquidity constraints.    

     In Table 12, we provide estimated effects on financial outcomes for borrowers in the 

CCP/Equifax sample eight years after entry. A $1,000 increase in student debt significantly 

reduces student loan delinquencies by 0.9 percentage point and defaults by 1.1 percentage 

points. We again find no evidence that student loan debt affects homeownership. The estimated 

95 percent confidence interval excludes effects larger than a 0.5 percentage point reduction in 

homeownership per $1,000 increase in debt, which is substantially smaller than the 1.8 

percentage point reduction per $1,000 in student debt found by Mezza et al. (2020). As 

mentioned earlier, Mezza et al. (2020) look at the effects of student debt that result from tuition 

increases. The stark difference with our estimates suggests that when student loan debt is used 

to finance human capital investments (rather than used to buffer against increasing higher 

education prices), it need not affect young adults' likelihood of home ownership.  

D. Robustness  

     Our estimates are robust to the exclusion of covariates and different sample restrictions for 

the Texas sample (Appendix Table C.16) and CCP/Equifax sample (Appendix Table C.17).80 

Estimates are the least precise when we exclude controls for baseline characteristics and school 

fixed effects, but point estimates remain similar in magnitude (Panel B of Table C.16 and Panel 

A of Table C.17) and adding back in school fixed effects results in estimates that are very similar 

to our main results (Panel C of Table C.16).   

     In the remainder of the robustness tests, we vary the estimation sample. We obtain similar 

results for the Texas sample when we omit the first cohort (Panel D of Table C.16), include 

students who initially enrolled in a nonprofit institution (Panel E of Table C.16), impose the 

same sample restrictions as the CCP/Equifax sample (Panel F of Table C.16), and use the 2001 

                                    
80
  Estimates for the pooled Texas sample using our preferred specification are provided in Panel A of Table C.16 to
facilitate comparisons.


                                                        29 
sample restrictions in all years (Panel G).81 Finally, our results are robust to using a narrower 

definition of unconstrained borrowers by excluding those who borrow less than half of the 

Stafford Loan limit (approximately $1,300) in their entry year (Panel H of Table C.16 and Panel 

C of Table C.17).  Doseresponse estimates are also similar when we use a specification that 

allows for five years of loan limit increases or discounts future borrowing by national 

persistence rates (not shown). 


6.       Conclusion  

     Much of the recent public discussion surrounding student borrowing has focused on the 

potential negative effects of resulting debt burdens, particularly on household balance sheets.82 

Our study is able to provide insight not only on the effects of increased borrowing on human 

capital but also on borrowers' future earnings and overall financial wellbeing.  

     We find that higher student loan limits increase borrowing among constrained students, 

with evidence that during college, such students are able to reduce time spent on paid work as 

well as their reliance on credit cards. Students who borrow more because of higher loan limits 

accumulate more human capital. They are, on average, more likely to (re)enroll in college, more 

likely to graduate from college, and have higher earnings in subsequent years. Additional 

student loans also benefit constrained borrowers' financial positions in the years after college. 

Increased borrowing reduces student loan delinquency and default, a finding that would appear 

to be counterintuitive without also being able to estimate effects on human capital accumulation 

and earnings. Our estimates rule out all but negligible effects of increased borrowing on future 

debtfinanced purchases of homes and automobiles, as well as repayment of other types of debt. 

     We evaluate the welfare consequences of additional borrowing due to loan limit increases 

using the framework of Denning, Marx, and Turner (2018). Increased borrowing could lower 

public revenue through four potential channels: (1) foregone tax revenues due to a reduction in 


                                     
81
   As discussed in Section 3, we use a slightly different sample definition for the 2001 entry cohort due to it being
the first year that data were reported to THECB in Texas. Enrollment and outcomes for students in nonprofit
institutions are observed starting only in 2004. The CCP sample is restricted to students who were under age 20 at
entry and excludes cohorts that entered before 2004.
82
   For example, in 2013 and 2014, respectively, the New York Times featured articles titled "Heavy Load of Student
Loan Debt Is Weighing on the Economy, Too" and "Ripple Effects from Rising Student Debt."


                                                         30 
earnings while in school, (2) increased spending on public higher education as a result of 

additional years of schooling, (3) additional grant aid due to increased years of enrollment, and 

(4) the cost of additional student loan debt that is not repaid due to the increase in borrowing.83 

On the positive side, government revenue increases after students leave college, as they earn 

more and, as a result, pay more in federal income taxes. Furthermore, the reduced likelihood of 

student loan default also provides some public savings. Under the assumption that the increase 

in earnings we observe at eight years after entry persists, we estimate that the government will 

fully recoup expenditures on additional student loans within 9 to 12 years after entry.84 

     Our study documents the existence and effects of a classic market failure--binding credit 

constraints for human capital investment. Further, we quantify the loss to students as a result of 

these constraints, including foregone wages, lower educational attainment, and worse credit 

market outcomes. Despite concerns that students are "overborrowing," our findings are most 

consistent with students underborrowing for college, on average. Our results also directly inform 

federal policymakers when considering changes to current loan limits and suggest that raising 

borrowing limits for dependent students would likely increase human capital accumulation and 

improve credit outcomes. In addition to the policy insight gained from this paper, our results 

offer direct evidence of the consequences of binding credit constraints for higher education in 

the United States. The predictions of a simple credit constraints model are borne out 

empirically: Increasing access to student loans increases both borrowing and human capital.  

 

References 

Andrews, R. J., & Stange, K. M. (2019). Price Regulation, Price Discrimination, and Equality of 
Opportunity in Higher Education: Evidence from Texas. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 11(4), 
3165. 
 


                                     
83
   As we explain further in Appendix F, additional borrowing has two offsetting effects on defaults. First, increased
borrowing results in a reduction in the probability that a borrower defaults on the student debt a borrower would
have taken on in the absence of loan limit increases, but the risk of default does not fall to zero. Thus, increased
borrowing also results in a larger per-borrower cost of default. In other words, marginal defaults fall, but more
student debt is subject to inframarginal defaults, which still result in a loss of public revenue. 
84
   Using the welfare-analysis framework of Hendren and Sprung-Keyser (2020), under the assumption that earnings
gains persist, federal undergraduate loan limit increases have a marginal value of public funds that is infinite.


                                                         31 
Avery, C. & Turner, S. 2012. "Student Loans: Do College Students Borrow Too Much  Or Not Enough?" 
Journal of Economic Perspectives 26(1): 165­192. 
 
Barr, A. C., Bird, K., & Castleman, B. L. 2019. "The Effect of Reduced Student Loan Borrowing on 
Academic Performance and Default: Evidence from a Loan Counseling Experiment," EdWorkingPaper: 
1989, Annenberg Institute at Brown University. 
 
Barrow, L. and Malamud, O. 2015. "Is College a Worthwhile Investment?" Annual Review of Economics 7: 
519555.  
 
Baum, S., Ma, J., Pender, M., & Libassi C.J. 2019. Trends in Student Aid 2019. New York, NY: College 
Board. 
 
Belzil, C., Maurel, A., & Sidibé, M. 2017. Estimating the Value of Higher Education Financial Aid: 
Evidence from a Field Experiment, NBER Working Paper 23641. 
 
Bertrand, M., E. Duflo, and S. Mullainathan. (2004).  How much should we trust differencesindifferences 
estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1): 249­275. 
 
Bettinger, E., Gurantz, O., Kawano, L., Sacerdote, B., & Stevens, M. 2019. "The LongRun Impacts of 
Financial Aid: Evidence from Californias Cal Grant," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 11(1): 64
94.  
 
Barr, A., & Turner, S. E. 2013. "Expanding Enrollments and Contracting State Budgets: The Effect of the 
Great Recession on Higher Education," The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 
650(1): 168193. 
 
Brown, M., Scholz, J.K., and Seshadri, A. 2012. "A New Test of Borrowing Constraints for Education," 
Review of Economic Studies 79(2): 511538.  
 
Card, D. E. 1999. "The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings." In Handbook of Labor Economics, volume 
3A (Ashenfelter, O. and Card, D.E., ed.), 18011863.  
 
Card, D., & A. Solis. 2020 "Measuring the Effect of Student Loans on College Persistence" NBER Working 
Paper No. 27269.  
 
Cameron, A. C., Gelbach, J. B., & Miller, D. L. 2008. "BootstrapBased Improvements for Inference with 
Clustered Errors," Review of Economics and Statistics 90(3): 414427. 
 
Cameron, S. V. & Taber, C. 2004. "Estimation of Educational Borrowing Constraints Using Returns to 
Schooling," Journal of Political Economy 112: 132182. 
 
Carneiro, P. & Heckman, J. J. 2002. "The Evidence on Credit Constraints in PostSecondary Schooling," 
Economic Journal 112: 705734. 
 
Chakrabarti, R., Fos, V., Liberman, A., & Yannelis, C. 2020. "Tuition, Debt, and Human Capital." Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 912.  
 


                                                   32 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. 2012. Private Student Loans. Washington, DC, 
https://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/201207_cfpb_Reports_PrivateStudentLoans.pdf. 
 
Chu, Y. L. & H. Chuffe. 2020. "Do Struggling Students Benefit from Continued Student Loan Access? 
Evidence from University and Beyond" Working Paper.  
 
Denning, J. T. 2019. "Born Under a Lucky Star: Financial Aid, College Completion, Labor Supply, and 
Credit Constraints," Journal of Human Resources 54(3): 760784. 
 
Denning, J. T., & Jones, T. R. 2019. "Maxed Out? The Effect of Larger Student Loan Limits on Borrowing 
and Education Outcomes," Journal of Human Resources, 041910167R1. 
 
Denning, J. T., Marx, B. M., and Turner, L. J. 2019. "ProPelled: The Effects of Grants on Graduation, 
Earnings, and Welfare," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 11(3): 193224.  
 
Dettling, L. J., & Hsu, J. W. 2018. "Returning to the Nest: Debt and Parental Coresidence Among Young 
Adults," Labour Economics 54: 225236. 
 
Dobbie, W., GoldsmithPinkham, P, Mahoney, N., & Song, J. forthcoming. "Bad Credit, No Problem? 
Credit and Labor Market Consequences of Bad Credit Reports," Journal of Finance. 
 
Dunlop, E. 2013. "What do Stafford Loans Actually Buy You? The Effect of Stafford Loan Access on 
Community College Students," CALDER Working Paper 94. 
 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 2019. Quarterly Report on Household Debt and Credit 2019: Q1. New 
York, NY: Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
 
Feiveson, L., Mezza, A., and Sommer, K. 2018. "Student Loan Debt and Aggregate Consumption 
Growth," FEDS Notes. Washington, DC: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 
https://doi.org/10.17016/23807172.2127. 
 
Fountain, J. H. 2019. "The Postsecondary Undergraduate Population: Student Income and 
Demographics," Congressional Research Service Report R45686.  
 
Friedman, M. 1955. The Role of Government in Education. Rutgers University Press. 
 
Gervais, M. and Ziebarth, N. L. 2019. Life After Death: Postgraduation Consequences of Federal Student 
Loans, Economic Inquiry 57: 134266.  
 
Goodman, S., Isen, A., & Yannelis, C. 2018. "A Day Late and a Dollar Short: Liquidity and Household 
Formation Among Student Borrowers," FEDS Working Paper No. 2018025, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2018.025. 
 
Gurgand, M., Lorenceau, A. J., & Mélonio, T. 2011. "Student Loans: Liquidity Constraint and Higher 
Education in South Africa," Agence Française de Développement Working Paper 117. 
 
Hendren, N. & SprungKeyser, B. 2020. "A Unified Welfare Analysis of Government Policies," Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 135(3): 12091318.  


                                                  33 
Krishnan, K. and Wang, P. 2019. "The Cost of Financing Education: Can Student Debt 
Hinder Entrepreneurship?" Management Science 65(10): 45224554.  
 
Lee, D., & Van der Klaauw, W. 2010. An Introduction to the FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel. Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York Staff Report 479. 
 
Lochner, L. J. & MongeNaranjo, A. 2011. "The Nature of Credit Constraints and Human Capital," 
American Economic Review 101(6): 2487­2529. 
 
Lucca, D. O., Nadauld, T., & Shen, K. 2019. "Credit Supply and the Rise in College Tuition: Evidence from 
the Expansion in Federal Student Aid Programs," The Review of Financial Studies 32(2): 42366. 
 
Marx, B. M., & Turner, L. J. 2018. "Borrowing Trouble? Human Capital Investment with OptIn Costs and 
Implications for the Effectiveness of Grant Aid," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 10(2): 163
201. 
 
Marx, B. M., & Turner, L. J. 2019. "Student Loan Nudges: Experimental Evidence on Borrowing and 
Educational Attainment," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 11(2): 10841. 
 
Mezza, A., Ringo, D., Sherlund, S., & Sommer, K. 2020. "Student Loans and Homeownership," Journal of 
Labor Economics 38(1): 21560. 
 
Rothstein, J., & Rouse, C. E. 2011. "Constrained After College: Student Loans and EarlyCareer 
Occupational Choices," Journal of Public Economics 95(12): 14963. 
 
Smole, D. 2009. "The Ensuring Continued Access to Student Loans Act of 2008." Congressional Research 
Service Report RL34452, Washington DC.   
 
Solis, A. 2017. "Credit Access and College Enrollment," Journal of Political Economy 125(2): 562622. 
 
Stinebrickner, R., & Stinebrickner, T. 2008. "The Effect of Credit Constraints on the College Dropout 
Decision: A Direct Approach Using a New Panel Study," American Economic Review 98(5): 216384. 
 
Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board. 2019. 2019 Texas Public Higher Education Almanac: A Profile of 
State and Institutional Performance and Characteristics. Available at: 
http://reportcenter.thecb.state.tx.us/agencypublication/almanac/2019texaspublichighereducation
almanac/. 
 
Woo, J. and Horn, L. 2016. Reaching the Limit: Undergraduates Who Borrow the Maximum Amount in Federal 
Direct Loans. U.S. Department of Education, Stats in Brief NCES 2016408. Washington, DC: National 
Center for Education Statistics.  
 
U.S. Department of Education. 2019. Digest of Education Statistics. Washington, DC: National Center for 
Education Statistics.  
 
Wiederspan, M. 2016. "Denying Loan Access: The StudentLevel Consequences When Community 
Colleges Opt Out of the Stafford Loan Program," Economics of Education Review 51: 79­96.                      



                                                   34 
Tables and Figures 


                        Table 1: Borrowing limits by class standing and entry cohort 
          Academic year                       Freshmen               Sophomores              Upper level 
          2006­07 and earlier                   $2,625                  $3,500                  $5,500 
          2007­08                               $3,500                  $4,500                  $5,500 
          2008­09 and later                     $5,500                  $6,500                  $7,500 
      Note: Combined subsidized and unsubsidized Stafford Loan limits. Independent undergraduate students can 
      borrow an additional $4,000 ($5,000 if upper level). Community college students are limited to sophomore status 
      regardless of credit accumulation. 
 

             Table 2: Borrowing limits and cumulative increase in limits by entry cohort 
                         Loan limit         Increase in total loan limit relative to 2005 cohort by years since entry 
    Entry cohort          at entry                    1                         2                        3 
    2005 and earlier       $2,625                    $0                         $0                       $0 
    2006                   $2,625                    $0                         $0                    $2,000 
    2007                   $2,625                  $1,000                    $3,000                   $5,000 
    2008                   $3,500                  $3,875                    $5,875                   $7,875 
    2009 and later         $5,500                  $5,875                    $7,875                   $9,875 
Note: 2005 cohort = 2004­05 entry cohort. The second through fourth columns show the difference in the total 
borrowing limit (relative to 2005 entrants) by years since college entry for a student who reenrolls and borrows the 
maximum available loan each year assuming students enrolled for four consecutive years. 
       

                                        




                                                             35 
                    Table 3: Baseline characteristics by cohort and constrained status 
                                                Constrained borrowers            Unconstrained borrowers 
             Entry cohort =                 20012005            20062008       20012005          20062008 
    A. Texas Sample, fouryear college entrants               
       Demographics                        
          Gender = male                        0.45                0.46           0.46                0.46 
          Race = white                         0.52                0.43           0.34                0.34 
          Race = URM                           0.41                0.49           0.60                0.61 
          Age                                  18.1                18.0           18.1                18.1 
       Financial aid received in entry year (2018$)            
          Federal Stafford loans              $3,580              $3,567        $2,474               $2,044 
          Total loans                         $3,586              $3,592        $2,569               $2,195 
          Federal Pell Grant                  $1,745              $1,806         $2,100               $2,113 
          TEXAS Grant                         $1,201              $1,473        $1,419               $1,754 
          Other grants                        $1,686              $2,127        $1,956               $2,321 
          Work study                           $167                $134           $206                 $185 
       EFC (2018$)                            $9,992             $11,986        $6,586               $6,768 
       COA (2018$)                           $17,026             $20,367        $16,413              $18,076 
       Number of students                     21,700              19,235        22,956                9,705 
    B. Texas Sample, community college entrants                                                            
       Demographics                        
          Gender = male                        0.52                0.50           0.55                0.53 
          Race = white                         0.43                0.44           0.44                0.44 
          Race = URM                           0.54                0.53           0.54                0.54 
          Age                                  18.6                18.4           18.7                18.5 
       Financial aid received in entry year ($2018) 
          Federal Stafford loans              $3,535              $3,561        $2,119               $1,941 
          Total loans                         $3,539              $3,573        $2,166               $1,991 
          Federal Pell Grant                  $1,983              $1,868        $1,870               $1,516 
          TEXAS Grant                          $222                $283          $212                 $202 
          Other grants                         $574                $545          $515                 $497 
          Work study                            $80                 $62           $58                  $41 
       EFC (2018$)                            $7,261              $7,929        $5,307               $6,890 
       COA (2018$)                           $13,051             $13,497        $11,384              $12,544 
         Number of students                 7,372              10,450            15,520              10,316 
    C. CCP/Equifax Sample                                                                                
        Total loans                        $3,588              $4,010            $2,151              $2,219 
        Age                                  18.5               18.5              18.8                18.7 
        Credit Outcomes Before First Student Loan Origination 
            Has a Credit Report              0.18               0.17              0.28                0.27 
            Has a Credit Score               0.15               0.15              0.26                0.26 
            Number of Accounts               0.23               0.22              0.43                0.41 
            Has a Credit Card                0.09               0.10              0.15                0.17 
            Has an Auto Loan                 0.02               0.02              0.04                0.04 
         Number of Students                41,539              65,858            16,525              22,692 
Note: The sample in Panels A and B includes student borrowers who first enrolled in a public higher education 
institution in Texas, were classified as dependent students, and borrowed at or below the federal Stafford Loan 
maximum for firstyear students. The sample in Panel C includes borrowers who were younger than 20, borrowed at 
or below the federal Stafford Loan maximum for firstyear students at entry, and maintained a credit report through 
the eighth year after entry. Total loans in the CCP/Equifax sample are winsorized at the 99th percentile.  



                                                           36 
                                          Table 4: Loan limit increases and baseline student characteristics 
                                                           (1) Predicted 
                                                                                  (2) Male           (3) White         (4) URM          (5) EFC         (6) Age 
                                                          graduation rate 
       A. Texas sample, fouryear college entrants (N = 74,132)                                                                                               
          Dependent variable mean                      0.555                       0.457               0.414            0.519            9026            18.08 
                              
          Constrained cohort  2006,2007,2008           0.006                       0.011               0.008           0.020             1720            0.04 
                                                      (0.005)                     (0.010)             (0.014)          (0.014)          (1206)          (0.03) 
       B. Texas sample, community college entrants (N = 43,122)                                                                                             
          Dependent variable mean                      0.321                       0.526               0.440            0.536            6639           18.58 
                                                                                                                                                            
          Constrained cohort  2006,2007,2008          0.004                       0.002                0.011            0.012            938             0.16 
                                                     (0.002)+                     (0.009)             (0.010)          (0.010)          (364)*          (0.16) 
                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                             (7) Credit                            (9) Accounts        (10) Any        (11) Any 
                                                                              (8) Credit score                                                           (12) Age 
                                                               record                                on record        credit card      auto loan 
       C. CCP/Equifax sample (N = 145,616)                                                                                                                  
          Dependent variable mean                              0.204               0.181               0.279             0.116          0.027            18.50 
                                                                                                                                                            
          Constrained   cohort  2006,2007,2008                0.002               0.002                0.010            0.008           0.001            0.03 
                                                              (0.005)             (0.005)             (0.011)          (0.004)*         (0.002)        (0.01)** 
Note: See Table 3 notes for sample definitions. Each column within a panel includes estimates from separate regressions; dependent variable indicated in column 
heading. All specifications also include an indicator for being constrained at entry, cohort entry year fixed effects, and entry school fixed effects (Panels A and B) 
or entry state fixed effects (Panel C). Predicted graduation rate is a linear prediction of the probability of receiving any degree within 8 years of college entry on the 
other characteristics displayed in this table and school of entry fixed effects. URM = underrepresented minority. EFC = expected family contribution. CCP/Equifax 
outcomes all measured in the June before initial student loan origination. Robust standard errors, clustered by entry institution (panels A and B) or entry state 
(Panel C), in parentheses; + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, **p < 0.01. 
 
                             Table 5: Higher loan limits increase constrained students' cumulative borrowing 
       Years since entry =                                0        1           2         3         4          5                                        6 
       A. Texas sample, fouryear college entrants (N = 74,132)
          Dependent variable mean                      $2,977    $6,018     $9,631   $13,487    $16,245   $17,708                                  $18,633 
          Constrained cohort  2006,2007,2008             175      740        1285     1760       1819       1856                                    1873 
                                                       (59)**   (230)**    (424)**   (559)**    (635)**   (668)**                                  (685)** 
                                                       {0.682}  {0.049}    {0.016}   {0.008}    {0.029}    {0.037}                                 {0.031} 
       B. Texas sample, community college entrants (N = 43,122)
          Dependent variable mean                       $2829    $4456      $6116     $7874      $9485    $10,708                                  $11,652 
          Constrained cohort  2006,2007,2008             86       249         547      802       1056       1118                                    1074 
                                                       (25)**    (83)**    (127)**   (193)**    (252)**   (294)**                                  (317)** 
                                                       {0.800}  {0.600}    {0.268}   {0.123}    {0.047}    {0.027}                                 {0.035} 
       C. CCP/Equifax sample (N = 145,616)            
          Dependent variable mean                       $3379    $9846     $16,990  $23,748     $30,307   $35,750                                  $39,770 
          Constrained cohort  2006,2007,2008             311      574        1130     1600       2037       2768                                    3043 
                                                       (12)**    (87)**    (182)**   (261)**    (362)**   (478)**                                  (503)** 
                                                       {0.361}  {0.506}    {0.266}   {0.170}    {0.112}    {0.087}                                 {0.098} 
Note: See Table 3 notes for sample definitions. Each column within a panel contains estimates from separate regressions; dependent variable is cumulative total 
student loans X years after entry, where the value of X is indicated in column heading. Total loans in the CCP/Equifax sample are winsorized at the 99th percentile. 
All specifications also include an indicator for being constrained at entry and cohort entry year fixed effects. Specifications in Panels A and B also include entry 
school fixed effects, and controls for race (white, URM), age at entry, EFC at entry, and gender. Specifications in Panel C also includes state and age at entry fixed 
effects, quarters from entry before a credit report was created fixed effects, indicators for having a credit card, auto loan, mortgage, number of credit accounts,
and credit score, measured before entry. Robust standard errors, clustered by entry institution (Panels A and B) or by entry state (Panel C), in parentheses; + p < 
0.1, * p < 0.05, **p < 0.01; pvalues from wildt cluster bootstrap in brackets. 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                   Table 6: The effect of loan limit increases on constrained fouryear entrants' educational attainment 
  X =                                                             1          2            3             4             5             6             7             8 
  A. Enrollment X years later                             
     Dependent variable mean                                0.877          0.793        0.728         0.532         0.311         0.203         0.147         0.114 
     Constrained cohort  2006,2007,2008                     0.044          0.047        0.050         0.014         0.002         0.012         0.018         0.007 
                                                          (0.007)**      (0.007)**    (0.009)**      (0.010)       (0.009)       (0.007)      (0.006)**      (0.004) 
                                                           {0.003}        {0.008}      {0.008}       {0.321}       {0.672}       {0.106}       {0.033}       {0.018} 
  B. Cumulative years of enrollment                       
     Dependent variable mean                                    1.88        2.67         3.40          3.93          4.24         4.44          4.59           4.71 
     Constrained cohort  2006,2007,2008                         0.04        0.09         0.14          0.16          0.15         0.14          0.12           0.12 
                                                             (0.01)**    (0.01)**     (0.02)**      (0.03)**      (0.03)**      (0.04)**      (0.04)**      (0.04)** 
                                                              {0.002}     {0.001}      {0.004}       {0.006}       {0.006}      {<0.001}      {<0.001}       {0.005} 
  C. Cumulative credits attempted                         
     Dependent variable mean                                   51.65       73.12        92.09        103.61        109.53        113.11        115.58        117.43 
     Constrained cohort  2006,2007,2008                         2.81       4.25          5.36         5.69          5.68           5.53         5.29          5.33 
                                                             (0.61)**    (0.87)**     (1.14)**      (1.20)**      (1.21)**      (1.23)**      (1.20)**      (1.18)** 
                                                              {0.001}    {<0.001}      {0.008}      {<0.001}      {<0.001}       {0.005}      {<0.001}       {0.004} 
  D. Any degree or credential 
     Dependent variable mean                                 <0.001        0.016        0.180         0.381         0.478         0.527         0.557         0.578 
     Constrained cohort  2006,2007,2008                      0.0004        0.001        0.033         0.039         0.049         0.052         0.050         0.046 
                                                             (0.001)      (0.002)     (0.009)**     (0.011)**     (0.010)**     (0.011)**     (0.011)**     (0.010)** 
                                                             {0.620}      {0.823}      {0.031}       {0.022}       {0.009}       {0.009}       {0.003}       {0.008} 
  E. Bachelor's degree                                    
     Dependent variable mean                                                            0.162         0.355         0.446         0.491          0.517         0.534 
     Constrained cohort  2006,2007,2008                                                 0.036         0.043         0.054         0.058          0.056         0.053 
                                                                                      (0.009)**     (0.011)**     (0.011)**     (0.012)**     (0.011)**     (0.011)** 
                                                                                       {0.015}       {0.023}       {0.003}       {0.002}       {<0.001}      {<0.001} 
  F. Associate degree                                     
     Dependent variable mean                                               0.012        0.015         0.023         0.032         0.039         0.046         0.053 
     Constrained cohort  2006,2007,2008                                    0.001        0.001         0.004         0.008         0.007         0.008         0.009 
                                                                          (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.003)      (0.003)*      (0.003)*      (0.003)*      (0.003)** 
                                                                          {0.387}      {0.489}       {0.264}       {0.041}       {0.076}       {0.115}       {0.049} 
Note: Texas sample, see Table 3 notes for definition (N = 74,132). Each column within a panel contains estimates from separate regressions; dependent variable is 
indicated in the subpanel heading, measured X years after entry, where the value of X is indicated in column heading. All specifications also include an indicator 
for being constrained at entry, cohort entry year fixed effects, entry school fixed effects, and controls for race (white, URM), age at entry, EFC at entry, and gender. 
Robust standard errors, clustered by entry institution, in parentheses; + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, **p < 0.01; pvalues from wildt cluster bootstrap in brackets. 
 
       Table 7: Effects of loan limit increases on alternative sources of college financing 
         Years since entry =                               1          2            3 
         A. Any credit card (N = 145,616)               
            Dependent variable mean                      0.517      0.584       0.615 
                Constrained     cohort  2006,2007,2008             0.023        0.007          0.010 
                                                                 (0.006)**      (0.006)        (0.007) 
                                                             {0.066}            {0.480}        {0.381} 
           B. Credit card balance (conditional on having 1+ cards)
              Dependent variable mean                         $1361             $1816          $2151 
                 Constrained     cohort  2006,2007,2008             83            79            27 
                                                                   (28)*         (42)+          (55) 
                                                                  {0.016}       {0.036}        {0.662} 
                 Observations                                     75,230        85,061         89,569 
           C. Any earnings X years after entry (N = 74,132)                                         
                Dependent variable mean                            0.807         0.796         0.798 
                 Constrained    cohort  2006,2007,2008             0.019        0.015          0.001 
                                                                 (0.005)**     (0.006)*        (0.006) 
                                                                  {0.066}       {0.051}        {0.926} 
           D. Ln(earnings) X years after entry                                                      
                Dependent variable mean                            8.595         8.826         9.044 
                Constrained     cohort  2006,2007,2008             0.048        0.028          0.043 
                                                                  (0.025)+      (0.025)       (0.025)+ 
                                                                  {0.020}       {0.394}        {0.049} 
                Observations                                      59,802        58,981         59,172 
Note: Texas and CCP/Equifax samples, see Table 3 notes for definitions. See Table 5 notes for specification. Each 
column within a panel contains estimates from separate regressions; dependent variable is indicated in the subpanel 
heading, measured X years after entry, where the value of X is indicated in column heading. Robust standard errors, 
clustered by entry state, in parentheses; + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, **p < 0.01; pvalues from wildt cluster bootstrap in 
brackets. 
                                                           
Table 8: Effects of loan limit increases on student loan repayment and labor market outcomes 
X =                                                  4            5           6           7           8 
A. Student loan delinquency (N = 145,616) 
   Dependent variable mean                        0.095        0.110        0.118       0.119       0.113 
  Constrained cohort  2006,2007,2008               0.014        0.015       0.008       0.009       0.008 
                                                (0.004)**  (0.004)**  (0.004)*  (0.004)*  (0.004)+ 
                                                 {0.141}      {0.118}      {0.281}     {0.070}     {0.064} 
B. Student loan default (N = 145,616) 
   Dependent variable mean                        0.067        0.082        0.092       0.095       0.094 
  Constrained cohort  2006,2007,2008              0.012        0.016       0.008        0.006       0.009 
                                                (0.003)**    (0.003)**    (0.003)*    (0.003)*    (0.004)*   
                                                 {0.135}      {0.113}      {0.479}     {0.150}     {0.049} 
C. Any earnings X years after entry, fouryear entrants (N = 74,132)                                     
  Dependent variable mean                         0.803        0.796        0.785       0.778       0.771 
  Constrained cohort  2006,2007,2008              0.008        0.006       0.002        0.005       0.009 
                                                 (0.007)      (0.006)      (0.008)     (0.007)     (0.007) 
                                                 {0.395}              {0.632}       {0.701}   {0.660}    {0.389} 
D. Ln(earnings) X years after entry, fouryear entrants                                                        
 Dependent variable mean                          9.414                9.750         9.972    10.124     10.247 
  Constrained cohort  2006,2007,2008              0.010                0.010         0.043     0.059      0.046 
                                                 (0.019)              (0.024)      (0.020)*  (0.016)**  (0.016)** 
                                                 {0.533}              {0.630}       {0.016}   {0.056}    {0.097} 
 Observations                                     59,513              58,987        58,199    57,686     57,114 
Note: Texas and CCP/Equifax samples, see Table 3 notes for sample definitions. See Table 5 notes for specification. 
Each column within a panel contains estimates from separate regressions; dependent variable is indicated in the 
subpanel heading, measured X years after entry, where the value of X is indicated in column heading. Student loan 
borrowers are classified as delinquent if they have a positive past due balance for least two consecutive quarters (180 
days) and are in default if they have a positive past due balance for at least 4 consecutive quarters (360 days). Robust 
standard errors, clustered by entry state, in parentheses; + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, **p < 0.01; pvalues from wildt cluster 
bootstrap in brackets. 

                                      
    Table 9: The effect of loan limit increases on constrained students' other financial outcomes 
     X =                                               4         5          6         7        8 
     A. Delinquent (60+ days past due) on any loans                                         
       Dependent variable mean                       0.105     0.112      0.118    0.122     0.124 
       Constrained cohort  2006,2007,2008            0.001     0.004      0.002    0.001     0.004 
                                                    (0.004)   (0.005)    (0.004)  (0.004)  (0.005) 
                                                    {0.775}   {0.016}    {0.775}  {0.742}  {0.461} 
     B. Has a mortgage                                                                           
       Dependent variable mean                       0.038     0.061      0.090    0.121     0.155 
       Constrained cohort  2006,2007,2008            0.005     0.004      0.001    0.002     0.001 
                                                   (0.003)+   (0.003)    (0.004)  (0.004)  (0.003) 
                                                    {0.082}   {0.353}    {0.859}  {<0.001}  {0.761} 
     C. Has an auto loan                                                                         
        Dependent variable mean                      0.259     0.311      0.356    0.398     0.434 
        Constrained cohort  2006,2007,2008           0.018     0.014      0.007    0.008     0.004 
                                                  (0.004)**  (0.005)**  (0.005)  (0.006)  (0.006) 
                                                         {0.082}       {0.024}       {0.541}      {0.064}      {0.625} 
Note: CCP/Equifax sample, see Table 3 notes for definition (N = 145,616). See Table 6 notes for specification. Robust 
standard errors, clustered by entry state, in parentheses; + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, **p < 0.01; pvalues from wildt cluster 
bootstrap in brackets. 

 

 

 

                                       




                                                            42 
       Table 10: Effects of loan limit increases on attainment, earnings, and financial outcomes, doseresponse specification 
 A. Cumulative student loans, credit card holding one year after entry                                                                
                                              (1) Four years     (2) Six years after    (3) Four years      (4) Six years   (5) Has credit 
                                           after entry (Texas)     entry (Texas)      after entry (CCP)  after entry (CCP)       card 
 Constrained x AggLimExp ($1k)                       339                  342                 461                624            0.004 
                                                   (94)**              (103)**              (62)**             (80)**         (0.001)** 
                                                   {0.045}              {0.041}             {0.052}            {0.048}          {0.075} 
 Observations                                      74,132               74,132             145,616            145,616          145,616 
 B. Attainment and earnings outcomes, eight years after entry                                                                         
                                             (5) Cumulative       (6) Cumulative       (7) Any degree                        (9) Zip code 
                                                                                                         (8) Ln(earnings) 
                                             years enrolled     credits attempted           receipt                           mean AGI 
    Constrained x AggLimExp ($1k)                   0.02                 1.07                0.007              0.008             242 
                                                  (0.01)**             (0.23)**           (0.002)**           (0.003)*          (74)**  
                                                   {0.052}              {0.041}             {0.050}            {0.153}          {0.097} 
    Observations                                   74,132               74,132              74,132             57,114          145,616 
 C. Financial outcomes, eight years after entry 
                                            (10) Ever delinq.    (11) Ever default    (12) Delinquent         (13) Any      (14) Any auto 
                                               student loan       on student loan        on any debt         mortgage            loan  
    Constrained x AggLimExp ($1k)                   0.005               0.006                0.001             0.0004          0.0001 
                                                 (0.001)**            (0.001)**             (0.001)            (0.001)          (0.001) 
                                                   {0.141}             {0. 025}             {0.371}            {0.696}          {0.947} 
    Observations                                  145,616              145,616             145,616            145,616          145,616 
Note: Columns 3, 4, 5, 9, and Panel C contain estimates from the CCP/Equifax sample; remaining columns contain estimates from the Texas fouryear entrant 
sample. See Table 3 notes for sample definitions. Total loans in the CCP/Equifax sample are winsorized at the 99th percentile. All specifications control for the level 
effect of AggLimExp and Constrained. See Table 5 notes for description of additional control variables used Robust standard errors, clustered by entry institution 
(columns 1, 2, 5, 6, and 7) or entry state (columns 3, 4, 5, 9, and Panel C), in parentheses; + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, **p < 0.01; pvalues from wildt cluster bootstrap in 
brackets. 
                                        
Table 11: IV estimates of the effect of student loans on fouryear entrants' attainment and earnings, eight years after college entry 
                                                  (1) Total years  (2) Total credits        (3) Any       (4) Bachelor's  (5) Associate              (6) 
                                                     enrolled           earned              degree            degree         degree              Ln(earnings) 
       Cumulative loans ($1k)                         0.066                3.01              0.026            0.030              0.005              0.025 
                                                     (0.031)*             (1.31)*           (0.012)*         (0.014)*           (0.003)+           (0.013)* 
       Observations                                   74,132              74,129             74,129           74,129             74,129             57,110 
Note: Fouryear entrants, Texas sample, see Table 3 notes for definition. Each column contains estimates from separate regressions; dependent variable is indicated 
in the column heading, measured eight years after entry. All specifications also include an indicator for being constrained at entry, cohort entry year fixed effects, 
entry school fixed effects, and controls for race (white, URM), age at entry, EFC at entry, and gender. The interaction between constrained at entry and belonging 
to the 2006 through 2008 entry cohorts serves as excluded instrument. Robust standard errors, clustered by entry institution, in parentheses; + p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, **p 
< 0.01. 

                                                                         
                                                                         
          Table 12: IV estimates of the effect of student loans on selected financial outcomes, eight years after college entry 
                                       (1) Delinquent       (2)  Default        (3) Any        (4) Any         (5) Any auto 
                                        (stud. loans)      (stud. loans)   delinquent debt   mortgage               loan 
            Cumulative loans ($1k)          0.010              0.012            0.003           0.001              0.003 
                                          (0.003)**          (0.003)**         (0.003)         (0.002)            (0.004) 
            Observations                   145,616            145,616          145,616        145,616            145,616 
Note: CCP/Equifax sample (N = 145,616), see Table 3 notes for definition. Each column contains estimates from separate regressions; dependent variable is 
indicated in the column heading, measured 8 years after entry. All specifications also include an indicator for being constrained at entry, cohort entry year fixed 
effects, state at entry fixed effects, and age fixed effects. Cumulative loans measured in years 14. The interaction between constrained at entry and belonging to 
the 2006 through 2008 entry cohorts serves as excluded instrument. Firststage FStatistic is 37.58. Robust standard errors, clustered by entry state, in parentheses; 
+ p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, **p < 0.01. 




                                                                                   44 
                                                    Figure 1: The distribution of entry year borrowing 
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
 
 
 
 




                                                                                                           
Notes: See Table 3 notes for sample definitions. 
      Figure 2: The relationship between being constrained and predicted graduation rate 




                                                                                                      
Note: Texas sample, see Table 3 notes for definition. Coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from regressions of 
predicted graduation rate on the interaction between being constrained at entry and entry cohort (with 2005 serving 
as omitted category). All specifications also include an indicator for being constrained at entry, cohort entry year 
fixed effects, and entry school fixed effects. The predicted graduation rate is a linear prediction of the probability of 
receiving any degree within 8 years of college entry on the characteristics displayed in Table 4 (Panels A and B) and 
school of entry fixed effects. Confidence intervals based on robust standard errors, clustered by entry institution.  
                                                      
     Figure 3: The effect of being constrained at entry on cumulative student loans by entry cohort 




                                                                                                           
Note: Texas sample, see Table 3 notes for definition. Coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from regressions of 
cumulative borrowing on the interaction between being constrained at entry and entry cohort (with 2005 serving as 
omitted category).  All specifications also include an indicator for being constrained at entry, cohort entry year fixed 
effects, entry school fixed effects, and controls for race (white, URM), age at entry, EFC at entry, and gender. 
Confidence intervals based on robust standard errors, clustered by entry institution.                                         
Figure 4: Effects of loan limit increases on cumulative years of enrollment 8 years after entry 
                                    A. Fouryear college enrollment 




                                                                                                 
                                           B. Community college enrollment 




                                                                                                 
Note: Texas sample, see Table 3 notes for definition. See Figure 3 notes for specification.  
                                       




                                                            47 
    Figure 5: Effects of loan limit increases on cumulative credits attempted 8 years after entry 
                                         A. Fouryear college credits 




                                                                                                 
                                              B. Community college credits 




                                                                                                 
Note: Texas sample, see Table 3 notes for definition. See Figure 4 notes for specification.  
 
                                       



                                                            48 
         Figure 6: Effects of loan limit increases on degree receipt eight years after entry 
                                           A. Bachelor's degree 




                                                                                                 
                                                    B. Associate degree 




                                                                                                 
Note: Texas sample, see Table 3 notes for definition. See Figure 4 notes for specification.  
                                       




                                                            49 
Figure 7: Effects of loan limit increases on student loan repayment eight years after entry 
                                        A. Ever delinquent 




                                                                                                            
                                                    B. Ever default 




                                                                                                            
Note: CCP/Equifax sample, see Table 3 notes for definition. Outcomes are measured four through eight years after 
initial borrowing. Coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from regressions of the indicated outcome on the 
interaction between being constrained at entry and entry cohort (with 2005 serving as omitted category).  All 
specifications also include an indicator for being constrained at entry, cohort entry year fixed effects, includes state 
and age at entry fixed effects, quarters from entry before a credit report was created fixed effects, indicators for
having a credit card, auto loan, mortgage, number of credit accounts, and credit score, measured before entry. 
Confidence intervals based on robust standard errors, clustered by entry state. 




                                                            50 
    Figure 8: Effects of loan limit increases on labor market outcomes eight years after entry 
                                            A. Any earnings 




                                                                                                 
                                                      B. Ln(earnings) 




                                                                                                 
Note: Texas sample, see Table 3 notes for definition. See Figure 4 notes for specification.  
 

                                       



                                                            51 
    Figure 9: Effects of loan limit increases on other financial outcomes, eight years after entry 
                                         A. Delinquent on any debt 




                                                                                               
                                           B. Has a mortgage 




                                                                                               
                                                         
                                                         
                                                         



                                                  52 
                                                   C. Has an auto loan 




                                                                                                       
Note: CCP/Equifax sample, see Table 3 notes for definition. See Figure 7 notes for specification.  
                                                            

 




                                                           53 
