                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              DATA PRIVACY AND TEMPTATION

                                            Zhuang Liu
                                           Michael Sockin
                                            Wei Xiong

                                        Working Paper 27653
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27653


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2020




We are grateful to Roland Benabou, Long Chen, Shaowei Ke, Liyan Yang, Leeat Yariv, Lixin Ye,
and seminar participants at Cambridge, CUHK Shenzhen, Luohan Academy, Northwestern, Princeton,
Stanford, UT-Dallas, and the Virtual Finance Seminar for helpful comments and suggestions. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Zhuang Liu, Michael Sockin, and Wei Xiong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Data Privacy and Temptation
Zhuang Liu, Michael Sockin, and Wei Xiong
NBER Working Paper No. 27653
August 2020
JEL No. D03,D62,M15

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper derives a preference for data privacy from consumers' temptation utility. This
approach facilitates a welfare analysis of different data privacy regulations, such as the GDPR
enacted by the European Union and the CCPA enacted by the state of California, when a fraction
of the consumers may succumb to targeted advertising of temptation goods. While sharing
consumer data with firms improves firms' matching efficiency of normal consumption goods, it
also exposes weak-willed consumers to temptation goods. Despite that the GDPR and the CCPA
give each consumer the choice to opt in or out of data sharing, these regulations may not provide
sufficient protection for severely tempted consumers because of a negative externality in which
the opt-in decision of some consumers reduces the anonymity of those who opt out. Our analysis
also shows that the default choices instituted by the GDPR and the CCPA can lead to sharply
different outcomes.

Zhuang Liu                                             Wei Xiong
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen              Princeton University
Shenzhen, China                                        Department of Economics
zhuangliu@cuhk.edu.cn                                  Bendheim Center for Finance
                                                       Princeton, NJ 08450
Michael Sockin                                         and NBER
Department of Finance                                  wxiong@princeton.edu
UT Austin McCombs School of Business
Austin, TX 78712
michael.sockin@mccombs.utexas.edu
    The age of big data brings with it not only substantial bene...ts, such as dramatically
improved access for consumers to products and services, but also undesirable drawbacks.
A key concern is that the collection of personal data by digital platforms such as Google,
Amazon, and Facebook represents an unprecedented challenge to consumer privacy. Moti-
vated by this concern, the European Union enacted the General Data Privacy Regulation
(GDPR) in 2018, and the State of California in the United States enacted the California
Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) in 2020. Both regulations aim to protect consumer privacy,
albeit with several important di¤erences that are summarized in Appendix A, and motivate
a normative analysis of the welfare consequences of di¤erent data collection and sharing
schemes. Such a normative analysis, however, requires a systematic framework of why con-
sumers have a preference for privacy. The existing economics literature on consumer privacy
tends to focus on the trade-o¤ between matching e¢ ciency and price discrimination: on the
one hand, consumer data can increase the social surplus by allowing ...rms to better match
their products with consumer preferences; on the other, such data empower ...rms to price
discriminate against consumers, which also tilts the distribution of the social surplus toward
...rms.1 While aversion to price discrimination is an important motivation for a preference
for privacy among consumers, this mechanism is indirect and depends intricately on the
assumed market structure.
    In this paper, we pursue an alternative approach to modeling a preference for privacy
among consumers by directly deriving it from their preferences over menus of consumption
goods, in the spirit of Kreps (1979), by building on the temptation utility of Gul and Pe-
sendorfer (2001).2 This utility speci...cation allows consumers to su¤er a mental cost from
resisting temptation goods on their menus. This can lead to a preference for a smaller menu
without temptation goods, in sharp contrast to the standard preference for larger menus in
    1
      See Acquisti, Taylor and Wagman (2016), Bergemann and Morris (2019), and Goldfar and Tucker (2019),
for recent reviews. For example, both Taylor (2004) and Acquisti and Varian (2005) show that it is optimal
for sellers to use consumers' past purchase information to price discriminate only if consumers are naive
of how their data is used, but not optimal if consumers are sophisticated and can adapt their purchasing
strategies. Ali, Lewis and Vasserman (2019) analyze how consumers can use their data disclosure choices to
amplify competition between ...rms in a competitive setting and to induce price concessions from a seller in
a monopolistic setting. Furthermore, Ichibashi (2019) shows that a multi-product seller prefers to commit
to not use consumer information for pricing so that consumers truthfully report their information and the
seller can recommend to them the best product matches.
    2
      Stovall (2010) has expanded this temptation utility representation to include random menus. Such
preferences over temptation goods also admit an interpretation as an internal con ict among multiple selves,
e.g., Bénabou and Pycia (2002), and are a special case of the random Strotz (1955) utility characterized by
Dekel and Lipman (2012).



                                                     1
the absence of self-control issues. As data sharing a¤ects how ...rms advertise their goods to
consumers, a consumer'
                     s menu preference eventually determines her preference for privacy
when sharing data with digital platforms. This systematic privacy preference allows us to
compare how di¤erent data sharing schemes a¤ect social welfare.
      Self-control problems have become more severe in the age of big data. Consider the story
of a compulsive gambler who tries to recover from gambling-- he deleted all casino apps from
his smart phone; he removed his pro...le from all of the major gambling sites; he set up a rule
in Gmail to automatically delete any emails that are related to gambling. One day, however,
he logged on to YouTube, and all his e¤orts seemed to be in vain: "99% of the ads I see on
                          3
YouTube are for gambling."  This frustration is just one example of how data analytics are
increasingly used by ...rms to target consumers with self-control problems.
      Such examples of consumer targeting is widespread. Online casinos and the global video
game industry, for instance, use third-party companies to harvest personal data and target
advertisements to those who are most likely to be tempted, such as those who previously
gambled or played but have stopped.4 E-cigarette companies use social media platforms
and youth-focused advertising strategies to target teenagers and expand the market for their
edgling product (Kim et al. (2019)). Marketers are now creating online alcohol advertise-
ments that are more speci...cally tailored to their intended audience based on social data,
including age, location, gender, interests, and much more (Morris (2019)). The adult ...lm
industry uses similar data-driven approaches to cater to consumers'diverse tastes (Raustiala
and Sprigman (2019)). This phenomenon also extends well beyond these so-called "sin"in-
dustries. Payday lenders use algorithmic scoring to zero-in on consumers when they are
likely to be vulnerable to short-term credit products with usurious interest rates and unfa-
vorable terms (Hurley and Adebayo (2017)). The size and inuence of these industries are
staggering. In 2018, for example, the gross revenue of the gambling industry in the United
States was $161 billion;5 the video game industry generated about $135 billion in revenue
(Newzoo (2018));6 visits to Pornhub, the largest adult ...lm website in the world, totaled 33.5
billion;7 and 12 million Americans took out payday loans, both online and through about
  3
    https://www.reddit.com/r/unitedkingdom/comments/6xdi4d/how_gambling_industry_targets_poor
  _people_and.
  4
    http://theguardian.com/society/2019/oct/09/casumo-ad-banned-for-targeting-people-trying-to-stop-
gambling.
  5
    See https://www.casino.org/gambling-statistics.
  6
    www.newzoo.com/globalgamesreport.
  7
    See https://www.pornhub.com/insights/2018-year-in-review.


                                                 2
16,000 storefront o¢ ces, borrowing almost $90 billion.8
       Motivated by these observations, we develop a model to analyze an ecosystem associated
with a digital platform, such as Google or Facebook, that may collect the data of consumers
on the platform and share the data with sellers. For simplicity, there are two sellers. Seller
A sells a normal consumption good, such as music, while seller B sells a temptation good,
such as gambling or video games.9 Each of the sellers can target advertisements to potential
buyers of its good at a convex cost. Each consumer may receive advertisements from none,
one, or both of the sellers, and then chooses from the menu none, one, or both of the goods.
       There are three types of consumers: The ...rst is strong-willed and will always resist the
temptation good, while the second is weak-willed and may indulge in the temptation good,
as captured by the temptation utility of Gul and Pesendorfer (2001). Both strong-willed
and weak-willed consumers bene...t from consuming the normal good, while only the weak-
willed may succumb to the temptation good. The third type of consumer would never buy
either the normal good or the temptation good and serves as noise in the sellers'targeted
advertising.
       For simplicity, we assume that both strong-willed and weak-willed consumers have a ran-
dom utility over the normal good. The random utility prevents seller A; even if it has perfect
information about consumer types, from using third-degree price discrimination against its
potential buyers, which is a potential cost of revealing consumer data that is analyzed in the
existing privacy literature. In the absence of such price discrimination (which may also be
ensured by perfect competition among multiple normal good sellers), both strong-willed and
weak-willed consumers prefer receiving advertisements from seller A. Furthermore, since
strong-willed consumers can always resist the temptation good, they do not mind receiv-
ing advertisements from seller B . As such, strong-willed consumers prefer a larger menu of
goods, which, in turn, leads to a preference for data sharing so that they can be precisely tar-
geted by seller A. Data sharing presents a more intricate trade-o¤, however, for weak-willed
consumers, who bene...t from more precise targeting by seller A but su¤er from receiving
advertisements from seller B . This is a key tension in our model that drives the di¤erences
   8
    https://www.occ.gov/news-issuances/bulletins/2018/bulletin-2018-14.html.
   9
    While the vast majority of game players would not experience anything close to addiction, a fraction do
struggle with gaming addiction-- a legitimate medical condition. In 2018, the World Health Organization
(WHO) included "gaming disorder"within the 11th Revision of the International Classi...cation of Diseases.
Interestingly, Aguiar et al. (2018) estimate that video gaming and other recreational computer activities
have reduced labor supply of young men (ages 21­  30) in the United States by 1.5 to 3.1 percent since 2004.



                                                     3
in social welfare under di¤erent data sharing schemes.
   For comparison, we ...rst consider two benchmark data sharing schemes: one without
any data sharing and consumers remaining fully anonymous to the sellers, and the other
with full data sharing so that the sellers can perfectly identify the type of each consumer.
In the former scheme, each seller faces a dark pool of consumers, and consequently the
convex cost of advertising determines that each seller only sends advertisements to a subset
of potential consumers. This dark pool prevents both the strong-willed and weak-willed from
being su¢ ciently covered by seller A, and at the same time protects the weak-willed from
the temptation good of seller B: In the latter scheme with full data sharing, both sellers A
and B can precisely target their advertisements to their intended consumers. As such, both
the strong-willed and weak-willed bene...t from the improved access to the normal good, but
the weak-willed su¤er from not being able to hide from the temptation good. As a result of
this trade-o¤, our analysis shows that when the temptation of the weak-willed is su¢ ciently
severe, the full data sharing scheme reduces their utilitarian welfare relative to the no data
sharing scheme, and the harm to weak-willed consumers may even be greater than the gain
of strong-willed consumers and cause lower overall social welfare.
   Both the GDPR and the CCPA allow consumers to opt in or out of data collection by any
platform, and its subsequent data sharing with sellers, but with an important di¤erence in
the default choice. The GDPR requires explicit consumer authorization before the platform
can collect consumer data, while the CCPA allows the platform to collect consumer data
unless a consumer explicitly opts out. That is, the default choice by the GDPR is opt-out
unless a consumer opts in, while the default by the CCPA is opt-in unless a consumer opts
out. In our model, since the third type of consumers are indi¤erent to either opt-in or
opt-out, their choices are determined by the default setting of the data privacy regulation.
Through this channel, the default data sharing choice impacts the composition of the opt-in
and opt-out pools of consumers faced by the sellers.
   Despite this di¤erence, both regulations o¤er each consumer an appealing opt-in or opt-
out choice in that strong-willed consumers can opt in to bene...t from the improved matching
with normal goods sellers while weak-willed consumers can opt out to protect themselves from
temptation goods sellers. By the optimality of each consumer'
                                                            s choice, one may naturally
expect these regulations to improve social welfare relative to the no data sharing and full
data sharing schemes. Indeed, our analysis con...rms that the CCPA strictly dominates full



                                              4
data sharing, as it allows seller A to fully identify its intended consumers and at the same
time, provides some, albeit imperfect, protection to weak-willed consumers. The comparison
of these schemes to no data sharing, however, is more subtle.
   Under both the GDPR and the CCPA, all strong-willed consumers opt in for data sharing.
As weak-willed consumers face a trade-o¤ when they opt in between improved access to the
normal good and intensi...ed exposure to the temptation good, they follow a cut-o¤ strategy in
which those severely tempted opt out while those modestly tempted opt in. The equilibrium
cuto¤ depends on the default choice instituted by the GDPR and the CCPA for the third
type of consumer. Interestingly, our model highlights a key externality of an individual
consumer'
        s data sharing with sellers on other consumers. When one consumer chooses to
opt in with data sharing either by an active choice or by default, that consumer'
                                                                                s data allows
the sellers to infer the preferences of other consumers. This echoes the notion of social data
put forth by Acemoglu et al. (2019), Bergemann, Bonatti and Gan (2019), and Easley et al.
(2019) that consumer data have an important social dimension.
   The data sharing externality we highlight can be negative: when one consumer opts in, he
drops out of the opt-out pool and reduces the camouage available for those severely tempted
consumers to hide from seller B . This negative externality increases with the temptation
problem of weak-willed consumers. As a result, no data sharing may o¤er higher social
welfare than both the GDPR and the CCPA when the temptation problem of weak-willed
consumers is su¢ ciently severe. This data sharing externality, however, can also be positive:
when the third type of consumers share their data under the default choice of the CCPA,
their data sharing allows seller A to fully identify and therefore cover its intended consumers,
including those weak-willed consumers in the opt-out pool. This positive externality allows
the CCPA to dominate both the GDPR and no data sharing when the temptation problem
of weak-willed consumers is su¢ ciently modest. The result that the CCPA may dominate
the GDPR is surprising as the GDPR is often regarded as providing stronger protection for
consumers. Interestingly, since the GDPR provides more of a balance between the matching
e¢ ciency of consumers with seller A and the protection of weak-willed consumers from
seller B , there may exist an intermediate range of the temptation problem of weak-willed
consumers in which the GDPR is the most desirable scheme.
   Our paper adds a new dimension to the privacy literature by highlighting the cost of
data sharing imposed on consumers who are vulnerable because of weak self-control. In



                                               5
this respect, it broadens the cost-bene...t analysis of privacy protection relevant for policy
analysis. Further, since we adopt the self-control utility framework, the weak-will consumers
in our model make fully rational information-sharing choices, despite their lack of self-control
in their consumption choices. This approach puts our normative analysis of data sharing
schemes and privacy regulations on a solid foundation, albeit at the cost of overlooking
consumers with even more severe behavioral weakness. For example, the use of hyperbolic
discounting may lead consumers not to fully internalize their lack of self-control, as for
example in Laibson (1997) and DellaVigna (2009). Our analysis also provides a rationale
for the so-called privacy paradox, which states that, although consumers express concerns
about data privacy in surveys, they often appear to freely share their data with ...rms and
digital platforms, as, for example, in Athey et al. (2017) and Tang (2019). In our model,
even weak-willed consumers may choose to opt in for data sharing to enjoy the bene...ts
from improved matching with normal goods sellers, despite their concerns about intensi...ed
exposure to temptation goods. As such, the privacy paradox may well reect the outcome
of a nuanced cost-bene...t analysis.
   Our paper contributes to a growing body of literature discussing a wide range of economic
issues related to data and data privacy. Ali and Benabou (2019) argue that while publicity
helps induce pro-social behavior, it crowds out information aggregation, thereby providing an
informational rationale for privacy. Tirole (2019) is concerned that political authorities might
enlist a social rating that bundles each individual'
                                                   s political attitude and social graph to
control society without engaging in severe repression or misinformation. Campbell, Goldfarb
and Tucker (2015) show that privacy protection policies can act as de facto barriers to
entry that entrench monopolies, while Calzolari and Pavan (2006) show that data sharing
across ...rms can enhance welfare by eroding distortions arising from asymmetric information.
Our model motivates the need for privacy protection in order to protect consumers with
behavioral weakness and highlights nuanced e¤ects of privacy protection regulations because
consumers do not internalize the impact of their data sharing decisions on other consumers.
In doing so, our model also provides a microfoundation for future analysis of how data
sharing by consumers may serve as a relevant factor for a¤ecting the macroeconomy at the
cost of consumer privacy as studied, for instance, in Jones and Tonetti (2020) and Farboodi
and Veldkamp (2020).




                                               6
1        The Model
We consider the ecosystem associated with a digital platform, such as Google or Facebook.
As a large number of consumers visit the platform, the platform can collect their digital
footprints, which, in turn, reveal useful information about their consumption preferences.
There are two types of consumption goods, A and B; each sold by a di¤erent goods seller.
We consider good A to be a normal good, such as music, and good B to be a temptation
good, such as a video game or gambling. There are three types of consumer fS; W; Og, which
represent strong-willed, weak-willed, and others, respectively. Strong-willed consumers can
always resist the temptation good, weak-willed consumers may not be able to resist, while
the type-O will purchase neither the normal nor the temptation good.

1.1       Consumers
There is a continuum of consumers of each type. The ex ante probability of a consumer being
strong-willed is     S   > 0, of being weak-willed is       W   > 0, and of being type O is 1         S     W:

In what follows, we assume that
                                                 W   <1         S;


which implies that the fraction of type-O consumers is positive. Both strong- and weak-
willed consumers may choose one or both of goods A and B for consumption, depending on
their individual preferences and the advertisements they receive from sellers.
       We adopt the self-control framework of Gul and Pesendorfer (2001), who provide an
axiomatic foundation for temptation. Following Kreps (1979), this framework speci...es a
consumer'
        s preferences in two steps. Moving backwardly, in the second step, a consumer
makes a choice from a given menu N , and, in the ...rst step, the consumer chooses from a set
of menus. Speci...cally, the consumer'
                                     s preference for a menu N in the ...rst step is given by
the following:10
                                max [u(x) + v (x)          p(x)]     max
                                                                      0
                                                                         v (x0 );                           (1)
                                x2 N                                 x 2N

  10
     In this speci...cation, we follow Gul and Pesendorfer (2004) to exclude goods prices from temptation util-
ities. One may, however, argue that more expensive temptation goods are less tempting, all else being equal.
Such a consideration can be incorporated into our framework by, for instance, specifying the consumer'        s
preference instead as:
                                 max [u (x) + v (x) 2p (x)] max0
                                                                   [v (x0 ) p (x)] ;
                               x2 N                           x 2N

without qualitatively impacting our key insights. We choose the simpler speci...cation for expositional brevity.
We thank Shaowei Ke for pointing out this construction to us.


                                                       7
where x is a possible choice from the menu N , and u (x), v (x) ; and p (x) are the commitment
utility, temptation utility, and price, respectively, of the choice x. The consumer'
                                                                                   s actual
choice from the menu in the second step is determined by the ...rst maximization in Equation
(1):
                              x = arg max [u(x) + v (x)          p (x)] ;
                                        x2N

which is a compromise of the commitment utility and the temptation utility. As a result
of the compromise, the consumer may not choose the most tempting choice from the menu.
If so, that is, x 6= arg maxx0 2N v (x0 ), the consumer exercises self-control. As self-control is
costly to the consumer, having the most tempting choice on the menu is undesirable even if
it is not eventually chosen. The last term in Equation (1), while it does not directly a¤ect
the consumer'
            s actual choice from the menu, a¤ects the consumer'
                                                              s preference for the menu.
More precisely, the di¤erence between the temptation utility of the actual choice x and the
maximal temptation from the menu, maxx0 2N v (x0 ) v (x ); represents the cost of self-control
incurred by the consumer when it resists the temptation good.11
       As we will discuss, the menu N faced by a consumer is random and depends on the two
sellers'advertising strategies, which, in turn, depend on the platform'
                                                                      s data sharing scheme.
Our analysis consequently builds directly on the random Gul-Pesendorfer temptation utility
of Stovall (2010), which can also be viewed as a special case of the random Strotz (1955)
utility characterized by Dekel and Lipman (2012). As such, the ex ante utility of a consumer
is the expected utility from all potential menus given the platform'
                                                                   s data sharing scheme.


Temptation utility A consumer, with type             i   2 fS; W; Og, has the following commitment
and temptation utilities from consuming good A and good B :
                    strong-willed           weak-willed                    type O
                 x uS (x) vS (x)        uW (x)    vW (x)               uO (x) vO (x)
                                                                                                (2)
                   ~A > 0
                 A u           0        ~A > 0
                                        u            0                   0        0
                 B uB < 0      0        uB < 0 i v uB > 0                0        0
with u i ( ) and v i ( ) denoting the commitment and temptation utility of the consumer,
respectively. Both strong- and weak-willed consumers have a random utility for good A, u
                                                                                       ~A ,
which has a uniform distribution H (~
                                    uA ) s U [0; u] ; with u > 0 as the maximal commitment
utility of consumers. One can interpret this random utility for the normal good as a transient
taste for the good, such as desiring co¤ee instead of tea on a given day.
  11
      Note that this framework subsumes the standard Von Neumann-Morgenstern utility framework. That
is, if v (x) = 0; the consumer's choice is fully determined by his commitment utility.


                                                 8
       Good B gives a negative commitment utility uB < 0 to both strong- and weak-willed
consumers, reecting that the temptation good is ultimately harmful to consumers. As good
B does not give any temptation utility to strong-willed consumers (i.e., vS (B ) = 0), they
will never buy the temptation good. Good B gives a temptation utility of                       iv      uB to weak-
willed consumers, where v > 0 is a constant measuring the overall temptation of weak-willed
consumers to good B , and           i   2 [0; 1] measures a consumer'
                                                                    s degree of temptation and has
a uniform distribution G ( i )               U [0; 1] across the population of weak-willed consumers.
We specify this particular form of temptation utility coe¢ cient so that a weak-willed con-
sumer'
     s choice of whether to buy good B; when it is on the menu, is determined by a simple
expression:

                        max     [uW (x) + vW (x)          p(x)]
                      x2fB;;g

                  = max fuW (B ) + vW (B )                p (B ) ; 0g = max f i v      p (B ) ; 0g ;

which implies that the consumer will choose to buy good B if his temptation coe¢ cient                           i

is su¢ ciently high, that is,      i        p (B ) =v .
       Note that the temptation delivered by good B to a weak-willed consumer is persistent
and characterized by a personalized parameter                     i,   while the commitment utility delivered
by good A to a consumer (either strong-willed or weak-willed) is random. The random
utility delivered by good A prevents price discrimination by seller A even if seller A has
full information about consumers.12 In contrast, information about a weak-willed consumer
allows seller B not only to precisely target its advertisements but also to price discriminate
against weak-willed consumers. This asymmetric setting allows us to focus on how access to
consumer data a¤ects weak-willed consumers through their temptation utility, rather than
how price discrimination a¤ects consumers'consumption of normal goods, which has been
explored extensively in the literature.
       Type-O consumers (with           i   = O) prefer an outside good, and their commitment utility
and temptation utility from either good A or B are both zero. The presence of these
consumers makes it costly for sellers A and B to advertise their goods to their intended
consumers.
  12
    Alternatively, one can view this speci...cation as reecting a preference by consumers for a speci...c one of
many possible normal goods with the utility bene...t indexed on [0; u] : Under this alternative setting, Ichihashi
(2019) shows that a seller who can precommit would choose not to price discriminate when consumers can
choose whether to disclose their information.



                                                          9
Menu preference The menu N that a consumer faces is determined by the advertisements
the consumer receives from the two sellers. The menu may contain both, one, or none of goods
A and B: Note that each consumer has separate and additive utilities for consumption of
goods A and B . Furthermore, for simplicity, we assume that each consumer faces no budget
constraints and could choose to consume both or one of A and B .13 That is, each consumer
can separately choose each good, even if both goods are on her menu. As a result, we can
separately denote the menu faced by consumer i for each of the two goods: MA
                                                                           i 2 ffA; ;g ; ;g

is the menu for good A; with ; representing the menu when good A is not advertised to the
consumer and fA; ;g representing the menu when it is advertised, and MB
                                                                      i 2 ffB; ;g ; ;g is

the menu for good B .
         Then, building on the utility framework speci...ed in Equation (1), we derive the choices
of a consumer with type                 i   2 fS; W; Og from the menus MA      B
                                                                        i and Mi :


                        x   i
                                MA
                                 i                             u i (x)
                                                    = arg max [~                     pA; i (x)] ;
                                                           x2MA
                                                              i

                        y   i
                                MB
                                 i                  = arg max [u i (y ) + v i (y )                 pB; i (y )] ;
                                                           y 2MB
                                                               i


where the prices of the two goods pA; i (x) and pB; i (y ) may be discriminative, depending on
the consumer'
            s type and whether the consumer'
                                           s type is known to the sellers. Each consumer
is competitive and takes as given the sellers'advertisement policies and pricing policies.
         The consumer'
                     s ex ante preference for the full menu is then

U    i
          MA    B
           i ; Mi      = u
                         ~      i
                                    x       i
                                                    MA
                                                     i      pA;    i
                                                                       x    i
                                                                                MA
                                                                                 i

                            +u      i
                                            y   i
                                                     MB
                                                      i     +v    i
                                                                       y   i
                                                                                MB
                                                                                 i       pB;   i
                                                                                                    y   i
                                                                                                            MB
                                                                                                             i     max v i (y ) :
                                                                                                                   y 2MB
                                                                                                                       i


This menu preference allows us to analyze the welfare implications of the platform'
                                                                                  s data
sharing scheme, which determines the sellers'information about each consumer and conse-
quently their advertising strategies. In our analysis, we will separately examine di¤erent
schemes regarding whether the platform shares consumer data with the sellers.

1.2         Sellers
There is one seller of good A and one seller of good B in the ecosystem. For simplicity,
we assume that both sellers face zero marginal cost of production, but a convex cost of
    13
    This assumption simpli...es our analysis from potential complications related to the consumer'
                                                                                                 s budget
constraint and allows us to focus on how di¤erent data sharing schemes with sellers a¤ect the consumer' s
choice and welfare.


                                                                       10
advertising the goods to consumers. Speci...cally, in order for seller k 2 fA; B g to reach zk
measure of the consumers, it incurs a cost of F 1 zk
                                                   zk
                                                      where F > 0 is a constant. One may
interpret this cost as an advertising fee, with the convexity reecting that it is increasingly
costly to advertise to a broader audience.14 In what follows, we impose a technical condition
        u
F <     4
            to ensure a nontrivial equilibrium for good A:
       In choosing its advertising and pricing policies, seller k maximizes its expected pro...t:
                                    Z
                                                        zk
                     k = sup E            pk (i) di F            I k ; k 2 fA; B g ;
                         fpk ;zk g   i2Zk             1    zk


where Zk is the set of consumers to which seller k advertises its good, pk (i) is the price
that the seller charges consumer i, and zk is the measure of the set Zk . We assume that if
the seller does not advertise to a consumer, then its good is not on that consumer'
                                                                                  s menu.
Each seller is strategic and can only condition its advertisement and pricing policies on its
information set I k ; which may allow the seller to charge di¤erent consumers di¤erent prices.
       Since consumers can always choose to buy nothing, sellers face the following implicit
participation constraints:
                                             pA    u; pB      v:

Violating these price constraints would lead to no sales.

1.3         Rational Expectations Equilibrium
We analyze how di¤erent data sharing schemes may a¤ect consumers and sellers by leaving
out the incentives of the platform. We implicitly assume that the platform will share all
consumer data with the sellers as long as such sharing satis...es each consumer'
                                                                               s sharing
choice, if applicable. In Section 2, we ...rst analyze two simple data sharing schemes, one
without any sharing and the other with full sharing. In both of these schemes, consumers
do not have any individual choice over data sharing. In Section 3, we analyze two schemes
instituted by the GDPR and the CCPA, both of which allow each consumer to choose whether
to share data with the platform, which then shares that data with the sellers.
       Under each of these data sharing schemes, an equilibrium in the ecosystem is a set of
optimal advertising and pricing policies fZk ; pk g for each seller k 2 fA; B g ; and an optimal
  14
    To the extent that consumers have limited attention and online advertisers do not want to         ood them
with unlimited advertisements, the fees have to rise progressively with the quantity. This is also consistent
with the fact that, in practice, sellers need to pay substantial advertising fees to online advertisers.



                                                     11
purchase policy correspondence fx        i
                                                 MA
                                                  i ;y   i
                                                             MB
                                                              i g and a data sharing choice si for each

consumer i such that the following are satis...ed:

      Consumer optimization: Given each seller'
                                              s advertising and pricing policies, each con-
      sumer i ...nds it optimal to ...rst adopt the data sharing choice si and then follow the
      purchase policy fx     i
                                 MA
                                  i ;y       i
                                                 MB                    A    B
                                                  i g for a menu set fMi ; Mi g.


      Seller optimization: Given each consumer'
                                              s optimal policy, each seller k ...nds it optimal
      to choose an optimal advertising policy Zk and a pricing policy pk for its good.

   To facilitate our welfare analysis, we assume that sellers pay the platform for its ad-
vertising services, and consequently the costs of advertising are zero-sum transfers between
sellers and the platform, which is also assumed to be owned by consumers. Since consumer
preferences are quasi-linear in the cost of their purchases, we can aggregate across consumer
utility and seller and platform pro...ts to arrive at the following utilitarian social welfare:
                Z
        W =        u~A S 1fA2MA \ xS =Ag + W 1fA2MA \ xW =Ag dH (~          uA )                (3)
                                 S                       W
                      Z
                + W       uB 1fB 2MB \ xW =B g + (uB       i v ) 1fB 2MB \ xW =;g dG ( i ) :
                                     W                                       W



The ...rst term captures the commitment utility of both strong-willed and weak-willed con-
sumers from consuming good A. The second term for weak-willed consumers represents the
social deadweight loss from consumption of the temptation good, uB ; and the cost of resisting
temptation, uB      iv,   by those who have the temptation good on their menus but choose not
to consume it. Note from Equation (1) that for a weak-willed consumer who purchases good
B , the realized temptation utility from consuming the good o¤sets the maximal temptation
from the menu, thereby giving the consumer zero temptation utility. The price she pays for
the good is a transfer to seller B and does not a¤ect social welfare. As a result, the welfare
loss incurred is from the negative commitment utility uB for those weak-willed consumers
who buy the good and from the mental cost of resisting temptation for those who have good
B on their menus but resist it.
   The social welfare given in Equation (3) reveals a trade-o¤ associated with sharing con-
sumer data with sellers-- it increases the matching e¢ ciency of seller A; which improves
social welfare through the ...rst term, at the expense of exposing weak-willed consumers to
seller B; which reduces social welfare through the second term. This trade-o¤ distinguishes


                                                      12
our model from typical models of data privacy that focus on how the availability of consumer
data increases the total social surplus through improved matching but also shifts the split
of the surplus between consumers and sellers.
    To anchor our welfare analysis of di¤erent data sharing schemes, it is straightforward
to characterize the ...rst-best outcome from the perspective of a planner who maximizes the
social welfare in Equation (3). Since advertising is costless from a social perspective, the
planner prefers seller A to sell its good to all strong- and weak-willed consumers. In contrast,
as the advertisement from seller B brings a cost to each weak-willed consumer, regardless
of whether he resists or succumbs to the temptation, the planner prefers seller B not to
advertise to any consumer. We summarize this ...rst-best outcome below.

Proposition 1 In the ...rst-best equilibrium, seller A sells its good to all strong-willed and
weak-willed consumers, and seller B advertises to no consumers.


2     Equilibrium Under Benchmark Schemes
In this section, we characterize the equilibrium of the ecosystem in two benchmark data
sharing schemes, one without any sharing and the other with full sharing. Under both
schemes, consumers do not have any individual choice to opt in or out of data sharing.

2.1    Consumer Choice
We ...rst analyze the choice of each consumer from a given menu of consumption goods.
The policy is simple. A strong-willed consumer may buy good A if its price is below the
consumer'
        s reservation value, and always refuses good B: A weak-willed consumer may buy
good A if its price is lower than his reservation value, just like a strong-willed consumer,
and may buy good B if his temptation coe¢ cient       i   is su¢ ciently high relative to the price
of the good. The following proposition summarizes these choices in detail, with the proof
provided in the appendix.

Proposition 2 A strong-willed consumer with commitment utility u
                                                               ~A will purchase good A
if it is o¤ered at a price below his reservation value pA         ~A ; and always reject good B . A
                                                                  u
weak-willed consumer with commitment utility u
                                             ~A and temptation coe¢ cient                 i   will purchase
good A if it is o¤ered at a price below his reservation value pA          ~A ; and purchase good B
                                                                          u
                                                                                                pB
if it is on the menu and if his temptation coe¢ cient      i   is su¢ ciently high:   i          v
                                                                                                   :

                                              13
   This proposition reveals that both strong-willed and weak-willed consumers may reject
good A if their random utility for the good happens to be lower than its price. This possibility
prevents seller A from imposing price discrimination on any consumer. Ex ante, all strong-
willed and weak-willed consumers still prefer to receive the advertisement of good A so that
they can bene...t from a high realization of their random utility for the good. This bene...t
motivates both strong-willed and weak-willed consumers to share their data with seller A.
   Proposition 2 also shows that even when good B is on their menu, only those weak-willed
consumers with a su¢ ciently high temptation coe¢ cient       i   will buy it. Those with a modest
temptation (   i   < pB =v ) resist it but still su¤er a mental cost of   iv   uB from exercising
self-control. Those with strong temptation buy good B and su¤er from not only paying the
price of pB to purchase the good, but also from enduring the negative commitment utility
of uB that this purchase entails.

2.2    Equilibrium With No Data Sharing
We ...rst analyze a benchmark scheme in which the platform does not collect or share any
consumer data with sellers. As a result, sellers have no information about any consumer'
                                                                                       s
type. The following proposition characterizes the equilibrium.

Proposition 3 With no data sharing (NS), there exists a unique equilibrium with the fol-
lowing properties:

                                             NS
  1. Seller A randomly advertises good A to zA  measure of consumers:
                                  (     (      r              ) )
                        NS                          1     F
                       zA  = min max 1 2                    ;0 ;1 ;                            (4)
                                                  S + W u

                               1
      at a uniform price: pN S
                           A = 2 u:

                                             NS
  2. Seller B randomly advertises good B to zB  measure of consumers:
                                     (     (     r         ) )
                          NS                        1  F
                         zB   = min max 1 2              ;0 ;1 ;                               (5)
                                                    W v

                               1
      at a uniform price: pN S
                           B = 2 v:


   Under this benchmark scheme of no data sharing, the sellers' undirected advertising
leads to a source of ine¢ ciency. As a result, seller A limits its advertising to a small pool of

                                                 14
                                                                              NS
potential consumers. Equation (4) shows that seller A'
                                                     s advertising intensity zA  decreases
with its cost parameter F , and increases with             S   +   W   (the fraction of intended consumers
in the population) and u (which determines the price of good A). As shown by Equation (5),
anonymity protects weak-willed consumers from being targeted by seller B . Without any
knowledge about the reservation value of their consumers, both sellers charge all consumers
                                                1                      1
the same prices for the goods, pN
                                A
                                  S
                                    =           2
                                                  u   and pN
                                                           B
                                                             S
                                                               =       2
                                                                         v,   which implies that the sellers'
advertisements are accepted by their intended consumers half of the time.

2.3    Equilibrium With Full Data Sharing
We now consider a very di¤erent scheme under which the platform is able to collect con-
sumers'data and therefore to determine not only the mental state of each consumer (i) but
also the severity of each weak-willed customer'
                                              s temptation coe¢ cient                  i:   While this assump-
tion exaggerates the current power of big data analytics, the rapid development of innovative
data analytics over the years is moving us closer to this instructive limiting case. By sharing
the data with goods sellers, the platform allows sellers to use di¤erent advertising and pricing
strategies for di¤erent types of consumers.
   As strong-willed and weak-willed consumers have the same preference for good A and
their purchase decision regarding good A is not a¤ected by good B , there is no need for seller
                                                                      FS
A to di¤erentiate strong-willed and weak-willed consumers. We denote zA  as the measure
of strong-willed and weak-willed consumers, to whom seller A advertises its good at a price
of pF S                                            FS
                                        s optimal zA
    A . Proposition 4 derives the seller'             and pF S
                                                           A . Data sharing allows seller A

to achieve a higher level of e¢ ciency by avoiding advertising to the type-O consumers who
would never buy good A: As a result of the improved e¢ ciency, seller A advertises more with
                                                  FS                NS
full data sharing than with no sharing, that is, zA                zA  , which in turn implies that both
strong-willed and weak-willed consumers have a strictly higher probability of being covered
by seller A. As the seller does not know the reservation value of the targeted consumers, it
                                  1
again charges the same price pF S
                              A = 2 u.

   Access to consumer data also allows seller B to focus its advertising on weak-willed con-
sumers. Furthermore, since seller B also observes the severity of each weak-willed customer'
                                                                                           s
temptation, it will price discriminate against each targeted weak-willed consumer by charging
his full reservation value, pB ( i ) =   i v;   which is the net utility cost of resisting temptation.
Such price discrimination in turn motivates the seller to concentrate its advertising only


                                                      15
on the most tempted consumers, that is, those with           i   higher than a threshold ^ F S . As a
result, full data sharing allows seller B to precisely target weak-willed consumers at greater
intensity than under the no data sharing scheme and to perfectly price discriminate against
them.
   We summarize the equilibrium in the following proposition.

Proposition 4 With full data sharing (FS), there exists a unique equilibrium with the fol-
lowing properties:

                                      FS
  1. Seller A advertises its good to zA  measure of strong-willed and weak-willed consumers:
                                      (     (      r       )          )
                            FS                        F
                           zA  = min max 1 2             ;0 ; S + W
                                                       u

                             1
      at the same price pF S
                         A = 2 u:

                                                                                                                        FS
                                                                                                                       zB
  2. Seller B advertises its good to all weak-willed consumers with                           i     ^F S = 1               W
                                                                                                                                   ;
             FS
      where zB  is the total   advertising by seller B :
               8               v                          v
               >               u                          u                                           !2
               >
               <2 +            u             3            u                               3                                                6
                               u   1                 F                   1                      WF                 1
                                                         +t
                                3
   FS
  zB = min
                       W       t         W
                                               +
                                                   W                                 W
                                                                                              +
                                                                                                                                       W
               >
               >     3                 3           2v                            3              2v                             3
               :
                     v                               v                                                                                 9
                     u                               u                                        !2                                       >
                     u                 3             u                       3                                         6               >
                                                                                                                                       =
                     u
                     3   1                     WF    t   1                           WF               1
                     t             W
                                           +
                                                                     W
                                                                                 +
                                                                                                               W
                                                                                                                           ;       W       ;
                               3               2v                3                   2v                    3                           >
                                                                                                                                       >
                                                                                                                                       ;

           FS
      and zB  is weakly increasing in v and decreasing in F: Furthermore, seller B charges
      each consumer a price equal to his reservation utility pB ( i ) =                       iv.


   Data sharing strictly bene...ts strong-willed consumers by improving their access to the
normal good but presents a trade-o¤ to weak-willed consumers. On the one hand, they have
better access to the normal good, which improves their welfare; on the other, they are also
more exposed to the temptation good, which hurts their welfare. As a consequence, the net
e¤ect is ambiguous. As each weak-willed consumer su¤ers from the negative commitment
utility uB of the temptation good, the utilitarian welfare of weak-willed consumers is increas-
ing in uB : Proposition 5 shows that when the temptation problem of weak-willed consumers
is su¢ ciently severe, that is, uB is lower than a critical level, full data sharing reduces the

                                                    16
welfare of weak-willed consumers by so much that it even reduces social welfare relative to
no data sharing.

Proposition 5 There exists a critical level of uB ; below which full data sharing lowers social
welfare relative to no data sharing.

       The comparison of the schemes with no data sharing and with full data sharing highlights
a trade-o¤ brought by data sharing-- it improves the e¢ ciency of seller A in covering its
intended consumers at the expense of exposing weak-willed consumers to the temptation
good. This trade-o¤ motivates the enactment of privacy regulations that allow each consumer
to opt in or out of data sharing. We explore two examples of such regulations in the next
section.


3        Opt-In and Opt-Out Regulations
The General Data Privacy Regulation (GDPR) enacted by the European Union and the Cal-
ifornia Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) aim to protect consumer privacy by giving consumers
the right to opt in or out of data sharing with digital platforms. These regulations o¤er the
promise of a Pareto e¢ cient outcome since strong-willed consumers can choose to opt in, and
consequently bene...t from data sharing, while severely tempted consumers can choose to opt
out, and consequently protect themselves from the temptation good. The GDPR and CCPA
di¤er, however, in a key default feature-- the GDPR empowers consumers with the initial
allocation of rights to their personal data and allows digital platforms to collect consumer
data only after explicit consumer authorization, while the CCPA gives businesses the initial
rights to collect consumer data and allows consumers to opt out of data collection through
an explicit request.
       In this section, we analyze whether these regulations can provide su¢ cient protection to
consumers. Speci...cally, we allow each consumer to choose whether to share his data with
the platform, which then shares the data, if allowed by the consumer, with both sellers.15
Under the GDPR, the default choice is opt-out if a consumer is indi¤erent, while under the
CCPA, the default is opt-in. This default choice directly determines the choice of the type-O
consumers in our model.
  15
     Note that we do not allow consumers to separately choose whether to share data with each seller. As
no one would choose to share data with sellers of temptation goods without other bene...ts, temptation good
sellers, in practice, would bundle their data-share requests with certain conveniences or bene...ts. In our
model, the improved access to the normal good serves as such a bene...t.


                                                    17
3.1       The GDPR
We ...rst analyze the equilibrium under the GDPR. Since strong-willed consumers strictly
bene...t from having their data shared with seller A and are not concerned with seller B ,
it is straightforward to see that all strong-willed consumers opt in to data sharing. As the
type-O consumers are not interested in either good in the platform, there is neither gain
nor loss for them from data sharing; as such, they are indi¤erent between opting in and
opting out. As opting out is the default choice of the GDPR, the type-O consumers opt
out of data sharing, given that it would take extra e¤ort for an indi¤erent consumer to opt
in. There is now, however, a nontrivial choice for each weak-willed consumer. By opting
in for data sharing, weak-willed consumers bene...t from the improved access to good A but
are also more exposed to the temptation good. It is intuitive to conjecture that weak-willed
consumers with su¢ ciently high temptation coe¢ cient                           i;   that is, higher than a critical level
 GDP R                                                                                                                  GDP R
          ; will choose to opt out of data sharing, while those with                              i   lower than                   will
opt in.
      The utility of a weak-willed customer that opts in with data sharing is
                        GDP R        Z u
 GDP R
                       zA;in
UW;in      ( i) =            GDP   R
                                         max u ~A pGDP     R
                                                       A;in ; 0 dH (~ uA )                                                         (6)
                   S + W              0
                                   0                                                                                               1
                      GDP R
                    z
                    ^B;in   (d i )
                  +                @uB pGDPB;in
                                                R
                                                  ( i ) 1( pGDP R ( i ) )                              iv1
                                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                   pGDP R ( i )
                                                                                                                                  )A ;
                         Wd i                              i
                                                               B;in
                                                                   v                                          i<
                                                                                                                    B;in
                                                                                                                        v



       GDP R
where zA;in  is the total advertising by seller A to the opt-in pool at price pGDP R
                                                                               A;in , z
                                                                                        GDP R
                                                                                      ^B;in   (d i ) 2
[0;   W]d i   is the advertising intensity of seller B to opt-in consumers with temptation co-
e¢ cient     i;   and pGDP R
                       B;in ( i ) is the price that seller B charges them. Note that the con-

sumer'
     s utility is determined by his conditional probability of being targeted by both sellers,
     GDP R
    zA;in               z GDP R (d )
                        ^B;in      i
 S + W
          GDP R   and       Wd i
                                     .     His utility from opt-out is

                                       GDP R            Z       u
   GDP R
                                      zA;out
  UW;out    ( i) =                              GDP R
                                                             max u
                                                                 ~A           pGDP  R
                                                                               A;out ; 0 dH (~
                                                                                             uA )                                     (7)
                          1       S         W               0
                                                            0                                                                     1
                                           GDP R
                                          zB;out
                          +                                 @u B         pGDP  R (
                                                                          B;out 1        pGDP R
                                                                                                  )
                                                                                                        iv1
                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                     pGDP R
                                                                                                                              )A ;
                              1                     GDP R                                 B;out                       B;out
                                      S         W                                    i      v                  i<       v



       GDP R
where zA;out is the total advertising by seller A to the opt-out pool at price pGDP  R
                                                                                A;out , and
 GDP R
zB;out is the total advertising by seller B to the opt-out pool at price pGDP  R
                                                                          B;out : For a consumer



                                                                    18
to opt in for data sharing, it must be the case that

                                         GDP R               GDP R
                                        UW;in  ( i)         UW;out ( i) :

       The following proposition characterizes the equilibrium under the GDPR.

Proposition 6 Suppose u < 8 (v                  uB ) ; then there exists an equilibrium under the GDPR
with the following properties:

   1. All strong-willed consumers opt in, and a weak-willed consumer chooses to opt in if
                GDP R                              GDP R             GDP R
          i             and opt out if    i   >            ; where           is the unique root of Equation
         (22) in (0; 1).

                                                                                       1
   2. Seller A charges the opt-in and opt-out pools the same price: pGDP
                                                                     A;in
                                                                          R
                                                                            = pGDP  R
                                                                               A;out = 2 u;

         and adopts a water-...lling advertising strategy with priority to the opt-in pool:
                        (         r                     )
          GDP R                      F
         zA;in  = min 1 2              ; S + GDP R W ;
                                     u
                        (         (      s                                     )                                         )
                                           1           GDP R
          GDP R                                  S            W F      GDP R                                GDP R
         zA;out = min max 1 2                       GDP R )
                                                                     zA;in ; 0 ; 1      S                            W       :
                                             (1             W   u

   3. Seller B also adopts a water-...lling advertising strategy with priority to the opt-in pool
         by targeting tempted consumers with           i   2 ^ GDP R ;   GDP R
                                                                                  and charging their reserva-
         tion utility: pGDP
                        B;in
                             R
                               ( i) =    i v:   After it exhausts the most-tempted in the opt-in pool,
                                             GDP R
         seller B may also target a measure zB;out of consumers in the opt-out pool by charg-
                                                     1
         ing a ...xed price of pGDP  R
                                B;out = max          2
                                                       ; GDP R v: Its total advertising in the         opt-in pool
          GDP R                                  GDP R
         zB;in  and in the opt-out pool         zB;out   is given by Equations (19) and (20).

                                                                                        1       2
   4. It is su¢ cient, although not necessary, for u < 4F 1                       S     2   W       to ensure that
         the equilibrium is unique.16

       Proposition 6 con...rms that weak-willed consumers follow a cuto¤ strategy to opt in
and out of data sharing-- those with mild temptation (low                        i)   opt in, while those with
severe temptation (high        i)   opt out. This is intuitive since weak-willed customers with mild
temptation bene...t more from the better coverage from seller A than the temptation they
  16
    Although we provide a su¢ cient condition for a cuto¤ equilibrium to be unique, we ...nd numerically
that such an equilibrium appears to be unique for a much wider range of u:


                                                        19
su¤er from the intensi...ed exposure to seller B: In contrast, severely tempted weak-willed
consumers are willing to forego the bene...t of better coverage from seller A to mitigate the
temptation cost of being targeted by seller B . Since seller B can e¢ ciently target weak-
willed consumers in the opt-in pool, it gives higher priority to target the most tempted in
the opt-in pool and charges them the full reservation value of their temptation. Only after
seller B exhausts the most-tempted in the opt-in pool, and equates the marginal revenues
from advertising to the opt-in and opt-out pools, may it also target some in the opt-out pool
by charging a ...xed price, equal to the maximum between 1
                                                         2
                                                           v and      GDP R
                                                                              v:
   Seller B '
            s priority to cover the opt-in pool ensures that the most-tempted consumers
will choose opt-out and therefore hide in the opt-out pool from seller B . This protection
is weakened by the opt-in decisions of other consumers, that is, strong-willed and modestly
weak-willed consumers. Their departure from the opt-out pool reduces the camouage of
                                                GDP R
                                               zB;out
those severely weak-willed and increases   1   S    W
                                                        ; the probability of weak-willed in the
opt-out pool being targeted by seller B . In this sense, there is a negative externality in
the opt-in decisions of strong-willed and modestly weak-willed consumers, as their decisions
do not account for the potential e¤ect on other consumers with severe temptation. This
externality echoes the notion of social data put forth by Acemoglu et al. (2019), Bergemann,
Bonatti and Gan (2019), and Easley et al. (2019) that data have an important social
dimension, as each individual'
                             s data also reveals information about others. The presence of
this externality suggests that simply allowing consumers to opt in or out of data sharing
may not be su¢ cient for consumers with severe temptation to protect themselves.

3.2    The CCPA
The CCPA makes opt-in the default choice for each consumer and thus makes all type-O
consumers opt in for data sharing. This key di¤erence leads to a very di¤erent equilib-
rium under the CCPA than under the GDPR. First, when type-O consumers, who are the
consumers that seller A needs to avoid, are all identi...ed, seller A can perfectly target all
strong-willed and weak-willed customers, including those that opt out. The default opt-in
choice of type-O consumers therefore induces a positive externality by allowing seller A to
perfectly cover weak-willed consumers in the opt-out pool. This positive externality high-
lights a subtle bene...t of data sharing and provides a justi...cation for the CCPA approach
over the GDPR approach, albeit at the expense of removing type-O consumers from the


                                               20
opt-out pool to hide severely weak-willed consumers from seller B:
   Second, as seller A symmetrically covers both the opt-in and opt-out pools, strong-willed
consumers are also indi¤erent between opt-in and opt-out and would opt in by default. The
opt-in of strong-willed and type-O consumers exposes all weak-willed consumers to seller
B . Nevertheless, seller B still faces a challenge in sorting out their degrees of temptation,
since seller B cannot directly observe the temptation coe¢ cients of weak-willed consumers
in the opt-out pool. As advertising to consumers with prices higher than their reservation
values would lead to rejection, it is optimal for seller B to strategically commit not to target
                                                                                           CCP A
weak-willed consumers in the opt-in pool with           i   lower than a cuto¤ of                    . This strategy
bifurcates the pool of weak-willed consumers and segregates the severely tempted consumers
above the cuto¤ in the opt-out pool. Thus, seller B can improve its advertising e¢ ciency to
this group of most-tempted consumers and maximize its net pro...t.
   The following proposition characterizes the equilibrium under the CCPA.

Proposition 7 The equilibrium under the CCPA has the following properties:

  1. All strong-willed consumers opt in, and all weak-willed consumers follow a cuto¤ strat-
                                                   1
      egy of choosing opt-in if    i
                                       CCP A
                                               =   2
                                                        and opt-out if     i   >   CCP A
                                                                                                   =1
                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                      :

  2. Seller A charges consumers in the opt-in and opt-out pools the same prices pCCP
                                                                                 A
                                                                                     A
                                                                                       =1
                                                                                        2
                                                                                          u;
      and advertises to the strong and weak-willed consumers in the opt-in and opt-out pools
      in the same way as under full data sharing:
                                     (      (     r                  )                     )
                          CCP A                                  F
                         zA     = min max 1                  2     ;0 ;   S    +   W           :
                                                                 u

  3. Seller B chooses the following advertising intensity for weak-willed consumers in the
      opt-out pool:                        (            (         r       )        )
                              CCP A                                   F      1
                             zB;out = min max 1                  2      ;0 ;           :
                                                                      v      2
                                                  1
      and charges them a ...xed price of pCCP  A
                                          B;out = 2 v; and commits not to advertise to con-

      sumers in the opt-in pool.

   Proposition 7 shows the sharply di¤erent equilibrium outcomes under the CCPA than
under the GDPR. Under the CCPA, seller B strategically commits not to target the half of
mildly tempted consumers in the opt-in pool and instead focuses on the other half of severely

                                                   21
                                                                                1
tempted consumers in the opt-out pool by charging them a high price of pCCP  A
                                                                        B;out = 2 v . In

contrast, under the GDPR, seller B gives higher priority to the relatively more tempted
consumers in the opt-in pool because its targeting e¢ ciency of those even more tempted
consumers in the opt-out pool is relatively poor given the presence of type-O consumers in
the pool. Only after it exhausts the more tempted ones in the opt-in pool does it start to
target those in the opt-out pool.
   More generally, by making opt-in the default choice, the CCPA makes consumer data
more accessible to sellers, which brings both a bene...t and a cost relative to the GDPR. From
a bene...t perspective, seller A is able to fully identify its intended consumers, including those
weak-willed consumers in the opt-out pool. From a cost perspective, seller B is also able to
fully identify all weak-willed consumers in both the opt-in and opt-out pools, albeit without
the full information of the degree of temptation of those in the opt-out pool.

3.3    Welfare Comparison
In this subsection, we compare the welfare consequences of the four data sharing schemes
that we have analyzed: no data sharing, full data sharing, the GDPR, and the CCPA.
   Under a given data sharing scheme, recall from Equation (3) that social welfare is de-
termined by the aggregate utility of all strong-willed and weak-willed consumers over the
two consumption goods, under the assumptions that the marginal cost of good production
is zero and that the prices of goods and the cost of advertising are all zero-sum transfers
within the population. As seller A cannot price discriminate against its customers (with the
consumers'random utility for good A), it always charges a price of u=2 for its good, resulting
in only half of the intended consumers having their random utility above u=2 to consume
the good. As a result, the consumers'net utility gain from good A is 3
                                                                     8
                                                                       u              A;   where    A   is the
measure of strong-willed and weak-willed consumers that receive seller A'
                                                                        s advertising. For
good B , the weak-willed consumers who purchase the good (with a measure of                    B)   su¤er a
negative utility of uB < 0, while those who receive the advertising from seller B but resist
the temptation (which we mark in a set SB ) su¤er a mental cost of uB                iv.   Taken together,
the social welfare is
                                                     Z
                            3
                         W = u    A   + uB   B   +          (uB   i v ) dG ( i ) :
                            8                        i2SB

Note that   A;   B,   and SB are determined by the sellers'advertising and pricing strategies
under each of the data sharing schemes. Except under no data sharing, seller B chooses an

                                                     22
optimal advertising strategy in which its advertising is always accepted by its targeted weak-
willed consumers, that is, SB is empty in equilibrium. As such, across these data sharing
schemes, the key trade-o¤ is between the ...rst term (the bene...t from good A) and the second
and third terms (the cost from good B ).

Proposition 8 The social ranking of full data sharing, no data sharing, the GDPR and the
CCPA, has the following properties:

     The full data sharing scheme is strictly dominated by the CCPA.

     The CCPA gives the highest social welfare if the temptation problem of weak-willed
     consumers is su¢ ciently modest, that is, uB is close to zero.

     The no data sharing scheme gives the highest welfare if the temptation problem is
     su¢ ciently severe, that is, uB is su¢ ciently negative.

     There may exist an intermediate range of uB such that the GDPR gives the highest
     social welfare.

   Proposition 8 ...rst shows that the full data sharing scheme is always dominated by the
CCPA. This is because the CCPA allows seller A to fully identify its intended consumers and
thus provides the same coverage to both strong-willed and weal-willed consumers as under
full data sharing. At the same time, the CCPA provides some, albeit imperfect, protection
to weak-willed consumers against seller B . This ranking consequently supports the common
wisdom that giving each consumer the choice to opt out of data sharing helps to improve
social welfare. The CCPA, however, may or may not be the most desirable scheme relative
to the other two data sharing schemes.
   Which scheme among no data sharing, the GDPR, and the CCPA gives the highest social
welfare depends on the trade-o¤ between improving the matching e¢ ciency of seller A with
both strong-willed and weak-willed consumers and protecting weak-willed consumers from
seller B . Generally speaking, by making consumer data the most accessible, the CCPA o¤ers
the best matching e¢ ciency with seller A but the worst protection of weak-willed consumers
from seller B . The no data sharing scheme lies at the other end of the spectrum-- it o¤ers
the worst matching e¢ ciency with seller A but the best protection of weak-willed consumers
from seller B: The GDPR lies in the middle along both dimensions. As a result of this


                                             23
trade-o¤, Proposition 8 shows that the CCPA is the most desirable scheme if the temptation
problem of weak-willed consumers is su¢ ciently modest, that is, with uB close to zero, while
no data sharing is the most desirable scheme if the temptation problem is su¢ ciently severe,
that is, uB su¢ ciently negative. The GDPR may be the most desirable in an intermediate
range of uB that balances both the bene...ts and costs of data sharing.




4     Conclusion
In this paper, we develop a model in which data sharing between consumers and ...rms may
be harmful to consumers in the presence of temptation. While data sharing improves the
matching between consumers and sellers of normal goods, it also allows sellers of temptation
goods to target weak-willed consumers. Our model allows us to analyze the advertising
and pricing strategies of normal goods and temptation goods sellers and the data sharing
strategies of consumers under di¤erent data sharing schemes. These schemes include not
only the primitive extremes of no data sharing and full data sharing, but also the more
elaborate arrangements adopted by the GDPR and the CCPA that allow each consumer to
opt in or opt out of data sharing. Our analysis highlights several general insights about the
welfare consequences of data sharing.
    First, it is bene...cial to give each consumer the choice of opting in or opting out of data
sharing, as illustrated by the dominance of the CCPA over the full data sharing scheme.
    Second, giving each consumer the data sharing choice does not necessarily lead to the
most desirable social e¢ ciency as a result of the presence of data sharing externalities-- that
the sharing of data with sellers by one consumer may also a¤ect the welfare of other con-
sumers because it allows sellers to infer their preferences and behaviors. This externality can
be either positive or negative. By letting normal goods sellers better cover their intended
consumers, data sharing leads to a positive externality on other consumers, which provides
a justi...cation for making consumer data more widely accessible to ...rms. By allowing temp-
tation goods sellers to more easily target weak-willed consumers, however, data sharing may
also generate a negative externality, which motivates the regulation of data collection and
sharing. As a result of this negative externality, no data sharing may deliver the highest
social welfare when the temptation problem is su¢ ciently severe.
    Third, the default choice in the data sharing scheme can have substantial e¤ects on the


                                              24
equilibrium outcomes, as reected by the di¤erences between the equilibria under the GDPR
and the CCPA. As part of the consumer population may be indi¤erent to sharing or not
sharing their data, the default choice makes the data of these indi¤erent consumers auto-
matically available or unavailable to sellers, which in turn a¤ects other consumers because
of the presence of data sharing externalities. The CCPA makes opt-in the default choice to
maximize the positive externality of data sharing, while the GDPR makes opt-out the default
choice, which gives a more balanced trade-o¤ between the positive and negative externalities
of data sharing. Interestingly, our analysis shows that the GDPR may deliver the highest
social welfare when the temptation problem is in an intermediate range, while the CCPA
is most desirable when the temptation problem is su¢ ciently modest. The result that the
CCPA may dominate the GDPR is surprising as the GDPR is commonly regarded to be
more protective of consumers.
   Fourth, our analysis also highlights that each consumer'
                                                          s data sharing choice represents a
subtle trade-o¤ between cost and bene...t, which are determined by not only the consumer'
                                                                                        s
own choice but also the choices of others and the overall data sharing scheme of the platform.
This subtle trade-o¤ o¤ers a potential explanation for the so-called privacy paradox that,
despite the tendency for consumers to state their concerns about their data privacy in surveys,
they often appear to freely share their data with ...rms and digital platforms, see, for example,
Athey et al. (2017) and Tang (2019). Our analysis ultimately suggests that consumers may
be willing to share their data, despite their concerns about data privacy, if the bene...t
outweighs the cost.




                                               25
Appendix A              Privacy Law in the EU and the US
The General Data Privacy Regulation (GDPR) came into force across the European Union on
May 25, 2018. It applies to the processing of personal data by businesses established within
the European Union and, importantly, to businesses outside the European Union if their
data collection activities are related to individuals in the European Union. The GDPR gives
European Union citizens more control over their personal data. For example, it empowers
users with the right to access and get a copy of their data from internet service providers,
erase their data from businesses ("the right to be forgotten"    ), and freely move their data
on one internet platform to another (data portability). The GDPR imposes serious ...nes for
infringement of rights and noncompliance, which are as high as $20 million or 4 percent of
annual revenue of a ...rm.
    There are two basic models of legal arrangements for privacy and data protection: opt-
in and opt-out. Under the opt-in regime, data collectors must obtain consumers' explicit
consent before collecting, using, and sharing their personal information. The GDPR adopts
the opt-in system, and it also requires consent to be freely given, speci...c, informed and
unambiguous. In contrast, in the opt-out regime, data collectors can collect and share non-
public consumer information with third parties, but need to give consumers an opportunity
to deny them permission to do so (i.e., opt out). The fundamental di¤erence between opt-in
and opt-out regimes is the initial allocation of the property rights over personal informa-
tion. In the opt-in regime, the rights are assigned to consumers by default, whereas in the
opt-out system, the entitlements are allocated to ...rms, though consumers have the right to
withdraw.
    The California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) became e¤ective on January 1, 2020.
Absent a comprehensive federal privacy law, the CCPA is considered to be one of the most
signi...cant legislative privacy developments in the United States. Its impact is global given
the scale of California'  s economy. The CCPA adopts the opt-out regime. By default, ...rms
can collect customer data and share them with third parties. The CCPA protects consumers
by requiring ...rms to allow California consumers to make the following requests: (1) to
provide information about what personal information ...rms have collected and whom ...rms
have shared consumer information with, (2) to delete consumer information, or (3) not to
sell consumer information. After a consumer opts out, a business cannot sell the consumer'   s
information without the consumer'      s written consent, and the business cannot ask for that
consent for 12 months after the consumer opts out.




                                             26
Appendix B                Proofs of Propositions
B.1     Proof of Proposition 2
We ...rst consider a strong-willed consumer, that is,                   (i) = S , who has the following prefer-
ences over di¤erent menus:

                               US (fA; ;g) = max fu
                                                  ~A                       pA ; 0g ;
                               US (fB; ;g) = 0:

Consequently, seller A will buy good A if u
                                          ~ A pA :
   Consider now a weak-willed consumer, (i) = W; with the following preferences:

                           UW (fA; ;g) = max fu
                                              ~A                        pA ; 0g ;
                           UW (fB; ;g) = uB + max f pB ;                                ivg :


Choosing B from the menu fB; ;g is optimal if buying B delivers higher utility:                        pB >    i v;
which is equivalent to i > pv
                            B
                              :

B.2     Proof of Proposition 3
Given the advertising and pricing strategies of seller A; Proposition 2 implies that the quan-
tity of goods sold by seller A is

                           QN S
                            A = (         S   +        NS
                                                  W ) zA          1    H pN S
                                                                          A =u              ;                  (8)

and consequently the seller'
                           s pro...t net of the advertisement cost is
                                                                                              NS
                   NS                                                                        zA
                   A    = pN S
                           A (   S   +         NS
                                          W ) zA     1       H pN S
                                                                A =u                    F       NS
                                                                                                   :           (9)
                                                                                            1 zA

Similarly, the quantity of goods sold by seller B is

                                 QN S
                                  B =
                                                 NS
                                              W zB       1        G pN S
                                                                     B =v           ;                         (10)

and the net pro...t of seller B is
                                                                                      NS
                         NS                                                          zB
                         B    = pN
                                 B
                                   S        NS
                                         W zB  1         G pN S
                                                            B =v                F       NS
                                                                                           :
                                                                                    1 zB
                                         NS           NS
Technological feasibility requires that zA    0 and zB     0:
                                                               NS
   The ...rst-order condition of Equation (9) with respect to zA  is
                                                                   NS
                                                                  zA
                                       pN S NS
                                        A QA = F                           2:                                 (11)
                                                                       NS
                                                             (1       zA  )


                                                      27
Then, we have that
                                                                                                 !                  2
                                            NS                     NS                     NS                 NS
           NS                              zA                     zA                     zA                 zA
           A    =     pN S NS
                       A QA        F               =F                                                 =F                :
                                       1      NS
                                             zA                      NS 2          1        NS
                                                                                           zA              1 zANS
                                                            (1     zA  )
                                                       NS
Similarly, the ...rst-order condition with respect to zB  is
                                                                         NS
                                                                        zB
                                                 pN S NS
                                                  B QB = F                          2;
                                                                             NS
                                                                   (1       zB  )

which further implies that
                                                                    NS          2
                                                   NS              zB
                                                   B    =F            NS
                                                                                    :
                                                                  1 zB
    The ...rst-order conditions for the goods prices set by the two sellers are

                                               pN
                                                A
                                                  S
                                   QN
                                    A
                                      S
                                        =           ( S + W ) zANS
                                                                   1f0                   pN S u ;
                                                                                               g                            (12)
                                                u                                         A

                                               pN S W zBNS
                                   QN
                                    B
                                      S
                                             = B           1f0 pN S vg :                                                    (13)
                                                    v           B



   Note that the expected quantities sold by both sellers, QN   S     NS
                                                               A and QB ; are nonnegative,
and the net pro...ts with respect to prices are concave, since

                        d2  NS
                            A                2                   NS
                                    =          (   S   +    W ) zA h        pN S
                                                                             A =u 1f0         pN S u
                                                                                                    g      0;
                           NS 2              u
                       d (pA )                                                                 A


                        d2 NB
                              S
                                                     NS       NS       1
                                    =        2    W zB g                 1                       0:
                                                                       v f0   pN     g
                                                                                 S v
                             S 2
                       d (pN
                           B )
                                                                               B



It follows that optimal prices will always be nonnegative. Since

                                             d2  NS
                                                 A                      F
                                                        =     2                     < 0;
                                                NS 2                     NS    3
                                            d (zA )               (1    zA  )
        d2 N   S
and   dpN
             A
           S dz N S   = 0; it follows that the Hessian for seller A'
                                                                   s optimization with respect to
         A     A
 pN
  A
    S
      ; zA
          NS
               negative de...nite and that the FOCs are su¢ cient.
                 is
    For strong-willed consumers, there are two possibilities: pN     S              NS
                                                                    A 2 [0; u] or pA 62 [0; u] : If
pN S                         NS           NS
 A 62 [0; u] ; then either pA = 0 or pA > u; neither of which generates revenue for seller
A; and advertising is costly. Consequently, it must be the case that pN        A
                                                                                 S
                                                                                   2 [0; u] : Then,
                                       NS       1
Equations (8) and (12) imply that pA = 2 u:
    Similarly, for seller B; if pN
                                 B
                                   S
                                     62 [0; v ] ; then either pN
                                                               B
                                                                 S
                                                                   = 0 or pN
                                                                           B
                                                                             S
                                                                                > v: Neither case
                                                            NS
generates any revenue, but advertising is costly. If pB 2 [0; v ] ; then Equations (10) and
                    1
(13) imply pN  S
              B = 2 v:




                                                                 28
                      NS      NS                         NS      NS
   From the FOCs for zA  and zB  ; it then follows that zA  and zB  satisfy

                                      S    +    W                1
                                                     u =                   2;
                                           4F               (1   zANS
                                                                      )
                                                W                1
                                                     v =                   2:
                                                4F          (1      NS
                                                                   zB  )

Then, we have
                                r                                               r
                     NS                    1         4F        NS                   1 4F
                    zA  =1                              ; and zB  =1                     :
                                       S   +     W    u                             W v

                                                                    NS
Thus, the equilibrium for the two sellers is unique. Note that if zA      0; then seller
                                               NS
A advertises to zero consumers. Similarly, if zB     0; then seller B advertises to zero
consumers.

B.3     Proof of Proposition 4
With full data sharing, sellers can now separately advertise to strong-willed and weak-willed
consumers. We ...rst consider the optimal advertisement and pricing policies of seller A: It
shall be clear that seller A would always avoid advertising to the third type of consumer,
and that seller A does not need to di¤erentiate strong-willed and weak-willed consumers.
             FS
We denote zA     as the measure of strong-willed and weak-willed consumers, to which seller
A advertises, and pF  S
                     A as the price the seller sets.
   Proposition 2 implies that strong-willed and weak-willed consumers use the same thresh-
old pF S
      A =u in their random utility u  ~A for purchasing good A. Thus, the sales of seller A
is
                                 QF S
                                   A = zA
                                          FS
                                              1 H pF   S
                                                      A =u   ;
and the net pro...t of seller A is
                                                                               FS
                           FS                                                 zA
                           A    =   pF S FS
                                     A zA        1    H    pF S
                                                            A =u           F     FS
                                                                                    :
                                                                             1 zA
                                                                                           1
Following the same proof for Proposition 3, it is optimal for seller A to set a price pF S
                                                                                       A = 2 u:
                                             FS
The ...rst-order condition with respect to zA   implies that
                                                    r
                                          FS           F
                                         zA  =1 2        :
                                                       u
                     q
Like before, if 1 2 F   u
                            0, it is optimal for the seller to advertise to no consumers. That
                                    q
     FS
is, zA  = 0: Furthermore, if 1 2 F     u
                                          > S + W , then zA  FS
                                                                = S + W:
    We now consider the policies of seller B . Seller B will advertise only to weak-willed
consumers. Since seller B can discriminate by temptation types, it will exercise ...rst-degree

                                                       29
price discrimination by charging a weak-willed consumer his full reservation value: pF S
                                                                                     B ( i) =
                                                  FS
 i v: It can also make its advertising strategy z
                                                ^B   dependent on i . Since consumers with
stronger temptation are willing to pay higher prices, seller B optimally prioritizes strong
temptation consumers:

                                  FS                    0; if        i   < ^F S
                               dz
                                ^B   ( i) =                                                    :
                                                     W d i ; if      i   2 ^F S ; 1

Thus, seller B '
               s pro...t is
                 Z 1                           FS                                    Z   1
         FS               FS                  zB                          FS                   FS
         B = v         iz
                        ^B   (d i )        F     FS
                                                           with          zB    =             z
                                                                                             ^B   (d i ) 2 [0;        W];
                      0                      1 zB                                    0
        R1      FS
where   0
              (d i ) is understood as a Riemann-Stieljes integral.
             i zB
                                                             R1                                                               1   (^F S )
                                                                                                                                            2

   Note that the expected revenue of seller B reduces to v ^F S                                    W   id   i   = v   W            2
                                                                                                                                                ;
                      FS
                     zB
where ^ F S = 1       W
                                    FS
                           ; since zB  2 [0;    W]:   Consequently, the expected revenue of seller B is
                FS
  FS         1 zB                                                            FS
vzB  1       2 W
                     ; which is determined by the seller'
                                                        s total advertising zB  . Consequently,
                                                            FS
we can rewrite seller B '
                        s maximization problem as choosing zB  :
                                           FS                FS
                     FS       FS        1 zB                zB                     FS
                     B    = vzB  1                     F       FS
                                                                             with zB  2 [0;                 W]:
                                        2 W                1 zB
                                FS
The ...rst-order condition for zB  is
                                                FS
                                               zB                        F
                                           1           v=                      2;
                                                                          FS
                                                 W              (1       zB  )

which is a cubic equation with one real, positive root. It then follows that
                      v                         v
                      u                         u                         !2
                      u            3            u               3                                                                       6
  FS       2+ W u     3
                      t   1    W         W F    t      1     W        W F                                             1           W
 zB =                                +        +                   +
               3             3           2v               3           2v                                                      3
             v                         v
             u                         u                         !2
             u            3            u               3                                                              6
             u
             3    1              F     t     1                 F         1
             t         W
                            +
                               W                   W
                                                         +
                                                             W                                                  W
                                                                                                                          :
                    3          2v                3           2v             3

Again, if this solution to the ...rst-order condition moves outside the feasible range [0; W ],
it is optimal for the seller to advertise at the corner value. Consequently, the equilibrium is
again unique.
                                                 FS
     Finally, rewriting the cubic equation for zB   as

                                                FS              FS   2         WF
                                       W       zB     1        zB        =           ;                                                 (14)
                                                                                 v

                                                          30
it follows that
                                                               FS   3            WF
                                                  W           zB                         ;
                                                                                 v
and consequently                                                        s
                                                  FS
                                                 zB                     3
                                                                                F
                                                               1                2
                                                                                     :
                                                   W                            Wv

Finally, applying the Implicit Function Theorem to Equation (14), one also has that
                          FS                                            WF
                        dzB                                             v2
                                   =                  2                                                       0;
                         dv            (1        FS
                                                zB  ) + 2(           W
                                                                                 FS
                                                                                zB  ) (1          FS
                                                                                                 zB  )
                          FS                                                W
                        dzB                                                 v
                                   =                      2                                                        0:
                         dF                (1     FS
                                                 zB  ) + 2(                 W
                                                                                     FS
                                                                                    zB  ) (1          FS
                                                                                                     zB  )

B.4     Proof of Proposition 5
                           FS      NS
It is easy to verify that zA      zA  : Without data sharing, the probability of a strong-willed
                                                          NS
or weak-willed consumer being covered by seller A is zA       ; with data sharing, the probability
      F
     zA S                                                        FS
                                                                zA
                FS     NS                                                NS
is S + W . As zA      zA   and S + W 1; it follows that S +         W
                                                                        zA  , and the inequality is
            FS
strict if zA > 0. Taken together, the conditional probability of a strong-willed or weak-willed
consumer being covered by seller A is higher with full data sharing.
    Across these two schemes with and without data sharing, seller A charges the same price
pA = p F
  NS        S
           A = u=2 for its good. From Equation (5), the social welfare under no data sharing
is given by
                            Z u                      Z 1                    Z pN S
                                                                               B =v
   NS                    NS         duA        NS                       NS
W         = ( S + W ) zA         uA      + W zB uB            d i + W zB            (uB    iv) d i
                              pA     u                pN
                                                       B
                                                         S =v                0

             3                   NS            NS                    1
       =       u(   S   +   W ) zA     +    W zB          uB           v :
             8                                                       8
With full data sharing, seller B can perfectly price discriminate against each targeted weak-
willed consumers. As a result, each targeted weak-willed consumer will purchase good B ,
and the social welfare is
                                             Z 1
                       FS     3 FS                       3 FS      FS
                    W = uzA + W uB                  d i = uzA   + zB  uB :
                              8                ^ FS      8
It then follows that
                             FS                                                                                  FS
                            zB                            1                      3                              zA
W FS    W NS =          W
                                        NS
                                       zB  uB +                   NS
                                                               W zB v           + u(         S   +   W)
                                                                                                                             NS
                                                                                                                            zA    < 0;
                               W                          8                      8                             S +      W

if uB < uB    where
                                                                     FS
                                                                    zA
                                                  S+ W                               NS     NS
                                            3u        W             S+ W
                                                                                    zA  + vzB
                               uB      =                             FS
                                                                    zB
                                                                                                          :
                                                                                 NS
                                                              8         W
                                                                                zB
That is, social welfare is lower with full data sharing than with no data sharing.

                                                                   31
B.5     Proof of Proposition 6
Sellers: We ...rst characterize the optimal strategies of both sellers taking the opt-in cuto¤ of
weak-will consumers GDP R as given. We start with the optimal strategy of seller A: Suppose
                             GDP R
that seller A advertises to zA;in  measure of strong-willed and weak-willed consumers in the
                       GDP R        GDP R
opt-in pool at price pA;in and zA;out      measure of consumers in the opt-out pool at price
 GDP R
pA;out . Then, the seller's expected pro...t, by the law of large numbers, is given by
                                                                                                                           !
                                            1          GDP R
                                                                    W                                            pGDP
                                                                                                                  A;out
                                                                                                                       R
               A       =                 GDP R )
                                                                                       pGDP  R GDP R
                                                                                        A;out zA;out         1
                               (1                      W   +1            S         W                               u
                                                                              !
                                                                   pGDP
                                                                    A;in
                                                                         R                   GDP R
                                                                                            zA;out    GDP R
                                                                                                   + zA;in
                               +pGDP R GDP R
                                 A;in zA;in                1                           F       GDP R     GDP R
                                                                                                               ;
                                                                     u                     1 zA;out    zA;in

        GDP R                              GDP R
where zA;out  2 [0; 1     S       W ] and zA;in  2 [0; S +      W ] : Note that an advertise-
ment to the opt-in pool reaches a strong or weak-willed consumer with perfect precision,
while one to the opt-out pool reaches a weak-willed consumer (who will buy the good) at a
                   (1 GDP R ) W
probability of (1 GDP R ) W +1 S W .
       GDP R            GDP R
   If zA;in  > 0 and zA;out   > 0; the FOCs for pGDP
                                                 A;in
                                                      R
                                                        and pGDP  R
                                                             A;out reveal that

                                                                         1
                                                       pGDP
                                                        A;in
                                                             R
                                                               = pGDP  R
                                                                  A;out = u:
                                                                         2
Then, the seller'
                s pro...t becomes
                                       GDP R                                                      GDP R    GDP R
                               1                   W       u GDP R u GDP R                       zA;out + zA;in
               A   =                                        z      + zA;in                    F                     :
                       1           S
                                          GDP R
                                                       W   4 A;out  4                               GDP R
                                                                                                1 zA;out      GDP R
                                                                                                            zA;in
                             GDP R                                    GDP R
The marginal pro...t from zA;in    is strictly higher than that from zA;out ; as the advertising
e¢ ciency to the opt-in pool is higher. Thus, seller A gives higher priority to the opt-in pool.
                                                  GDP R
    The ...rst-order condition with respect to zA;in    gives
                                                                   8         GDP R
                                                                   >
                                                                   > < 0 if zA;in  =0
                                                                   >
                                                                   >
           u                              1                        <
                                                                             GDP R
                   F                                           2
                                                                     = 0 if zA;in  2 0; S + GDP R                      W
           4               1        GDP R
                                   zA;out        GDP R
                                                zA;in              >
                                                                   >
                                                                   >
                                                                   >
                                                                   :         GDP R
                                                                     > 0 if zA;in  = S + GDP R W
                                                   u                 GDP R          GDP R
The parameter restriction F <                      4
                                                       ensures that zA;in  > 0. As zA;in  has higher priority
      GDP R
than zA;out , we have
                                                           (            r                                )
                                        GDP R                                F               GDP R
                                       zA;in  = min 1                2         ;   S    +            W       :                 (15)
                                                                             u



                                                                         32
      GDP R
If zA;in    = S + GDP R W , the seller may have capacity to cover the opt-out pool. The
                            GDP R
...rst-order condition for zA;out  in this scenario gives
                            s
                              1           GDP R
   GDP R                            S            W F        GDP R             GDP R
zA;out   = minfmaxf1 2                 GDP  R             S       W ; 0g; 1 S       W g:
                                (1            ) W u
Since seller A gives a higher priority in advertising to the opt-in pool, we can directly prove
that each strong-willed consumer would prefer opt-in to opt-out. For simplicity, we skip the
proof here.
    We now analyze the optimal advertising strategy of seller B: Suppose that seller B
                              GDP R
advertises with intensity z ^B;in    ( i ) to weak-willed consumers in the opt-in pool at price
 GDP R                    GDP R
pB;in ( i ) = i v and zB;out measure of consumers in the opt-out pool at price pGDP           R
                                                                                         B;out .
                                                                                 (1 GDP R ) W
Note that an advertisement to the opt-out pool reaches, with probability of 1 S GDP R W ;
a weak-willed consumer, who will buy the good only if his temptation coe¢ cient i is above
pGDP  R
 B;out =v: Thus, the seller's pro...t is
                        GDP R       GDP R        Z GDP R
                       zB;out  + zB;in                        GDP R
         B =      F       GDP R       GDP R
                                              +v            ^B;in
                                                           iz       (d i )
                     1 zB;out        zB;in        0
                                   W             GDP R GDP R
                +                   GDP R
                                                zB;out pB;out
                  1          S              W
                 h                                                                                            i
                       1    pGDP  R
                             B;out =v 1fpGDP R        GDP R v
                                                                g+ 1
                                                                              GDP R
                                                                                      1fpGDP R <   GDP R v
                                                                                                             g ;
                                         B;out                                           B;out


         GDP R                   GDP R           GDP R
                                                           R GDP R GDP R                                     GDP R
where zB;out   2 0; 1     S             W and zB;in     = 0       zB;in (d i ) 2 0;                                  W
is the total advertisement to the opt-in pool.
        GDP R
    If zB;out > 0; then the ...rst-order condition for pGDP  R
                                                        B;out gives the following:

                           GDP R   1
                  If                 ; 1 2pGDP    R
                                             B;out =v 1fpGDP  R   GDP R v
                                                                          g = 0;
                                   2                      B;out

                                   1 GDP R
                If GDP R >           ; p     = GDP R v if zB;out
                                                            GDP R
                                                                      0:
                                   2 B;out
Thus, the optimal price satis...es
                         8 1
                         < 2v            if GDP R 1
                GDP R
                                                     2            1 GDP R
               pB;out =                                = max        ;           v:
                         : GDP R                     1            2
                                       v If GDP R > 2
Since consumers with stronger temptation are willing to pay higher prices with pGDP
                                                                                B;in
                                                                                     R
                                                                                       ( i) =
 i v , it is optimal for seller B to prioritize consumers with higher i :

                         GDP R                    0       if    i    < ^ GDP R
                       dzB;in  ( i) =                                     GDP R     GDP R   :
                                                 Wd   i    if       i 2 ^       ;
                                                                             R GDP R
Therefore, the expected revenue of seller B from the opt-in pool reduces to v ^GDP R W i d i =
             2         2
    ( GDP R ) (^GDP R )         GDP R   GDP R
                                                 GDP R
                                                zB;in
v W            2
                         : As ^       =            W
                                                       ; the expected revenue of seller B from

                                                          33
advertising to the opt-in pool is determined by the seller'  s total advertising to the opt-in
                                   z GDP R
      GDP R     GDP R   GDP R    1 B;in
pool zB;in  : vzB;in             2    W
                                           : Thus, the expected pro...t of seller B reduces to
                                                                                                    !
                       GDP R     GDP R                                                      GDP R
                      zB;out  + zB;in         GDP R                      GDP R           1 zB;in
           B   =   F     GDP R      GDP R
                                           + zB;in                                                         v                        (16)
                     1 zB;out     zB;in                                                  2 W
                                        "                                                               #
                                                                                 2
                             W            1       GDP R                      1                             GDP R
                 +            GDP R
                                                                                     1f   GDP R > 1
                                                                                                       g vzB;out ;
                   1   S             W    4                                  2                    2



                                             GDP R       GDP R
and the seller's choice reduces to choosing zB;in   and zB;out :
    The revenue from the opt-in pool is concave in the total advertising to the opt-in pool,
  GDP R
zB;in ; since seller B targets the highest marginal revenue consumers ...rst, while the revenue
                                                                                          GDP R
from the opt-out pool is linear with respect to the advertising to the opt-out pool zB;out      .
                                GDP R
The ...rst-order condition for zB;in is
                                                                        8         GDP R
                                                                        >
                                                                        > < 0 if zB;in  =0
                         !                                              >
                                                                        >
                 GDP R
                zB;in                              1                    <
       GDP R                                                                      GDP R                                    GDP R
  v                              F                                  2
                                                                          = 0 if zB;in  2 0;                       W                ;
                   W                 1        GDP R
                                             zB;out         GDP R
                                                           zB;in        >
                                                                        >
                                                                        >
                                                                        >
                                                                        :         GDP R                            GDP R
                                                                          > 0 if zB;in  = W
                                                                                                                                    (17)
                                          GDP R
and the ...rst-order condition for       zB;out    is
                            "                                                #
                                                             2
                  W           1               GDP R        1                                                       F
                   GDP R
                                                               1f GDP R > 1 g v                                                     2
      1      S           W    4                            2              2
                                                                                   1                 GDP R
                                                                                                    zB;out                  GDP R
                                                                                                                           zB;in
                                                           8          GDP R
                                                           >
                                                           > < 0 if zB;out    =0
                                                           >
                                                           >
                                                           <
                                                                      GDP R                                                GDP R
                                                             = 0 if zB;out    2 0; 1                   S           W                 :
                                                           >
                                                           >
                                                           >
                                                           >
                                                           :          GDP R                                        GDP R
                                                             > 0 if zB;out    =1               S               W

Which pool has priority depends on which has higher marginal revenue. The marginal
                                      GDP R
revenue from the opt-in pool when zB;in     = 0 is v GDP R ; while the marginal revenue from
                                    h                                 i
                                      1             1 2
the opt-out pool is 1 S GDPW                GDP R
                                                        1f GDP R > 1    v . When GDP R < 1   ;
                                                                   2g
                               R      4             2                                      2
                                  W
then the opt-in pool has priority whenever

                                     GDP R         1                W
                                               >                     GDP R
                                                                                     ;
                                                   41          S                 W

which is equivalent to
                    2                    s                                           s                                 3
                                                           2                                               2
                      1          S            1        S           1 1       S            1        S               15
           GDP R
                  24                                                ;            +                                    :
                       2     W                 2   W               4 2   W                 2   W                   4

                                                            34
This range exists since 1    S > W (i.e., there are O -type consumers). Thus, the upper end
                       1
of this range is above 2 . Then, the opt-in pool has higher priority if
                                  2           s                    3
                                                           2
                                    1     S       1     S      1 15
                           GDP R
                                 24                             ;     ;
                                     2 W           2 W         4 2

which is nonempty. When GDP R > 1   2
                                      ; it is direct to verify that the opt-in pool has priority.
Taken together, the opt-in pool has priority if and only if
                                                 s
                                                               2
                            GDP R   1       S         1    S       1
                                                                     :                      (18)
                                      2 W              2 W         4
If the opt-out pool has higher priority, seller B will devote all resources to the opt-out pool
before the opt-in pool:
                 8      8                                                   9                        9
                 >      >    v                                              >                        >
                 <      <    u                           GDP R              =                        =
 GDP R                       u F             1     S            W                           GDP R
zB;out = min max 1 t                                                     ; 0 ; 1        S          W   ;
                 >      >                              1 2
                 :      :         Wv 1
                                      4
                                               GDP R
                                                       2
                                                           1f GDP R > 1 g > ;                        >
                                                                                                     ;
                                                                      2
                 8      8                                                             9            9
                 >      >    v                                                        >            >
                 <      <    u                           GDP R                        =            =
 GDP R                       u F             1     S            W                            GDP R
zB;in    = min max 1 t                                                      zB;out ; 0  ; W          :
                 >      >         Wv 1         GDP R   1 2                            >            >
                 :      :             4                2
                                                           1f  GDP R  1
                                                                     > g              ;            ;
                                                                            2


If, instead, the opt-in pool has priority, seller B will devote resources to the opt-in pool until
                                GDP R
its ...rst-order condition for zB;in  is satis...ed or the marginal products of the two pools are
equal, whichever occurs ...rst. Since the marginal revenue of the opt-in pool decreases from
v GDP R to 0; the two marginal revenues will intersect at a unique level zB;in GDP R
                                                                                     = z ; where
                                           1         GDP R   1 2
                                                                   1f   GDP R > 1
                                                                                    g
                                GDP R    2 4                 2                  2
                     z =    W            W                    GDP R
                                                                                        :
                                                 1      S                   W
                                GDP R                         GDP R
The ...rst-order condition for zB;in   in Equation (17) when zB;out = 0 gives a cubic equation
to determine a unique, positive level for z :
           v         s                                   v          s
           u                                             u
           u     F            F
                                  2
                                      (1        GDP R )3 u    F
                                                                               2             GDP R )3
           t W
           3                W               W            t W
                                                         3              WF         (1    W
z =1               +                                                                                  :
              2v           2v                27             2v          2v                27

Consequently, it follows that
                                     GDP R
                                    zB;in  = min fz ; z g :                                      (19)
If z < z , seller B would also target the opt-out pool with
             8      8                                                               9                       9
             >      >     v                                                         >                       >
             <      <     u                        GDP R                            =                       =
 GDP R                    u F          1     S            W                                     GDP R
zB;out = min max 1 t                                2                           z ;0 ;1     S           W       :
             >
             :      >
                    :         Wv  1      GDP R   1
                                                      1f GDP R > 1 g                >
                                                                                    ;                       >
                                                                                                            ;
                                  4              2                      2

                                                                                                 (20)

                                               35
         If z     z , seller B does not target the opt-out pool.
             Taken together, the level of GDP R determines whether the opt-in or opt-out pool has
         higher priority to seller B . In either case, its optimal advertising policy exists and is unique
         given GDP R :
             Weak-willed customers: We ...rst verify that, if other weak-willed customers follow the
         conjectured cuto¤ strategy with cuto¤ GDP R , that it is optimal for a weak-willed consumer
         with temptation i to follow the same cuto¤ strategy. We then characterize the equilibrium
          GDP R
                :
             Consider a weak-willed consumer with temptation index i . Following Equation (6), his
         expected utility from opt-in is
                                                                GDP R                 GDP R
                                 GDP R
                                                               zA;in             u z ^B;in   ( i)
                                UW;in  ( i) =                                      +              (uB                        iv) :
                                                         S    + GDP R       W    8         W

                                       GDP R                   GDP R                       GDP R
         This expression shows that UW;in    increases with zA;in     but decreases with z
                                                                                         ^B;in   ( i ).
         Following Equation (7), his expected utility from opt-out is
                                                GDP R                                     GDP R                                           GDP R
              GDP R
                                               zA;out               u                    zB;out                                          zB;out
             UW;out ( i) =                           GDP R
                                                                      +                          GDP R
                                                                                                               uB                            GDP R
                                    1      S                    W   8 1              S                     W             1           S                   W
                                                        1      GDP R
                                        v max             ;              1f      i >max   f1 ;    GDP R
                                                                                                          gg +      i 1f         maxf 1 ;    GDP R
                                                                                                                                                     gg ;
                                                        2                                  2                                 i        2


                               GDP R                     GDP R
         which increases with zA;out and decreases with zB;out : Then,
                 GDP R           GDP R
               UW;in   ( i ) UW;out    ( i)                                                                                                                         (21)
                 "                                                               #                                                                       !
                         GDP R                                 GDP R                              GDP R                               GDP R
               u        zA;in                                 zA;out                            z
                                                                                                ^B;in   ( i)                         zB;out
             =             GDP R                                    GDP R
                                                                                     +                                                     GDP R
                                                                                                                                                             uB
               8     S +          W     1                S                  W                        W               1           S                   W
     "                                                                                                                                                                      #
                     GDP R                                                                                                                                 GDP R
                    zB;out                                                                1      GDP R
                                                                                                                                                         z
                                                                                                                                                         ^B;in   ( i)
+v                      GDP R           i 1f       maxf 1 ;   GDP R
                                                                      gg + max              ;               1f      i >max   f1 ;    GDP R
                                                                                                                                             gg                         i
         1      S               W
                                               i        2                                 2                                   2
                                                                                                                                                              W

                             z GDP R                   z GDP R
         Note that S + A;in
                          GDP R
                                W      1 S
                                            A;out
                                              GDP R
                                                    W
                                                      from our earlier analysis of seller A'     s strategy.
                                 GDP R          GDP R
         Therefore, whether UW;in ( i ) UW;out ( i ) crosses zero depends on the second and third
         terms.
                            GDP R
            Note that if zB;in    = 0; then UW;in ( i ) > UW;out ( i ) for all i ; and GDP R = 1: Conse-
         quently, it must be the case that the opt-in pool has priority, or GDP R satis...es Equation
         (18). It then follows that, unless the equilibrium is trivial for seller B (i.e., advertising costs
                                                                                    GDP R
         are forbiddingly high and the seller does not advertise at all), then zB;in       > 0:
                                                                                           GDP R   GDP R
            Since the marginal consumer must be indi¤erent to opt-in and opt-out, UW;in
           GDP R    GDP R
         UW;out             = 0; which imposes the following condition on GDP R :
                                                  8
                                                  < < 0 if GDP R = 0
                                         GDP R
                                      C              = 0 if GDP R 2 (0; 1) :                            (22)
                                                  :          GDP R
                                                     > 0 if         =1

                                                                            36
where, with some manipulation of Equation (21),
                                                                         GDP R           GDP R
        GDP R                                   GDP R              3   z
                                                                       ^B;in
C                       =           S   +                    W                                                                                                          (23)
                                                                                   W
                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                                 GDP R            GDP R
                                                                 W uB          z
                                                                               ^B;in                                 GDP R                       GDP R          2
                                            1+       S   +                                                          zB;out             S    +             W
                                                                   v                          W
                                                                                                                          !                                              !
                                                                             GDP R            GDP R
                                                         W uB              z
                                                                           ^B;in                                 GDP R                 Wu        GDP R    GDP R
                                +            S   +                                                              zB;out                          zA;in  + zA;out
                                                         v                                W                                            8v
                                                 GDP R                         W u GDP R
                                        S   +                W         +          zA;in :
                                                                               8v
We now verify the optimality of the cuto¤ strategy for weak-willed customers to opt in. We
substitute the indi¤erence condition in Equation (22), assuming an interior GDP R 2 (0; 1) ;
into Equation (21) to obtain
             GDP R                    GDP R
            UW;in  ( i)              UW;out ( i)
                                       !                                                                        !
                  GDP R                                                                   GDP R
                z
                ^B;in   ( i)                                           GDP R
                                                                                        z
                                                                                        ^B;in   ( i)
    =                                       1 uB + v                                                        i
                        W                                                                         W
                                GDP R
                               zB;out                                                                                   1         GDP R                                        GDP R
            +v                       GDP R                   i 1f          maxf 1 ;      GDP R
                                                                                                  gg + max                ;                 1f   i >max  f1 ;   GDP R
                                                                                                                                                                        gg             :
                 1        S                       W
                                                                       i        2                                       2                                 2



We begin with i > GDP R : Note that z  GDP R
                                     ^B;in   ( i ) = W ; since this more tempted weak-willed
                                                                  1
consumer will be targeted by seller B if he opts in. If GDP R 2     ; then
                                             GDP R                      GDP R                              GDP R
                                            UW;in  ( i)                UW;out ( i) = v                                        i   < 0:
                       GDP R            1                    1
If instead                       <      2
                                            and      i       2
                                                               ;   then
                                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                   GDP R
                 GDP R                       GDP R
                                                                                                  zB;out                              GDP R
                UW;in  ( i)                 UW;out ( i) =                  1                          GDP R
                                                                                                                              v                    i      0;
                                                                                    1         S                     W

                      GDP R
                     zB;out                                                               1
since       1    S
                        GDP R
                                 W
                                             1: Finally, if                GDP R
                                                                                    <     2
                                                                                              and      i   >1
                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                              ; then

                 GDP R                       GDP R
                UW;in  ( i)                 UW;out ( i)
                                                                 !
                                         GDP R                                                                            GDP R
                                        zB;out                                 GDP R
                                                                                                                         zB;out                   1
        =        1                              GDP R
                                                                       v                          i   +v                          GDP R                    i    < 0;
                         1          S                        W                                             1         S                      W     2

                     z GDP R
since 1 S B;out
            GDP R
                  W
                        1 and i > 1 2
                                      : Therefore, all weak-willed consumers with i > GDP R
opt out, regardless of the level of GDP R .
    We now consider i < GDP R : Note that for i < ^ GDP R ; the threshold i below which
seller B does not advertise (z GDP R
                              ^B;in  ( i ) = 0 for i < ^ GDP R ), it is trivial that UW;in
                                                                                      GDP R
                                                                                            ( i)

                                                                                         37
  GDP R
UW;out  ( i ) > 0; since the consumer bene...ts from both higher advertising by seller A and
lower (zero) advertising by seller B . Consequently, all weak-willed consumers with i <
^ GDP R opt in. For i 2 ^ GDP R ; GDP R ; zB;in GDP R
                                                        ( i ) = W ; and their opt-in / opt-out
condition reduces to
                                                                 !
                                                      GDP R
          GDP R          GDP R
                                                    zB;out
        UW;in   ( i ) UW;out   ( i) = 1                  GDP R
                                                                   v GDP R      i > 0;
                                          1       S            W


               z GDP R
since 1 S B;out
              GDP R
                    W
                          1. Therefore, all i 2 ^ GDP R ; GDP R opt in. Consequently, all
        GDP R
  i <          opt in, which veri...es the optimality of the cuto¤ strategy. Importantly, the
optimality of the cuto¤ strategy holds regardless of the equilibrium value of GDP R :
    Existence of GDP R : An interior solution for Equation (22) is such that C GDP R =
0: If C (0) < 0; then GDP R = 0; while if C (1) > 0; then GDP R = 1: We next recognize that
                                                                                 !
                                                 GDP R
               C (1)                    uB     z
                                               ^B;in   (1)                 GDP R
                        =     W 1                          (1  S    W)    zB;out
              S + W                      v           W

                                       1       S       W   W u GDP R           W u GDP R
                                   +                          zA;in               zA;out :
                                           S   +   W       8v                  8v
                                                                                    ^GDP R (1)
                                                                                    z
Suppose 8u
         v
              1 uB : Note that when GDP R = 1; then B;inW             = 1 (the most tempted
customer that opts-in is targeted) since the opt-in pool has priority, and
                                           !
                          GDP R
                    u zA;in             uB                          W u GDP R
         C (1) =                   1+        (1    S     W) W           z      < 0;
                    8v S + W             v                          8v A;out

        GDP R                                                        z GDP R
since zB;out  = 0 when GDP R = 1; uB < 0; and SA;in
                                                + W
                                                                                     1: Consequently, it follows that
  GDP R
        < 1:
    At the other end, note that
                                           !                                                                          !
                   GDP R                                                                           GDP R     GDP R
          W uB   z^B;in   (0)        GDP R        Wu                                              zA;in    zA;out
C (0) =                       (1 S) zB;out   S+                                 S    (1      S)                           > 0;
            v           W                         8v                                                 S     1      S

         GDP R
        zA;in        GDP R
                    zA;out
since      S         1 S
                            >0     because the opt-in pool has higher advertising e¢ ciency for seller
                      z GDP R
                       ^B;in (0)
A, uB < 0; and       W
                          = 0 because only the most mildly tempted opt in (condition (18)
fails). Consequently, C ( S ) > 0 and therefore GDP R > 0:
                                               GDP R    GDP R    GDP R        GDP R
    Notice now that all advertising policies, zA;in  ; zA;out ;z
                                                               ^B;in   ; and zB;out are (piece-
                       GDP R         GDP R
wise) continuous in           when         has an interior solution. As such, C GDP R is
continuous. Since C (0) > 0 while C (1) < 0; by the Intermediate Value Theorem, there exists
a GDP R 2 (0; 1) : Given the nonlinearity of C GDP R ; however, there may be multiple
values in (0; 1) with C GDP R = 0; and consequently multiple equilibria.


                                                                38
                                                                                                                         GDP R             1
        We further establish that there exists an equilibrium in which                                                             +   =           S
r                                                                                                                                              W
                    2
        1               1             1
            W
                S
                            W
                                S
                                     >2 : Direct manipulation of the de...nition of C ( ) gives that

                                                r                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                   GDP R
                                                               W                W uB                                              zB;out
C        +          =   (1            S)    1    1                                              ~+ 1           ~+        1
                                                           1        S               v                                         1    S       + W
                                                                                                                !
                                                             GDP R                       GDP R
                                Wu                          zA;in                       zA;out
                        +            ~+ 1       ~+                                                                   > 0;
                                8v                         S + + W              1           S            + W

                                                                                                                                  q
where ~ + =                 S   +     +    W.   Note that uB < 0; and therefore (1                                    S) 1         1   1
                                                                                                                                           W
                                                                                                                                               S
                         GDP R
                        zB;out
 W uB
    v
       > 0; 1 S             1 by the de...nition of advertising e¢ ciency, and the last term is
                    + W
positive since advertising e¢ ciency is higher in the opt-in pool than in the opt-out pool for
seller A: Since C + > 0 and C (1) < 0; it follows that there is an equilibrium for which
 GDP R           1
            + > 2 : Thus, the optimal advertising policy of seller B for the opt-in and opt-out
pools is given by Equations (19) and (20).
    Uniqueness: We ...nally provide a su¢ cient condition under which an equilibrium with
 GDP R                                            GDP R    1
            + is the unique equilibrium. Since             2
                                                             ; it is su¢ cient for
                                                                r
                                                                     F                  1
                                                       1       2       <        S   +           W;
                                                                     u                  2
or equivalently
                                                                                                     2
                                                                                    1
                                                     u < 4F         1       S           W                ;
                                                                                    2
             GDP R
to ensure zA;out    = 0: Intuitively, it is too costly for seller A to advertise to more than
      1              GDP R                                                                GDP R
  S + 2 W       S +         W consumers. Given this su¢ cient condition, notice that zA;in
from Equation (15) is also insensitive to GDP R :
    Next, we view GDP R as a ...xed point determined by Equation (22) through zA;in       GDP R
                                                                                                ;
  GDP R   GDP R    GDP R                            GDP R           GDP R
zA;out ; zB;in ; zB;out ; which are functions of          . With zA;in being independent of
  GDP R        GDP R             GDP R                                                    GDP R
         and zA;out = 0, C               in Equation (23) is now only a function of zB;out      .
                  GDP R      GDP R                            GDP R              GDP R
Conditional on zB;out , C            is a cubic equation in         . By taking zB;out as given,
we apply the Implicit Function Theorem to Equation (22) to obtain
                                                                    GDP R      uB                            GDP R
                                      d GDP R              W                    v    S +                             W
                                        GDP R
                                              =                                                                           :
                                      dzB;out                               C 0 ( GDP R )

Since C GDP R = 0; and C                             GDP R
                                                               is a cubic equation with one negative and two positive
real roots, it follows that C 0                      GDP R
                                                               < 0. Furthermore, since uB < 0; it follows that

                                                                   d GDP R
                                                                     GDP R
                                                                           > 0:
                                                                   dzB;out

                                                                        39
Consequently, we have established that the solution for GDP R 2 + ; 1 is continuous and
                              GDP R
monotonically increasing in zB;out  :
                           GDP R
    Note next that either zB;out = 0 or, from Equations (19) and (20),
              (     s                                                                                                        )
                                      GDP R           GDP R
 GDP R                  F 1      S           W    W         (1    S    W)          GDP R
zB;out = min 1               GDP R       GDP R                 GDP R
                                                                          ;1  S                                          W       :
                        Wv         (1          )    1    S           W

                        GDP R                           GDP R                               GDP R           GDP R
It then follows that zB;out   as a function of                  that is decreasing in                for
  + ; since at an interior solution

                            1                   GDP R           GDP R 2
  GDP R0     GDP R     1F       W
                                    S
                                        1   2            +                    W (1          S ) (1     S          W)
 zB;out              =                                                                                               :
                       2v 1      GDP R
                                zB;out      (   GDP R   (1       GDP R ))2     (1                GDP R           2
                                                                                        S                   W)

                                                                                     GDP R
The ...rst term has a root between (0; 1) at             +:   Consequently, since                      +;   and the
               dz GDP R                             GDP R
other root of d B;out is above 1; it follows that zB;out
                  GDP R                                   is monotonically decreasing in GDP R :
              GDP R                                    GDP R                                GDP R
If, instead, zB;out  is
                      at a corner solution, 1     S           W ; it is again decreasing in       :
                                GDP R                                          GDP R
Consequently, by continuity, zB;out is decreasing and then        at at 0 in         :
                           GDP R       GDP R
    Since the map from zB;out to             ; Equation (22), is monotonically increasing, while
             GDP R       GDP R
that from           to zB;out from Equation (20) is (weakly) monotonically decreasing, it
                                      GDP R
follows these two curves on the zB;out      ; GDP R plane intersect at most at one point, and
therefore the equilibrium is unique.

B.6        Proof of Proposition 7
Since all type-O consumers opt in by default, seller A no longer faces an inference problem
when targeting consumers and has no incentive to distinguish between the opt-in and opt-
                                                  CCP A
out pools. As such, seller A'     s advertising, zA     ; and pricing policy, pCCP
                                                                               A
                                                                                    A
                                                                                      ; correspond
to those under the full data sharing scheme from Proposition 4, with pA         CCP A
                                                                                        = 12
                                                                                             u, and
  CCP A     FS
zA      = zA : Strong-willed consumers are also indi¤erent to opting in or out, because seller
A does not distinguish between the two pools. Thus, they also opt in by the default policy.
The probability of a consumer of type S or W receiving an advertisement from seller A is
                 CCP A
                zA
consequently S    + W
                        :
    As seller A does not distinguish between the opt-in and opt-out pools, weak-willed con-
sumers do not face the cost of losing improved advertisement targeting by seller A if they
opt out. As such, they need only consider how it impacts their interaction with seller B:
    Seller B must now set a price schedule for consumers pCCP          A
                                                                   B;in ( i ) and an advertising
                    CCP A
policy function z  ^B;in ( i ) for consumers that opt in. By observing the level of temptation
of weak-willed consumer i in the opt-in pool, seller B will charge his full reservation value
for good B as in Proposition 4: pCCP      A
                                      B;in ( i ) = i v: For the opt-out pool, seller B must set a
uniform price pCCP     A                            CCP A
                  B;out and advertising intensity zB;out .
    Let us conjecture an equilibrium cuto¤ CCP A such that weak-willed consumers opt in
          CCP A
if i            ; and opt out if i > CCP A : By similar arguments to those in Proposition 6,

                                                        40
seller B charges a price:
                                                                               1
                                              pCCP  A
                                               B;out = max                       ;       CCP A
                                                                                                     v;
                                                                               2
to consumers in the opt-out pool.
    Note that any weak-willed consumer that would be targeted by seller B if seller B knew
his i from the opt-in pool is better o¤ by opting out. To see this, we recognize that, if
he opts in, he receives utility   i v from buying the temptation good; if instead he opts
                                                       z                                                                         z CCP A
                                       B;out
out, then his expected utility is (1 CCP   A)
                                              W
                                                min pCCP    A                  B;out
                                                       B;out ; i v : Since (1 CCP A ) W    1; the
consumer prefers opt-out, as he may not receive the advertising from seller B .
    In contrast, suppose that seller B commits to leaving this consumer alone if he opts in.
                                                                                CCP A
In this case, the consumer prefers opt-in, and this preference is strict when zB;out  > 0, under
which case he may be targeted by seller B in the opt-out pool. Since the equilibrium is trivial
    CCP A                                                     CCP A
if zB;out = 0; we hereafter only consider the case when zB;out       > 0: Therefore, consumers
that would be left alone by seller B strictly prefer opt-in, and those that would be targeted
by seller B if they opt in prefer opt-out.
    Consider now the optimal advertising policy of seller B: By committing to leaving weak-
                                                        CCP A
willed consumers in the opt-in pool alone, that is, z  ^B;in  ( i ) = 0, seller B can bifurcate
the pool of weak-willed consumers to improve its e¢ ciency in targeting the more-tempted
consumers in the opt-out pool. To ...nd the optimal cuto¤ CCP A ; consider the pro...t for
seller B; B : As the pro...t from the opt-in pool under this strategy is zero, we have
                                      CCP A                Z   1                                                      CCP A
                                     zB;out                                                                          zB;out
     B     =     pCCP
                  B;out
                       A
                                      CCP A )         W                    1f            pCCP A =v g d    i     F       CCP A
                            (1                   W             CCP A                 i       B;out                  1 zB;out
                                                                                                                                          CCP A
                   CCP A      CCP A                                        1     v CCP A                                                 zB;out
           =                vzB;out 1f     CCP A > 1
                                                       g+                         z
                                                                           CCP A 4 B;out
                                                                                         1f                   CCP A     1
                                                                                                                            g       F       CCP A
                                                                                                                                                  ;
                                                   2           1                                                        2               1 zB;out
       CCP A                          CCP A                                            CCP A
where zB;out 2 0; 1                              W    :The ...rst-order condition for zB;out is
                                                                                                          8         CCP A
                                       1        v                                             F           < < 0 if zB;out =0
 CCP A                                                                                                              CCP A                               CCP A
         v 1f   CCP A > 1
                            g+ 1                  1                1                                        = 0 if zB;out 2 0; 1                                      W   ;
                                                4 f                    g
                                                       CCP A
                                       CCP A                                                  CCP A 2     :
                        2                                          2
                                                                                1            zB;out                 CCP A
                                                                                                            > 0 if zB;out = 1                         CCP A
                                                                                                                                                                  W


from which follows that
             (      (                  s                                                                                         )                            )
 CCP A                                                               F                                                                         CCP A
zB;out = min max 1                         CCP A v 1                                           1       v                        ;0 ; 1                   W        :
                                                                  1
                                                        f CCP A > 2 g+1                        CCP A     1
                                                                                                       4 f    CCP A     1
                                                                                                                        2   g
                                                             CCP A
Assume that seller B '    s problem is nontrivial, that is, zB;out 6= 0: At an interior solution,
seller B '
         s pro...t is given by
                                 s                                                                                                  !2
                                     CCP A v 1
                                                                                         1     v
                    B   =                       f   CCP A > 1
                                                                g+1                              1
                                                                                         CCP A 4 f        CCP A     1
                                                                                                                        g       F        :
                                                            2                                                       2




                                                                       41
                                1
Note that B when CCP A > 2         is maximized at the corner CCP A = 1; in which case pro...t is
                                   CCP A          CCP A
arbitrarily close to zero, since zB;out  = 1              W ! 0 since revenue per consumer is
bounded by v: Consequently, this cannot be the optimal choice of CCP A : When CCP A 1          2
                                                                                                 ;
                        CCP A     1           1                     CCP A
this is maximized at           = 2 ; since 1 CCP A is increasing in       : Consequently,
                                          (     (       r        )           )
                          CCP A                             2F      1
                         zB;out = min max 1                    ;0 ;      W       :
                                                             v      2

One may be concerned that seller B faces a time-consistency problem and has incentive to
search the opt-in pool after announcing not to advertise to those consumers. Note that the
marginal revenue to advertising to the most tempted weak-willed customer in the opt-in pool
is weakly less than v   2
                          ; while the marginal revenue to targeting the opt-out pool is v 2
                                                                                            : Thus,
seller B prefers targeting the opt-out pool, even though it has incentives to target the opt-in
pool after exhausting the opt-out pool. Thus, the commitment is not an issue if seller B
faces a high cost to cover the consumers. Only when it is optimal for the seller to cover more
than half of the weak-willed consumers, the commitment is an issue. In this case, if seller B
cannot commit to leaving consumers in the opt-in pool alone, those weak-willed consumers
with i right below 1    2
                          ; anticipating being targeted by the seller, would choose opt-out. This
in turn reduces the e¤ective CCP A to a level below 1      2
                                                             , the optimal level, thus hurting the
seller. We assume that the seller has the power to precommit in this case.
    Since seller B ...nds it optimal to separate the two pools according to the cuto¤ CCP A ;
                                                                                                 v
this con...rms the conjectured cuto¤ equilibrium. Furthermore, since the price is pCCP        A
                                                                                        B;out = 2
                1
and CCP A = 2     ; it follows that all weak-willed consumers that opt out buy good B when it
is advertised to them.

B.7     Proof of Proposition 8
We compare the social welfare under four data sharing schemes: no data sharing, full data
sharing, the CCPA and the GDPR.

No data sharing: From the proof of Proposition 5, the social welfare is
                             3                                               v
                       W NS = u (     S   +        NS
                                              W ) zA    +      NS
                                                            W zB    uB         :
                             8                                               8

Full data sharing: From the proof of Proposition 5, the social welfare is
                                           3 FS
                                    W F S = uzA    FS
                                                + zB  uB :
                                           8

CCPA:       From (1), the social welfare is given by
                                        3 CCP A
                               W CCP A = uzA       CCP A
                                                + zB;out uB :
                                        8

                                                 42
We ...rst compare to full data sharing. It is straightforward to see that the bene...t from
                                                             FS      CCP A
sharing data with seller A is the same under both schemes (zA   = zA       ), while the cost of
                                                        FS   CCP A
sharing with seller B is worse under full data sharing zB   zB;out . It therefore follows that

                                           W CCP A       W FS:

This inequality is sharp whenever seller B '
                                           s advertising policy is nontrivial. Thus, the CCPA
strictly dominates the scheme of full data sharing.
    Comparing to no data sharing, it is apparent that the utility bene...t of good A is higher
                                                                           CCP A     NS
with the CCPA, since seller A can fully cover weak-willed consumers (zA            zA   ), while
                                                                                                                  CCP A
                                                                                                                 zB;out
                                                         v    CCP A                    3            NS
the utility cost from good B is more severe uB           2
                                                             zB;out < uB               8
                                                                                         v       W zB      and     W
 NS
zB  : Consequently, for
                                      CCP A                           NS                 NS
                                  3u zA       ( S+               W ) zA           +   W zB v
                  uB < uB =                    CCP A                   NS
                                                                                                 ;
                                           8 zB;out                 W zB


we have W CCP A < W N S ; and W CCP A        W N S otherwise. This bound uB is well-de...ned
       CCP A    NS    NS        CCP A
since zA     ; zA  ; zB  ; and zB;out are all independent of uB :

GDPR: From a social welfare perspective, we have
                                                                                                 !
                                                                              GDP R
                                                                             zA;out                  3
           W GDP R =          GDP R
                             zA;in  + 1         GDP R
                                                             W                     GDP R
                                                                                                       u
                                                                 1       S                   W       8
                                                                                                     !
                                                                                   GDP R
                               GDP R                     GDP R
                                                                                  zB;out
                         +    zB;in    +    W   1                                     GDP R
                                                                                                       uB :
                                                                     1        S                  W


As the scheme of full data sharing is dominated by the CCPA, we do not compare the GDPR
with full data sharing, but rather the CCPA.
   We now compare the GDPR to no data sharing:
                                                                                  !
                                                              GDP R
                                                            zA;out                  3
    W GDP R W N S =          GDP R
                            zA;in   + 1     GDP R
                                                    W              GDP R
                                                                             zA
                                                                               NS
                                                                                      u
                                                      1   S              W          8
                                                                                    !
                                                                  GDP R
                                GDP R         GDP R
                                                                zB;out           NS
                          + zB;in     + 1             W              GDP R
                                                                                zB    uB ;
                                                        1     S            W

        NS        NS
where zA    and zB    are independent of uB : The ...rst term is positive, representing the
improved matching with seller A under the GDPR, while the second is negative, due to the
increased exposure of weak-willed consumers to seller B .
    Notice that, when uB = 0; it must be the case that W GDP R > W N S due to the improved
matching with seller A: For su¢ ciently negative uB ; in contrast, the most-tempted weak-
willed consumers lose the camou   age of not only all strong-willed consumers, but also the
more-mildly tempted weak-willed consumers. The social bene...t of the GDPR for increased

                                                    43
                                       GDP R u
matching with seller A accrues as zA;in      4
                                               ; which is bounded from above. In contrast,
        GDP R
with          bounded from below, the cost to the weak-willed consumers in the opt-out pool
becomes arbitrarily large. Since they have less camou   age than in the no data sharing scheme
because the strong-willed and mildly weak-willed consumers all opt in, then W GDP R <
W N S : Since the objectives are continuous, it follows that there exist critical values of uB ;
uB ; such that W GDP R < W N S when uB uB :
   We now compare the GDPR with the CCPA. The di¤erence in the social welfare is given
by
                                                                                       !
                                                                  GDP R
                                                                zA;out                   3
  W GDP R W CCP A =           GDP R
                             zA;in  + 1      GDP R
                                                      W              GDP R
                                                                               z CCP A
                                                                                 A         u
                                                        1     S            W             8
                              GDP R    GDP R            1       S      W         GDP R    CCP A
                           + zB;in  + zB;out                        GDP R
                                                                                zB;out   zB;out uB :
                                                    1       S               W

Note that under the CCPA, seller A has higher advertising e¢ ciency and therefore is able to
better cover its intended consumers, that is, the ...rst term is negative. Since total advertising
                                                                   GDP R     GDP R     CCP A
by seller B under the GDPR is less than under the CCPA, zB;in            + zB;out     zB;out < 0;
because of seller B 's less e¢ cient targeting of the most-tempted customers, it follows that
the coe¢ cient of uB in the last term is negative.
   Consequently, there exists a critical uB such that W GDP R > W CCP A if uB uB (and
W GDP R < W CCP A otherwise).

Ranking the four schemes: Suppose uB is su¢ ciently mild (uB > max fuB ; uB g),
then W CCP A > W GDP R ; W N S : Since W CCP A W F S ; it follows that the CCPA delivers the
highest social welfare.
   In contrast, suppose uB is su¢ ciently severe (uB < min fuB ; uB g), then W N S >
W GDP R ; W CCP A : Since W CCP A W F S ; it follows that no data sharing delivers the highest
social welfare.
   Finally, it is su¢ cient, although not necessary, for uB to be in an intermediate range
(uB < u and uB > uB ); for W GDP R > W CCP A ; W N S : Since W CCP A W F S ; it follows
that GDPR delivers the highest social welfare.




                                               44
  References
Acemoglu, Daron, Ali Makhdoumi, Azarakhsh Malekian, and Asuman Ozdaglar (2019), Too
   Much Data: Prices and Ine¢ ciencies in Data Markets, National Bureau of Economic
   Research Working Paper 26296.
Acquisti, Alessandro, Curtis Taylor, and Liad Wagman (2016), The Economics of Privacy,
    Journal of Economic Literature 54, 442­ 492.
Acquisti, Alessandro, and Hal R. Varian. (2005), Conditioning Prices on Purchase History,
    Marketing Science 24, 367­ 381.
Aguiar, Mark, Mark Bils, Kerwin Ko... Charles, and Erik Hurst (2018), Leisure Luxuries and
    the Labor Supply of Young Men, mimeo Princeton University, University of Chicago
    Booth School of Business.
Ali, S. Nageeb, and Roland Bénabou (2019), Image versus Information: Changing Societal
     Norms and Optimal Privacy, American Economic Journal, Microeconomics, forthcom-
     ing.
Ali, S. Nageeb, Greg Lewis, and Shoshana Vasserman (2019), Voluntary Disclosure and
     Personalized Pricing, mimeo Penn State University.
Athey, Susan, Christian Catalini, and Catherine Tucker (2017), The Digital Privacy Para-
    dox: Small Money, Small Costs, Small Talk, NBER Working Paper No. 23488.
Bénabou, Roland, and Marek Pycia (2002), Economic Letters 77, 419­424.
Bergemann, Dirk, and Stephen Morris (2019), Information Design: A Uni...ed Perspective,
    Journal of Economic Literature 57, 44­95.
Bergemann, Dirk, Alessandro Bonatti, and Tan Gan (2019), The Economics of Social Data,
    mimeo Yale University.
Calzolari, Giacomo, and Alessandro Pavan (2006), On the Optimality of Privacy in Sequen-
    tial Contracting, Journal of Economic Theory 130, 168­204.
Campbell, James, Avi Goldfarb, and Catherine Tucker (2015), Privacy Regulation and
   Market Structure, Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 24, 47­73.
Deckel, Eddie, and Barrton L. Lipman (2012), Costly Self-Control and Random Self-
    Indulgence, Econometrica 80, 1271­1302.
DellaVigna, Stefano (2009), Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field, Journal
    of Economic Literature 47, 315­72.
Easley, David, Shiyang Huang, Liyan Yang, and Zhuo Zhong (2019), The Economics of
    Data, mimeo Cornell University.
Farboodi, Maryam, and Laura Veldkamp (2020), A Growth Model of the Data Economy,
    mimeo MIT Sloan.
Goldfarb, Avi, and Catherine Tucker (2019), Digital Economics, Journal of Economic Lit-
    erature 57, 3­43.
Gul, Faruk, and Wolfgang Pesendorfer (2001), Temptation and Self-Control, Econometrica
    69, 365-396.

                                           45
­(2004), Self-Control and the Theory of Consumption, Econometrica 72, 119­158.
Hurley, Mikella, and Julius Adebayo (2016), Credit Scoring in the Era of Big Data. Yale
    Journal of Law and Technology. 18:148­ 216.
Ichihashi, Shota (2019), Online Privacy and Information Disclosure by Consumers, Ameri-
     can Economic Review, forthcoming.
Jones, Charles, and Chris Tonetti (2020), Nonrivalry and the Economics of Data, American
    Economic Review, forthcoming.
Kim, A. E., Chew, R., Wenger, M., Cress, M., Bukowski, T., Farrelly, M., and Hair, E.
   (2019). Estimated Ages of JUUL Twitter Followers. JAMA pediatrics.
Kreps, David M (1979), A Representation Theorem for "Preference for Flexibility", Econo-
    metrica, 565­577.
Morris, Chris (2019), Big Data Meets the Beer Industry, Fortune. Jan.
Raustiala, Kal, and Jon Christopher Sprigman (2019), The Second Digital Disruption:
    Streaming & the Dawn of Data-Driven Creativity. New York University Law Review.
    94:1555­1622.
Stovall, J. (2010), Multiple Temptations, Econometrica 78, 349­376.
Strotz, R. (1955), Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization, Review of
    Economic Studies 23, 165­ 180.
Tang, Huan (2019), The Value of Privacy: Evidence from Online Borrowers, mimeo HEC.
Taylor, Curtis R. (2004), Consumer Privacy and the Market for Customer Information,
    RAND Journal of Economics 35, 631­  650.
Tirole, John (2019), Digital Dystopia, mimeo Toulouse School of Economics.




                                          46
