                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  INFORMATIONAL BARRIERS TO MARKET ACCESS:
                  EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM LIBERIAN FIRMS

                                         Jonas Hjort
                                        Vinayak Iyer
                                   Golvine de Rochambeau

                                      Working Paper 27662
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27662


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2020




We thank Vittorio Bassi, Katarzyna Bilicka, Dave Donaldson, Amit Khandelwal, Andrea Prat,
Eric Verhoogen, and seminar participants at Columbia, Cornell, Essex, the Graduate Institute of
Geneva, the Indian Statistical Institute, Yale, Sciences Po, Zurich, and the webinar series on
Firms, Markets, and Development (FIMAD) for helpful comments; Junyi Que for stellar research
assistance; the IGC for financial support; IPA and Q\&A Liberia for great field-work; and
Building Markets for data-sharing and great collaboration. The project was registered in the AEA
RCT Registry, ID 0002264 The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jonas Hjort, Vinayak Iyer, and Golvine de Rochambeau. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Informational Barriers to Market Access: Experimental Evidence from Liberian Firms
Jonas Hjort, Vinayak Iyer, and Golvine de Rochambeau
NBER Working Paper No. 27662
August 2020
JEL No. D2,D83,O1,O25

                                           ABSTRACT

Evidence suggests that firms in poor countries stagnate because they cannot access growth-
conducive markets. We hypothesize that overlooked heterogeneity in marketing ability distorts
market access. To investigate, we gave a random subset of Liberian firms vouchers for a week-
long program that teaches how to sell to corporations, governments, and other large buyers. Firms
that participate win about three times as many contracts, but only firms with access to the Internet
benefit. We use a simple model and variation in online and offline demand to show evidence that
this is because ICT dampens traditional information frictions, but not marketing barriers.


Jonas Hjort                                       Golvine de Rochambeau
Graduate School of Business                       Sciences Po
Columbia University                               golvine.derochambeau@sciencespo.fr
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 622
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
hjort@columbia.edu

Vinayak Iyer
Columbia University
vi2137@columbia.edu




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/2264
1     Introduction
Firms in poor countries often grow slowly (Bloom et al., 2010; Hsieh & Klenow, 2014; Ver-
hoogen, 2020). One class of explanations focuses on productivity--the cost firms incur
to produce goods and services--and another on ability to access markets. In the former
line of research, many studies attempt to make firms more productive by loosening vari-
ous production contraints, such as access to credit and management practices. The results
have been mixed (McKenzie & Woodruff, 2014; Quinn & Woodruff, 2019).1 The other
strand of the literature instead assesses the importance of demand constraints. There
is growing evidence that access to bigger and more quality-sensitive markets can raise
firm growth (Verhoogen, 2008; Syverson, 2011; Hornbeck & Rotemberg, 2019; Goldberg &
Reed, 2020), and small firms in particular appear to benefit from selling to large buyers
(Hoekman & Sanfilippo, 2018; Alfaro-Urena et al., 2019; Abebe et al., 2020).
    Why are some firms better able to access desirable markets than others? What are the
factors that influence market access? The existing literature in large part considers infras-
tructure, tariffs, and other traditional trade costs that affect different types of firms dif-
ferently (see e.g. De Loecker & Goldberg, 2014; Donaldson & Hornbeck, 2016). However,
ability to market products appears to vary substantially even across firms of similar size
and productivity that are located near each other. This suggests that overlooked forms
of access barriers may constrain growth. The literature on information frictions in poor
countries points towards one (Jensen, 2007; Allen, 2014; Startz, 2018; Atkin et al., 2017b).
Studies that experimentally vary contract allocation find, in particular, that randomly cho-
sen small firms can successfully supply large buyers (Ferraz et al., 2016; Atkin et al., 2017a;
Carrillo et al., 2019). But firms themselves must normally sell their goods and services in
the marketplace. Might heterogeneity in their ability to do so--marketing ability--distort
access to markets?
    In this paper we experimentally enhance Liberian firms' ability to market their prod-
ucts to corporations, governments, and other large buyers. This is to our knowledge the
first attempt to investigate how exogenous variation in individual firms' ability to access
a particular market affects their growth. The source of demand we focus on--buyers that
purchase goods and services through tenders and other formal contracts--is an especially
important one: public procurement alone makes up roughly 12 percent of worldwide
GDP and more in low-income countries (Bosio et al., 2020). Our analysis begins to charac-
terize how limited marketing ability and its interaction with more widely studied forms
    1 Thetraining and input programs that have shown bigger impacts on firm growth have generally been
tailored to individual firms and/or very expensive (see e.g. Bloom et al. (2013) and Bruhn et al. (2018), and
McKenzie & Woodruff (2014); Quinn & Woodruff (2019); Verhoogen (2020) for discussion.)


                                                     2
of information frictions excludes productive suppliers from growth opportunities.
     The paper has five parts. First we present a simple theoretical framework in which a
firm's probability of winning both formal bidding processes--tenders--and non-tender
formal contracts the firm pursues depends on its underlying ability to identify and appeal
to buyers' preferences. We then estimate the average impact of a seven-day training pro-
gram that teaches Liberian firms how to construct good bids on tenders from large buyers.
Next we show how the impact of the program varies with access to the Internet. We then
use the model to illustrate why marketing knowledge may interact with firms' technolog-
ical ability both (i) to access contracts that are publicized online--typically tenders--and
(ii) to search for information about, be found by, and communicate with tender and non-
tender buyers through ICT. Finally, we take advantage of trained firms' differential expo-
sure to online demand shocks--arbitrary variation over time in the share of tenders that
are publicized online--and the fact that we observe the composition of contracts firms
win. This helps us empirically test for the online market access and search and communication
channels through which ICT may mediate the impact of marketing ability on sales.
     With 14 employees on average, the firms in our sample are by local standards medium-
sized. The sample is drawn from a registry of firms in Monrovia--Liberia's capital city--
which is maintained by Building Markets, the non-profit we work with. To be included in
the registry, firms have to be formally registered and active. The sample firms come from
a wide range of sectors, including "Construction and Renovation" (23 percent), "Food and
Beverages" (15 percent), "Home Essentials" (13 percent), and "Handicrafts and Artisans"
(12 percent). Like most small and medium-sized firms in poor countries, they have lit-
tle experience supplying to large buyers and instead sell mostly to final consumers, thus
struggling to build reputation (Macchiavello & Morjaria, 2015). Twelve percent held a con-
tract awarded through a formal bidding process in the six months preceding the baseline
survey.2
     The seven day-long Winning-contracts training our analysis focuses on aims to change
this. Run by the non-profit, it teaches firms how to bid on tenders from corporations,
government entities, and other large buyers. The training is not sector-specific and fo-
cuses exclusively on how to participate and succeed in the procurement market. One part
teaches fundamentals of bidding and common buyer preferences such as favoring "green"
suppliers.3 A second part provides practice and feedback on mock bids.
   2A policy goal of the Government of Liberia is to steer public procurement contracts towards smaller,
domestic firms. In 2014, they passed the "Small Business Empowerment Act", which mandates all govern-
ment entities to allocate at least 25 percent of their total procurement budget to Liberian-owned small and
medium-sized firms. However, very few government entities are in compliance with the law.
  3 This example is illustrative. Most firms in our sample use little energy and would therefore be consid-




                                                    3
    The research team first visited the firms in the treatment group from June to August of
2016.4 Research assistants gave the firms' managers a free voucher to attend the training
and information about otherwise similar firms which took the training in the past. The
non-profit then ran training sessions throughout the study period. The encouragement
(voucher+information) persuaded about 20 percent of firms in the treatment group to take
the training. They mostly did so during July ­ September 2016. Endline data collection
took place from March ­ June 2017.
    We use a simple model to frame our analysis. A buyer selects a supplier from a set
of bidders based on requested prices and auxiliary features such as engaging in environ-
mentally friendly production. Buyers don't have perfect information about bidders so the
winning supplier can earn rents. These depend not only on production costs, but also
marketing ability. Since tender-winning knowledge may also improve firms' ability to
win non-tender formal contracts, the impact of the training on effort devoted respectively
to bidding on tenders and pursuing other contracts is ambiguous.
    In the first part of our empirical analysis, we show that firms that learn how to market
their products to large buyers bid on more tenders; win more tenders; and win contracts
of higher quality. Firms in the treatment group that take the training are for example more
than twice as likely to win a contract lasting longer than six months. We also find that en-
hanced contract-winning knowledge significantly increases the number of contracts firms
win through other means than formal tenders. Winning more and higher-quality contracts
appears to ultimately improve firm performance. Our estimates suggest that treated firms
that take the training earn about USD 10,000 in revenue from contracts over the course of
six months above and beyond a control group mean of about USD 5,000, although this
estimate is not statistically significant. The overall impact of the Winning-contracts train-
ing suggests that allocative efficiency may be considerably greater if all firms were able to
competitively pursue formal contracts.5
    In the second part of our analysis, we estimate how the benefits of enhanced marketing
ability vary with Internet connectivity. If contract-winning knowledge constrains access
to desirable buyers by amplifying information frictions, we a priori expect the impact of
Winning-contracts training to positively interact with firms' access to ICT. Conversely, the
Internet and similar technologies may themselves allow firms to overcome informational
ered "green", but few were aware of this before taking the training.
    4 We measure the initial characteristics of firms in the sample frame using pre-baseline periodical surveys

conducted by the non-profit. These were also used to stratify the randomization.
    5 This is because the training program expands the set of potential contract-winners. The experiment was

not designed to test the program's market-wide efficiency consequences. However, our findings suggest
that these would likely be positive if contracts tend to be awarded to the most productive suppliers when
all suppliers have the ability to effectively convey their qualifications to buyers (see Section 4).


                                                      4
barriers to marketing their products, in which case we would expect a negatively signed
interaction effect. The distinction is important because Internet access is rapidly expand-
ing in poor countries.
    We find that the Winning-contracts training raises the number of tenders firms bid on,
total contracts won, non-tender contracts won, and revenue from contracts only among
firms that use the Internet for business purposes at baseline. A double-LASSO regulariza-
tion procedure suggests that Internet use is the strongest predictor in our baseline data of
a large treatment effect of the training (Chernozhukov et al., 2018). Simultaneously includ-
ing interactions between the treatment and other observable proxies for firm type that may
correlate with Internet access barely affects the estimated coefficient on training×Internet.
    To guide our investigation of the mechanisms underlying these results, we expand the
theoretical framework to include ICT. In our model, Internet access can "convert" mar-
keting ability into sales for two reasons. First, through directly expanded market access:
some contracts, and in particular many tenders, are only publicized online. Second, by fa-
cilitating suppliers' ability to search for information about, be found by, and communicate
with buyers, whether or not the buyers publicize their contracts online. Firms with Inter-
net access are then expected to bid on and win more tenders when their tender-winning
knowledge is enhanced, while the effect on effort pursuing non-tender contracts is am-
biguous. The latter effect is expected to be positive when online demand is low because
of the search and communication function of Internet.
    To test these predictions, we take advantage of variation over time in the share of ten-
ders that are publicized online and offline (for example in newspapers). Treated firms are
differentially exposed to (relative) online demand shocks because they take the Winning-
contracts training at different times.6
    We find evidence pointing towards a role for Internet's search and communication func-
tion in converting marketing ability into sales. In particular, the benefits of the Winning-
contracts training are concentrated among firms with Internet access even when online de-
mand is low. At such times ICT-connected firms with enhanced contract-winning knowl-
edge win more non-tender contracts.
    We further find evidence that Internet's online market access function also helps firms
with enhanced marketing ability win formal contracts. Specifically, firms with Internet
access win both more non-tender contracts and more tenders after learning how to craft
competitive bids if online demand is high. Trained firms with Internet access also win
   6 We show that, relative to the time variation in online and offline tender postings, the timing of firms
taking the Winning-contracts training appears arbitrary. Since firms themselves choose when to take the
training, we nevertheless instrument for a firm's training date with the date the research team first visited
the firm. The first visit date was unrelated to contract demand shocks.


                                                     5
higher-quality contracts when online demand is high, perhaps reflecting a difference be-
tween the attributes of tender and non-tender contracts. These shifts due to online de-
mand shocks appear to persist in the longer-run--after the shocks themselves--pointing
towards learning-by-doing dynamics in tender-winning (see also Foster et al., 2016; Atkin
et al., 2017a).
    In sum this paper documents that many productive firms face a limited market be-
cause they don't know how to sell their products to growth-conducive buyers. Liberian
suppliers need both such marketing ability and the technology necessary to interact with
large buyers to win more formal contracts. The implied inequality of opportunity may
help explain the slow average growth of firms in poor countries.
    We contribute to three related strands of the literature on information frictions and
access to markets in the developing world. First, this paper documents the dramatic con-
sequences of an overlooked informational barrier to selling to large buyers. We build on
research on knowledge constraints that estimates how complex forms and procedures pre-
vent disadvantaged individuals from conveying productive qualifications (see e.g. Jensen,
2010; Bettinger et al., 2012; Kling et al., 2012; Chetty & Saez, 2013).7 We add to growing evi-
dence that informational barriers can be surprisingly costly to overcome also for firms (see
e.g. Atkin et al., 2017b; Almunia et al., 2019), and that information-constrained sales and
marketing procedures may be especially consequential (Anderson et al., 2018; DellaVigna
& Gentzkow, 2019; Hortacsu et al., 2019).8 By documenting that large demand-side clients
in effect speak another language than small firms, we connect the information-constrained
decision-making literature with work on market access and firm growth.
    Conversely, we advance the literature on the causes and consequences of access to
buyers by establishing a particular reason why productive firms in developing countries
rarely participate in growth-conducive value chains.9 That access to demand can be im-
   7 Recent  studies also suggest that supply-side--worker--variation in ability to convey productive qual-
ifications to buyers--employers--severely distorts labor markets in developing countries (Hardy & Mc-
Casland, 2017; Abebe et al., 2019; Bassi & Nansamba, 2019; Carranza et al., 2019).
    8 We know of one other paper that experimentally varies the marketing ability of firms in a poor country:

Anderson et al. (2018). Their focus differs from ours: they study small-scale retail entrepreneurs rather
than medium-sized, multi-sector formal firms, and analyze the impact of an intensive 10-week training,
rather than a short program narrowly focused on accessing a particular market. However, Anderson et al.
(2018)'s results are consistent with ours in that they find remarkably large impacts of marketing ability on
sales and profits in South Africa. Some similarly hands-on consulting programs studied in the literature--
e.g. in Bruhn et al. (2018)--include marketing among multiple modules in a tailored and/or broad training
package, but do not study the impact of enhanced marketing ability itself.
    9 In addition to the more empirical work cited above--see Verhoogen (2008), Foster et al. (2016), and

Pozzi & Schivardi (2016) for examples, and Syverson (2011); De Loecker & Goldberg (2014) for overviews of
related literatures--there is a burgeoning theoretical literature focusing on how demand forces affect firm
dynamics (see e.g. Drozd & Nosal, 2012; Gourio & Rudanko, 2014; Arkolakis et al., 2018), and a growing
body of work on industrial policy (see e.g. Lee, 2017; Lane, 2019).


                                                     6
portant for firm growth--a belief commonly reflected in policy (Lederman et al., 2010)--is
most clearly shown in studies that exploit random or quasi-random allocation of contracts
(Ferraz et al., 2016; Atkin et al., 2017a; Carrillo et al., 2019). This paper to our knowledge
provides the first direct evidence on why some firms are able to sell goods and services to
a particular market while similar firms in the same location are not.10
    Finally, we begin to unpack how lack of information distorts input markets. Infor-
mation frictions have first-order consequences for firms in developing countries (Jensen,
2007; Allen, 2014; Jensen & Miller, 2018; Hjort & Poulsen, 2019). Prior studies document
the distortions arising from classical frictions--constrained contracting, matching, and
search--in low-information markets (see e.g. Startz, 2018; Mitra et al., 2018; Hansman
et al., 2019). We instead show how firms' own ability to sell goods and services affect
participation in input markets, and how such marketing ability interacts with traditional
information frictions that Internet's online market access and search and communication func-
tions can help overcome.11


2      Context and Experimental Design
In this section we describe the context Liberian firms operate in, and the design of the
experiment we use to investigate how informational barriers to marketing goods and ser-
vices affect their access to demand.


2.1         Firms and procurement by large buyers in Liberia
Most firms in Liberia are small. In 2013, the country conducted a national economic cen-
sus aimed at counting all businesses with a solid physical structure. The census reports
data on about 21,500 firms and confirms common observations from other low-income
economies. The average firm has 7.3 employees, 63 percent have less than three employ-
ees, and 98.5 percent have less than 50.
     The non-profit we work with attempts to record all formal tenders in Liberia. In 2016,
it recorded 1,381 tenders. Summary statistics of these tenders are shown in Table 1. A little
    10 As
        noted above, research on causes of market access has focused on traditional forms of trade barriers
that differentially constrain the sales of firms of different types, for example those located in different areas
(see e.g. Faber, 2014; Atkin & Donaldson, 2015; Donaldson & Hornbeck, 2016; Hornbeck & Rotemberg, 2019).
  11 Most existing research focuses on how buyers' access to information affects market outcomes like price

dispersion and pass-through (see e.g. Aker, 2010). Jensen (2007) and Mitra et al. (2018) are closer to this
paper in that they analyze how suppliers' access to information affects market outcomes. This paper is also
related to Hjort & Poulsen (2019), but unlike them, we document why Internet connectivity can help firms
in poor countries' access markets.



                                                       7
more than half are from public sector buyers such as ministries; a small minority (about
2 percent) from private companies; and the remainder from international organizations.
Most tenders are posted publicly: 57 percent in newspapers and another 31 percent online.
Twelve percent are publicized only through word-of-mouth.12 Anecdotally, many large
buyers report that they have a hard time finding small and medium-sized suppliers that
meet the requirements to fulfill their contracts.


2.2    Sample
The sampling frame for the experiment we carried out was Building Markets' directory
of active firms in Liberia. The organization's goal is to integrate local small and medium-
sized firms into value chains by enabling them to win contracts. They maintain online
directories of thousands of firms in several developing countries, akin to the Yellow Pages.
The Liberian directory included more than 4,000 firms in 2017.
    To be included in the sample, firms had to:

   · Be listed on the non-profit's business directory

   · Have at least one employee in addition to the owner

   · Be located in Monrovia, the capital city

   · Have not already taken the Winning-contracts training

In addition, since a lot of firms closed down after the 2014-2016 West African Ebola out-
break, only firms that had been in contact with the non-profit after April 2015 (when the
outbreak subsided) were included in the sampling frame.
    The firms in the sample span many different sectors, the largest being "Construction
and Renovation" (23 percent), "Food and Beverages" (16 percent), and "Home Essen-
tials" (13 percent). We show this and other summary statistics from before the experiment
started in Table 2. These data come from periodical surveys the non-profit carries out to
keep track of the firms in its directory. The mean number of employees is 14, and there is
huge variation in this measure of firm size: the standard deviation is 43. Ninety percent
of the firms have at least one Liberian owner. Thirty-four percent of the managers speak
at least one local language in addition to Liberian English.
    Relative to all firms in Liberia's economic census, firms with between five and 20
employees are over-represented in our sample, while the smallest and bigger firms are
  12 Publicsector buyers publicize 85 percent of their tenders in newspapers and 14 percent online. In-
ternational organizations publicize 32 percent of their tenders in newspapers and 45 percent online. The
remaining tenders are only advertised through word-of-mouth.

                                                   8
under-represented. This is shown in Panel A of Figure 1. Relative instead to otherwise
comparable firms which had participated in the non-profit's Winning-contracts training
in the past--those that satisfy the other three sample requirements above--firms with
fewer than 10 employees are overrepresented in our sample, as shown in Panel B.13
    The firms in the sample have little experience supplying to large buyers. Twenty-
one percent bid on one or more tenders in the six months before being interviewed, and
12 percent won one or more tenders. The average success rate--tenders won relative to
tenders the firm bid on--is 32 percent.


2.3    The Winning-contracts training
We randomly assigned firms in the sample to treatment (772 firms) and control (420 firms)
groups. The randomization was stratified on number-of-employees bins, sector, and the
geographical zone within Monrovia in which the firm is located. The treatment and con-
trol groups are balanced, as shown in the first two columns of Table 3.
    The research team visited the treatment group firms starting in June 2016 and gave
each one a voucher allowing one person from the firm to attend the Winning-contracts
training for free.14 The firms were also asked to answer a survey and given information
about the training. This information included the training's content, as well as statistics
on how participation correlated with bidding and various measures of success for firms
like theirs in the past, as measured in data from the non-profit's periodical surveys.15
    The training content focuses exclusively on how to bid on and win formal contracts.
It is not aimed at raising a firm's productivity: neither of the two training sessions are
sector-specific, and there is no mention of management practices, financial planning, or
product development. There is also no mention of how use of the Internet can help firms.
    The first training session lasts five days and is referred to as General Procurement train-
ing. This session teaches participants the fundamentals of the process of bidding on ten-
ders: how to find tenders and how to bid. The General Procurement session also provides
information about supplier and bid characteristics that many buyers require or put weight
on when awarding a contract. Examples include environmental awareness, ethical behav-
  13 More  precisely, the benchmark firms in Panel B include both the firms in our sample and those that are
listed on the non-profit's business directory; have at least one employee, and are located in Monrovia, but
have taken the Winning-contracts training in the past. Doing so cost a fee of about USD 50.
   14 The voucher did not have an expiration date and could be used when desired.
   15 As specified in the pre-analysis plan, the voucher was combined with different statistics on how par-

ticipation correlated with bidding on and winning contracts in the past in several different sub-treatments
used to encourage firms to attend the training. However, we do not observe differences in effects of these
sub-treatments in either take-up or effect of the treatment. In the analysis presented here, all sub-treatments
are combined.


                                                      9
ior, and sensitivity to cultural differences or persons with disabilities. Clarifying these is
an important aspect of the training because many participants say that they find such aux-
iliary buyer preferences confusing. For example, most small and medium-sized firms in
Liberia use little energy and therefore would be considered "green" businesses, but many
fail to mention this in their bids.
    Completing the first week of training is required to participate in the second training
session, called Bid Compilation training. This session lasts two days and offers a hands-
on toolkit for producing bids. Participants do exercises in which they examine a mock
tender, prepare a draft bid, learn to communicate with procurement officers, and undergo
evaluation of their bid. The second training session in essence teaches firms how to engage
with buyers at the different stages of the tender process.
    Almost all firms in the sample that took the training did so from June 2016 to Novem-
ber 2016.16 The non-profit offered two to three training sessions per month depending
on demand, and a total of eight training sessions. On average 32 attendees from firms in
11 different sectors participated in each training session. Figure 2 summarizes the experi-
mental design and the timeline of the experiment.


2.4    Data
Our analysis is based on data collected in three rounds: pre-baseline, baseline, and end-
line. Firms listed in the non-profit's directory are asked to answer a phone survey every
three to six months. The data collected through these phone surveys were made avail-
able to the research team. We refer to the last round before the data collection for the
experiment itself as the pre-baseline data.
    The research team collected the baseline data starting in June 2016. When research
assistants visited firms in the treatment group to give them the training voucher, they also
asked the firms to answer a survey. By construction, this baseline data round only covers
the firms in the treatment group.
    Lastly, the research team attempted to re-interview all firms in the full sample for an
endline survey conducted from March to June 2017. Out of the 1,192 firms in the sample,
we successfully (re-) surveyed 831 firms: 295 in the control group, and 533 in the treatment
group. The survey team's use of a battery of tracking techniques--both phone and in-
person search, GPS devices, flexible scheduling of interviews, etc--kept attrition low. The
firms which answered the endline survey are slightly different from firms which did not.17
  16 Three firms took the training in January 2017.
  17 Thisis shown in Appendix Table A.1. Appendix Table A.2 shows that the treatment and control groups
are balanced also in the sample of firms that were interviewed at endline, as well as summary statistics for


                                                    10
However, there was no differential attrition across the treatment and control groups, as
shown in the last two columns of Table 3.


3     Conceptual Framework Part 1: Bidding on Contracts
In this section we present a simple model that illustrates how firms may benefit from
enhanced marketing knowledge.
    A buyer selects a supplier from bids submitted by firms in an auction. The bids state
the price and/or the quality of the products on offer, but also auxiliary features such as
the firm's environmental awareness. Certain features may be required, while auxiliary
features are substitutable. For example, conditional on the bidder being able to provide
a certain quality, a buyer might be willing to choose a higher price bid if the bidder re-
ports great environmental awareness. The tender market is also marked by information
asymmetry since buyers don't have perfect information about bidders. Therefore win-
ning bidders can earn rents, the size of which depend not only on the firm's production
costs but also their knowledge of buyers' preferences over auxiliary features--marketing
knowledge.
    We now formalize these ideas in a simple bidding model.


3.1    Model set-up
A firm benefits from two types of contracts: those that are won through tenders in an
auction, and non-tender contracts that do not require formal bidding. Its profit can thus
be written as
                            N r (a, b) +  (e, s) - c(e + kb)                           (1)

where N is the total number of open tenders and r (a, b) the expected rent extracted from a
bid. r depends on a, the tender-winning knowledge of the firm, and b, the number of bids
submitted--a measure of the firm's effort to win contracts through tenders. N r (a, b) is
thus the firm's expected rent over all open tenders.  (e, s) is the profit a firm makes from
non-tender contracts.  is a function of e, the firms' efforts to win contracts outside of the
tender market, and s, the firm's non-tender contract-winning knowledge. The function
c(e + kb) measures the cost of seeking contracts for the firm. k measures the relative cost
of effort devoted to winning contracts in the tender markets to that in non-tender markets.
c depends on the weighted sum of the firm's marketing effort in and out of the tender
market, and its weight in the profit function is  .
firms in this restricted sample.

                                             11
    We make standard assumptions on the shape of the functions r,  and c. r is increasing
in the number of tenders the firm bids on and its tender-winning knowledge (ra , rb > 0)
and concave in a and b (raa , rbb < 0). We also assume that tender-winning knowledge
and bidding effort are complementary, so that the marginal rent from an additional bid is
higher if firms have higher tender-winning knowledge (rab > 0). Similarly, we assume 
is increasing (e , s > 0) and concave in both arguments (ee , ss < 0) and that knowledge
and effort are complementary (es  0). We assume the cost function to be increasing
(c > 0) and convex (c > 0).


3.2   Winning-contracts training
We think of both tender-winning knowledge and non-tender contract-winning knowl-
edge as functions of a general marketing ability . This ability represents, for example,
the firm's capacity to identify and appeal to buyers' preferences, or to convey the firm's
productive qualifications to buyers. Naturally, we suppose both forms of knowledge s()
and a() to be increasing and concave in the general ability .

Proposition 1. The effect of Winning-contracts training on a firm's profits is unambiguously
positive. However, with no further assumptions on s () and a (), the effect of the training on
the number of tenders the firm bids on and its effort pursuing non-tender contracts is ambiguous.

Proof. Firms choose the number of tenders to bid on and the effort pursuing non-tender
contracts to maximize profits, and satisfy the first order conditions:

                                        N rb - kc = 0
                                           e - c = 0

                                N rbb - k 2 c        -kc
The Jacobian matrix J (b, e) is                               whose determinant is
                                   -kc               ee - c

                            D = N rbb (ee - c ) - k 2 c ee > 0

By the Implicit Function Theorem, there exist unique continuously differentiable functions
b(N , ,  , k ) and e(N , ,  , k ) over an open set, such that

                                 1
                         b = -     {N rba a (ee - c ) + es s kc }                             (2)
                                 D
                               1
                       e = -     {N rba a kc + (N rbb - k 2 c )es s }                         (3)
                               D

                                                12
    The first term in the bracket of (2) is negative while the second term is positive. With
no further assumptions, whether or not Winning-contracts training increases the number
of tenders firms bid on is thus ambiguous. Similarly, the sign of the effect on the effort to
win non-tender contracts is also ambiguous.
    Let V (, b (), e ()) denote the maximized profit of the firm. By the Envelope Theo-
rem, the effect of the training on profit is therefore

                    dV
                       = N ra a + N rb b + e e + s s - c (e + kb )
                    d
                       = N ra a + s s + b [N rb - kc ] + e [e - c ]
                        = N r a a +  s s  > 0

where the inequality is given by the FOCs.

    Proposition (1) shows that enhanced contract-winning knowledge is expected to in-
crease firms' profit. The impact of Winning-contracts training may come from bidding
on more tenders, exerting greater effort to win non-tender contracts, or both, depending
on the relative increase in the marginal payoff to the two sales activities caused by the
training. This intuition is further developed in the following proposition:

Proposition 2. Winning-contracts training increases the number of tenders firms bid on if (i) the
effect of the training on tender-winning knowledge is significantly bigger than the effect on non-
tender contract-winning knowledge, (ii) the demand in the tender market is sufficiently large, and
(iii) the search and communication costs necessary to win contracts are sufficiently small.

Proof. From (1) we have that

                        b > 0  N rba a (c - ee ) > es s kc                                     (4)

The larger N --the number of open tenders--the more likely the above inequality is to
hold, which shows part (ii) of Proposition 2.
   Inequality (4) can be re-written

                                           a > Cs

where C = N r (   es kc
                        ee . This shows that the inequality holds if the effect of Winning-
                ba c -  )
contracts training on tender-winning knowledge a is significantly bigger than the effect
on non-tender contract-winning knowledge s , which shows part (i) of Proposition 2.



                                                13
   Further, since ee < 0, the denominator of C is larger when  is small. Therefore, the
smaller the cost of seeking contracts  , the more likely b is to be positive, which shows
part (iii) of Proposition 2.

   Given a small increase in the general marketing ability underlying both types of sales
knowledge, firms reassign their efforts between pursuing non-tender contracts and bid-
ding on tenders, depending on the new marginal payoff to these two types of effort. If the
increase in general marketing ability improves tender-winning knowledge more, firms
will shift effort from non-tender markets to the tender market.


3.3   Information frictions
The framework presented in this section focuses on a different form of information fric-
tions than existing research: variation in marketing knowledge resulting in a "wedge" in
the rents from contracts that differs across equally productive firms. However, the intu-
ition underlying the model also suggests that such distortionary variation in marketing
knowledge may interact with traditional information frictions and in particular the tech-
nologies used to dampen them in the modern economy. On the one hand, information
technology may reduce the benefits of enhanced contract-winning knowledge if the Inter-
net and other ICTs themselves allow firms to overcome informational barriers to market-
ing their products. On the other hand, information technology may increase the marginal
benefit of enhanced contract-winning knowledge if firms with access to such technology
can more easily find and bid on suitable contracts: firms that use the Internet may in ef-
fect have access to a bigger market and more easily be able to search for and communicate
with buyers, for example. We investigate this empirically in Section 5 and return to the
underlying theoretical intuition in Section 6. Before doing so, we test propositions 1 and
2 in the data from the experiment.


4     Average Impact of Winning-contracts Training
In this section we show that the opportunity to learn how to sell goods and services to
large buyers induces Liberian firms to bid on and win more and higher-quality contracts.
In Section 5 we explore heterogeneity in the impact of the Winning-contracts training we
document in this section.
    Where relevant we show results from both Intent-to-treat (ITT) regressions of the out-
comes of interest on treatment status and Treatment-on-the-treated (TOT) regressions like



                                           14
the following:
                       yi = 0 + 1 Winning-contracts Trainingi +  Xi +                  i                    (5)

Here yi is a measure of firm i's expectations, behavior, or performance measured at end-
line. Xi is a set of controls measured before the experiment, including fixed effects for a
firm's sector(s), location, and size bin fixed effects: we show results both with and with-
out including these. Winning-contracts Trainingi is an indicator variable equal to one for
firms that participate in the training, and 1 is the coefficient of interest. We present tables
with TOT estimates in the top panel, and ITT estimates in the bottom panel.


4.1    Take-up of training and expectations
Firms in the treatment group are significantly more likely to attend the Winning-contracts
training. Those in the control group were not encouraged to attend the training, but four
control group firms independently decided to pay to participate. Columns (1) and (2) of
Table 4 show that the treatment--that is, the voucher and encouragement to attend the
training--increases the probability that a firm participates by 19-20 percentage points, as
recorded in the non-profit's attendance sheet.18 Given this relatively high but incomplete
take-up, the ITT estimates of impact are scaled down in magnitude relative to the TOT
estimates that follow, but generally of similar statistical significance.
    At endline, firms that were induced to participate in Winning-contracts training by the
treatment expect to bid on and win more tenders in the future. Trained firms expect to
bid on about one--or 40-50 percent--more tenders in the coming six months, and to win
about 55 percent more of the tenders the firm bids on. We show this in Table 5.


4.2    Number of contracts won
Small- and medium-sized Liberian firms rarely bid on contracts awarded through a formal
tender process. The control group firms in our sample bid on 0.35 tenders during the past
six months on average. Winning a tender is even more rare: control group firms won an
average of 0.16 contracts through a formal bidding process in the past six months.
  18 These numbers are for the first part of the Winning-contracts training, the General Procurement session.

Panel A of Appendix Table A.3 shows the same coefficient for the second session, on Bid Compilation.
Eighty-five percent of the firms that attend the first session also attend the second session, and treatment
increases the probability of attending the second session by 17 percent (and to self-report participating in
any type of training by about 15 percent, as we also show in Appendix Table A.3). In the results that follow,
we estimate TOT effects for firms that embark on the Winning-contracts training. Note also that, following
Abadie et al. (2017), we present robust standard errors as there are neither sampling design nor experimental
design reasons for clustering in our context, although our results are robust to clustering at the sector level.



                                                      15
    Enhanced contract-winning knowledge markedly increases in the number of contracts
firms bid on and win. We show this in Table 6. First, as seen in columns (1) and (2), firms
that are encouraged to participate in Winning-contracts training bid on 0.16 more tenders
in the past six months--an increase of nearly 50 percent compared to the control group.19
The estimated impact is even larger, as expected, for treated firms which took the training.
    We find a large positive impact also on the total number of contracts won. Firms that
take the Winning-contracts training because of the randomized encouragement win more
than one additional formal contract over the course of six months--an increase of over
200 percent--as we show in columns (3) and (4) of Table 6. It thus appears that firms that
learn how to market their products to large buyers can access a market that otherwise
comparable firms cannot.
    The benefits of enhanced contract-winning knowledge extend beyond a greater ability
to win tenders, consistent with the framework in Section 3. To see this, we look at contracts
won through other means than a tender process--those that do not require a formal bid--
in columns (7) and (8) of Table 6. Being encouraged to participate in Winning-contracts
training raises the number of non-tender contracts won by about 60 percent compared to
the control group. As shown in columns (5) and (6), treated firms also win 53 percent
more contracts through formal bidding processes, though this estimate is only marginally
statistically significant.


4.3    Quality of contracts won
Learning how to market goods and services to large buyers increases not only the quan-
tity, but also the quality of contracts Liberian firms win. First, treated firms that take the
Winning-contracts training more than double their chances of winning long-lasting (six
months or more) contracts, our primary measure of contract quality. We show this in
Panel A of Table 7.
    Second, participating in the training also doubles firms' chances of winning contracts
from international clients, from 29 to 58 percent. We show this in Appendix Table A.4. Ex-
porting often enables firm "upgrading" (Atkin et al., 2017a; Verhoogen, 2020), and grow-
ing evidence suggests that supplying to foreign buyers operating in the home market can
similarly benefit firms in poor countries (Abebe et al., 2020; Alfaro-Urena et al., 2019).
    Finally, we find that firms that learn how to market their products to large buyers bid
  19 The  first column of Appendix Table A.4 shows results on the extensive margin of bidding on tenders.
The probability of bidding on any tenders is estimated to increase by about 75 percent. This estimate is not
statistically significant, but the magnitude suggests that the training likely positively affects the extensive
margin as well.



                                                      16
on and win a greater proportion of all tenders advertised for goods and services the firm
specializes in. We show this in Appendix Table A.4. The outcome variable is now the
number of tenders a firm bids on or wins as a proportion of the total number advertised
within the primary sector the firm operates in, as measured in the non-profit's database of
tenders. The proportion of all own-sector contracts bid on and won is respectively around
500 and 600 percent higher among firms induced to take the Winning-contracts training
by the randomized encouragement.


4.4       Revenue earned
Learning how to market products to large buyers--and bidding on and winning more
formal contracts--appears to ultimately increase firms' revenue considerably. We show
this in Panel B of Table 7. The estimates suggest that the total value of contracts won is
around USD 10,000, or 200 percent, higher in treated firms that take the Winning-contracts
training. Although remarkably large, this estimate is not statistically significant, perhaps
because--as is common in firm surveys--many managers were unwilling to answer ques-
tions about the value or sources of their contracts.20
    The evidence we have presented in Section 4 shows that learning how to access large
buyer markets is remarkably beneficial for small- and medium-sized Liberian firms. Firms
that are given the opportunity to participate in Winning-contracts training expect to bid
on and win more tenders, and do in fact bid on and win more tender and non-tender
contracts, and contracts of higher quality. These gains may come in part at the expense of
status quo contract-winners. The firms that would have won the relevant formal contracts
had treated firms not learned to compete for contracts are most likely larger firms outside
of our sample--the experimental design minimized any direct impact on control group
firms.21 While the experiment was not designed to test the market-wide consequences
of Winning-contracts training, the results in this section point towards possible allocative
efficiency improvements from removing informational barriers to market access. Sup-
pose that contracts will tend to be awarded to the most productive firms if every firm in
the economy has the ability to bid. If so, the treatment effects we have shown--Winning-
  20 We treat such missing values as zeroes. Firms in the treatment group were 21 percent more likely not to
answer value-of-contracts-won questions, suggesting that we may be underestimating the impact on value
of contracts won.
  21 Recall from Sub-section 2.4 that the research team did not collect data from the control group until the

endline, suggesting that control group firms were most likely unaware that another group of firms was
being taught how to bid on tenders. Combined with control group firms rarely bidding on--and even more
rarely winning--formal contracts in the status quo, this suggests that increased bidding on and winning
contracts by treatment group firms generally did not come at the expense of control group firms.



                                                     17
contracts training enabling some firms that ex ante lack sufficient contract-winning knowl-
edge to bid on and win contracts--may reduce misallocation if scaled up.22
    In the next section we show how a firm's contract-winning knowledge interacts with
its ability to access contracts and search for and communicate with buyers through the
Internet.


5       How the Impact of Winning-contracts Training Varies with
        Information Technology
In this section we show evidence that, in Liberia, only firms with access to modern infor-
mation technology--the Internet--benefit from learning how to market their products to
large buyers.
    If complex input procurement procedures limit access to large buyers by amplifying
information frictions, we expect the Winning-contracts training to interact with suppliers'
ability to find contracts and communicate with buyers. In the baseline survey, firms were
asked how often they use the Internet for business purposes. Respondents could choose
between seven answers, ranging from "Every Day" to "Never". The distribution of an-
swers is shown in Figure 3. There is wide variation in access, with about 45 percent of
firms reporting that they use the Internet for business purposes daily and 30 percent that
they never do so.
    Firms that use the Internet for business purposes are typically larger, and bid on and
win more tenders at baseline, as we show in Appendix Table A.5. Such firms also report
to find it easier to access tenders; to have sufficient time to prepare bids; and to better
understand the requirements in tender documents.
    We now explore how the impact of Winning-contracts training differs for firms with
access to the Internet. In Sub-section 5.2 we investigate whether any such heterogeneity
is due only to differences between the types of firms that do and don't have access to the
Internet or also to the technology itself.
    22 In
       general, the impact of programs favoring potential bidders that a priori are unlikely to win contracts
on participation in procurement auctions and the price buyers ultimately pay is theoretically ambiguous (see
e.g. McAfee & McMillan, 1989; Best et al., 2019). However, auction theory also suggests that the documented
increase in the pool of potential bidders likely makes buyers better off and may improve allocative efficiency
if buyers award their contracts to the most qualified bidder.




                                                     18
5.1    Number and quality of contracts won and Internet access
The impact of Winning-contracts training is markedly different for firms with Internet
access. To show this, we estimate the following regression:

                      yi = 0 + 1 Winning-contracts trainingi                                             (6)
                        + 2 Winning-contracts trainingi × Interneti +  Xi +             i


We normalize the recorded measure of firms' Internet use to unit scale so that Interneti = 1
if firm i uses the Internet for business purposes every day at baseline and Interneti = 0 if
the firm never does so at baseline.23 We restrict attention to the ITT results hereafter for
simplicity.
     Winning-contracts training induces firms that use the Internet daily to bid on 0.5-0.7
additional tenders over the course of six months, compared to the treatment's impact on
bidding by firms without Internet access. In fact, the estimates from (6) indicate that the
opportunity to learn how to bid on formal tenders has no impact on the number of tenders
firms that do not use the Internet bid on. At baseline firms had bid on 0.35 tenders in the
past six months. The relative and total effect for firms with Internet access is thus large.
We show these results in Table 8.24
     Winning-contracts training also enables firms with Internet access to win more con-
tracts, but has no such effect for firms that do not use the Internet. Columns (3)-(8) of Table
8 show that the total number of contracts won; the number of contracts won through a ten-
der; and the number of non-tender contracts won all tend to double or triple when a firm
with Internet access is encouraged to learn how to bid on and win tenders. In contrast,
contracts won are unaffected for treated firms that do not use the Internet.
     The impact of enhanced marketing ability on the quality of contracts won as measured
by contract length is considerably greater for firms that use the Internet. Such firms are
26 percentage points or around twice as likely to win a contract lasting longer than six
months if encouraged to learn how to bid on tenders, as seen in Panel A of Appendix
Table A.6. Firms that use the Internet also bid on and win a greater proportion of all
  23 Here Xi includes Interneti so that 2 captures the pure interaction effect.
  24 Interestingly, the estimated effect of the treatment for firms without access to the Internet on most of
the outcomes in Table 8 is negative, though small in magnitude and statistically insignificant. A possible
explanation is that participating in Winning-contracts training leads firms without Internet access to divert
their sales effort from bidding on particular tenders that they are especially likely to win towards attempt-
ing to win more non-tender formal contracts (consistent with the model in Section 3). Since such firms
ultimately do not win more non-tender formal contracts after taking the training--the estimated effect on
non-tender contracts won is zero or slightly positive, though imprecisely estimated--this could explain a
possible decrease in total contracts won, in addition to in bidding on and winning tenders.



                                                     19
tenders advertised for goods and services the firm specializes in. However, we do not find
evidence that the increase in the probability of winning a contract from an international
buyer is greater for firms that use the Internet.
    Learning how to access large buyers has a remarkably big ultimate impact on the value
of contracts won for firms with Internet access, but little effect for firms without Internet
access. In Panel B of Appendix Table A.6 we show that treated firms that use the Internet
win contracts worth about USD 10,000 or 200 percent more than control firms, while the
impact on contract revenue is small and statistically insignificant for firms that do not use
the Internet. The average impact on revenue we documented in Section 4 is thus driven
entirely by firms with access to a technology that helps them search for, be found by, and
communicate with buyers.


5.2    Use of the Internet versus differential access by firm type
We now show evidence suggesting that Internet technology itself helps firms use their
marketing ability to win contracts from large buyers. To do so, we start by repeating re-
gression (6) with additional controls included. These capture the interaction between the
Winning-contracts training and a wide range of baseline firm characteristics that may cor-
relate with Internet access: firm size as measured by employment, the firm's counties of
operation, the gender of the owner, sectors the firm operates in, languages used for busi-
ness, the geographical zone the firm is located in, and the extent to which the firm bids on
tenders at baseline.25 With these interactions included we continue to find, as in Table 8,
that the increase in tender bids submitted, total number of contracts won, contracts won
through a tender, and the total value of contracts won is significantly greater for firms
that use the Internet. The estimated coefficient on Winning-contracts trainingi × Interneti ,
shown in Appendix Table A.7, is in fact bigger in magnitude with these additional inter-
action terms included.
    We next show that Internet access is in fact the best predictor of firms' conditional
average treatment effect (CATE) among the full set of firm characteristics captured in the
data we use.26 Following the LASSO procedure in Chernozhukov et al. (2018), we estimate
the best linear predictor of the CATE of the treatment on the number of tenders a firm bids
on as follows:

   1. We first split the full sample into two parts, the auxiliary sample and the main sample.
  25 Recallfrom the introduction that we measure the initial characteristics of firms using pre-baseline peri-
odical surveys conducted by the non-profit that are available both for the treatment and control groups.
  26 The additional firm characteristics we interacted the treatment with in Appendix Table A.7 cover a wide

range, but nevertheless represent a selection of such characteristics subjectively chosen by the authors.

                                                     20
         The two are used respectively as the training set and the hold-out set.

   2. We then use a LASSO regression of the number of bids on baseline observables es-
      timated on the control group part of the auxiliary sample to predict the number of
      bids for the full auxiliary sample (control and treatment). A second LASSO regres-
      sion of number of bids on (i) the predicted output of the first LASSO regression and
      (ii) the interaction of treatment and baseline observables selects variables which best
      predict the heterogeneity of the treatment effect observed.

   3. We then test the predictive power of the heterogeneity variables selected in the aux-
      iliary sample in step 2 on the main sample. Predicted number of bids is generated
      on the main sample using the variables selected in step 2 with their associated coef-
      ficients from the auxiliary sample. The observed number of bids in the main sample
      is regressed on the predicted number of bids based on the auxiliary sample. This al-
      lows us to test whether variables selected in step 2 accurately describe the observed
      heterogeneity in treatment effects.27

   4. Finally, we run a cross-validation procedure wherein the main sample is used as the
      training set and the auxiliary sample as the hold-out set.

    The results of this procedure depends on the random split of the sample. We thus
bootstrap by repeating the procedure 100 times. Since each of these includes two estima-
tions, the total number of LASSO estimations is 200. Out of these 200 estimations, 196
were validated by the test for the hold-out set heterogeneity variables as good predictors
of heterogeneity. Appendix Table A.8 shows how many times each firm characteristic was
selected in the set of variables that best explain heterogeneity in treatment effects in the
training set. Internet access is by far the variable selected the most times, 194.
    In sum, the evidence in Appendix Tables A.7 and A.8 suggests that, in isolation, the
broader ways in which firms with and without Internet access differ are unlikely to fully
explain the trainingi × Interneti interaction effect. The instrumental functions of Internet
technology itself appear to also help "connected" firms use contract-winning knowledge
to better access markets.
  27 Avariable is said to accurately describe the observed heterogeneity if the p-value of its coefficient on
the main sample is smaller than 0.01.




                                                     21
6      Conceptual Framework Part 2: Bidding on Contracts with
       and without Information Technology
In this section, we build on the framework introduced in Section 3 to formalize intuition
for why firms with access to information technology may benefit more from marketing
ability.


6.1      Information technology
We consider two general ways in which information technology such as the Internet
can give firms a better starting point for accessing markets--greater potential for win-
ning contracts. First, firms that invest in information technology are able to access some
contracts--a set of tenders--that can only be accessed online, directly expanding the mar-
ket they face.28 Second, information technology reduces search and communication fric-
tions, for example making it easier to correspond with buyers and possible to visit them
in person less frequently. Online market access can be modeled by simply decomposing
the total number of tenders N as Non + Nof f , where Non is the number of tenders only
available online, and Nof f is the number of tenders also available to firms not investing
in Internet access. Easier search and communication can be modeled as a difference in  , the
weight in front of the cost function. If we denote the firm's Internet access choice by i, we
can now write the profit function in (1) with:
                                             
                                             N
                                                  on   + Nof f   i=1
                                       N=
                                             N
                                                  of f           i=0

and                                                
                                                   
                                                         1    i=1
                                             =
                                                   
                                                         0    i=0

with 1 < 0 .

    28 The
         non-profit notifies the suppliers in its registry that belong to the relevant sector by SMS whenever a
tender is published. This system operates separately from our experiment, and both treatment and control
group firms receive such notifications. It is thus not surprising that Winning-contracts training itself had
no impact on the probability that a supplier in our sample reports to have found out about a tender from
the non-profit. The reason why SMS notifications leave scope for Internet access helping firms find suitable
tenders to bid on may be that the firms in our sample generally find the SMS notifications unhelpful. Few
suppliers report to have found out about a tender they bid on from the non-profit, and many told us that
they treat the SMS notifications as spam.



                                                         22
Proposition 3. The interactive effect of Winning-contracts training and Internet access on the
number of tenders firms bid on is unambiguously positive, while that on effort to win non-tender
contracts is ambiguous. This last effect depends on the magnitude of the (a) greater (online) market
access and (b) lower search and communication costs firms with Internet access face.

Proof. The interactive effect of training and Internet is given by comparing b between
firms with and without Internet access. From the Mean Value Theorem, this is given by:

                                                   ~,
                   b (N1 , 1 ) - b (N0 , 0 ) = bN (N ~ )Non + b (N
                                                                 ~,~ )                           (7)

       ~,
where (N  ~ ) is a point between (N0 , 0 ) and (N1 , 1 ). Further, we have  = 1 - 0 < 0
and we have that:

                                 es s kc N rbb ee + k 2 c N rba a ee
                                                                  2
                        b = -                                        <0
                                                D2

                              (ee - c )kc (rba a kee + rbb es s )
                      bN =                                        >0
                                            D2
Therefore, (7) is positive.
    Similarly, the difference in the treatment effect on effort pursuing non-tender contracts
is given by :

                          e (N1 , 1 ) - e (N0 , 0 ) = eN Non + e                                 (8)

Since e and eN are both negative, the sign of (8) depends on the relative magnitude of
each term.

Corollary 4. (1) Online Market Access Channel : If the impact of Winning-contracts training
for firms with Internet access is larger following an increase in online demand, then the online
market access channel must exist.
(2) Search and Communication Channel : If the effect of Winning-contracts training for firms
with Internet access is larger than that for firms without Internet access for non-tender contracts,
then the search and communication channel must exist. This holds regardless of the level of online
demand.

    Intuitively, if the Internet did not help convert marketing ability into access to buyers
via an online market access effect then online demand shocks should not differentially
benefit trained Internet firms compared to non-Internet firms. Conversely, if the Internet
did not help convert marketing ability into access to buyers via a search and communi-
cation channel then trained Internet firms should not have a comparative advantage in

                                                23
winning non-tender contracts compared to non-Internet firms.

Proof. Proof of (1):
The effect of an increase in online demand Non on the interactive effect of the Winning-
contracts training and Internet access, assuming that b 0, can be written

                     [b (N1 , 1 ) - b (N0 , 0 )] = bN Non + bN Non                        (9)

baN is decreasing in N so that bN < 0. So if the equation (9) above is positive, then it has
to be that Non > 0: there is an online market access channel of the Internet.
    Proof of (2):
In equation (8), the first term eN Non is negative, while the second term e  is positive.
Hence, if (8) is positive overall, it has to be that e  > 0 and Internet firms benefit from
lower search and communication costs (i.e.  < 0).

    It is worth noting that this framework can easily be extended to a context where firms'
general marketing ability  is endogenously influenced by firms' experience in apply-
ing to and winning contracts. Suppose for example that contract-winning is subject to
learning-by-doing effects. The intuition underlying the predictions laid out in this section
then implies that firms with Internet access which take the Winning-contracts training
win more contracts also in the long-run if they experience positive demand shocks early
on. We investigate this possibility empirically in Sub-section 7.2. Before doing so, we test
Proposition 3 and Corollary 4 by exploiting variation in the composition of demand over
time.


7    Why the Impact of Winning-contracts Training Varies with
     Information Technology
In this section we show evidence that Liberian firms that learn how to sell their products to
large buyers can use the Internet to win formal contracts both because additional tenders
are accessible online and because suppliers can search for and communicate with buyers
online.
    In Section 4 we saw evidence that learning how to bid on and win formal tenders
also improves firms' ability to win non-tender contracts. The framework in sections 3
and 6 then predicts that Winning-contracts training should unambiguously increase effort
to win non-tender contracts if the Internet facilitates market access through a search and
communication function, especially when online tender demand is low. If in addition it

                                             24
does so through an online market access function, the framework predicts that effort bidding
on tenders may increase when online tender demand is high. To investigate, we thus use
the non-profit's database of tenders published in Liberia. It records the date a tender is
publicized, the medium it is publicized through (newspaper, online or other), and the
relevant supplier sector(s).


7.1    Online market access, search, and communication
Figure 4 shows the variation across time in the number of tenders publicized in 2016 for
an average sector in Liberia. About one-third of tenders are publicized online, but this
proportion varies markedly from week to week. We use this variation to construct firm-
specific online demand shocks. Non-tender contracts are rarely publicized online or in
other public fora; contracts that are publicized online are almost always awarded through
a formal tender process.
    To investigate how firms' effort pursuing contracts and bidding on tenders changes
with online demand, we estimate the following regression:

             yi = 0 + 1 Winning-contracts Trainingi                                                  (10)
                + 2 Winning-contracts Trainingi × Online Demandi
                + 3 Winning-contracts Trainingi × Interneti
                + 4 Winning-contracts Trainingi × Interneti × Online Demandi
                + 5 Interneti + Xi +        i


Here Online demandi is defined as the number of tenders for firm i's sector(s) that are
publicized online in the three months after the firm's training. Each supplier can--and
most do--list two sectors in the registry, and we include any that they list in the construc-
tion of Online demandi . Individual firms are thus assigned the demand corresponding to
one out of a wide array of sector combinations during the period after taking the training.
We use "sector" as shorthand for these sectors and sector-combinations corresponding to
firms.
    Xi is a set of controls that includes the ones used in previous sections.29 Here Xi
additionally includes the number of tenders for firm i's sector(s) that are publicized offline
in the three months after the firm's training (defined analogously to Online demandi ) so
that we focus on relative online demand in the analysis.30
  29 Theseare employment, counties of operation, gender of the owner, sector fixed effects, languages used
for business, geographical zone fixed effects, and the number of submitted bids, all measured at baseline.
  30 Note also that we specifically focus on variation in online demand when a firm's marketing abil-



                                                   25
     The effect of an increase in online demand is identified by within-sector variation in
firms' training timing since we control for sector fixed effects. Firms which took the train-
ing earlier may have experienced more or less online demand in the three months period
following their training than firms which took the training later. A possible concern with
exploiting this across-firm variation is that particular types of firms may be able to forecast
future online demand and choose when to take the Winning-contracts training accord-
ingly. Note first that our measure of firm-specific online demand shocks is uncorrelated
with firms' behavior and performance at baseline, as shown in Appendix Table A.9. Nev-
ertheless, we next construct an instrument for post-training online demand by exploiting
the arbitrary order in which firms were visited and encouraged to participate.31 Specifi-
cally, we instrument our online demand measure with the number of online tenders pub-
lished in the three-months period that starts 40 days after the date of the encouragement
visit--the average number of days between encouragement and the last day of training.
     Appendix Table A.10 shows that our instrumented online demand shock variable is
not correlated with training take-up, suggesting that training dates endogenously timed
to match variation in demand does not confound our IV regressions. Note also that our
focus on post-training and post-encouragement demand does not imply an assumption
that time variation in demand does not matter for control group firms which do not take
the training. Instead the assumption is simply that the timing of the encouragement visit
is essentially random. To see this, recall that these demand variables are defined and
calculated at the sector level and that we include sector fixed effects in the regression.
     We find evidence that Liberian firms with Internet access can use marketing knowl-
edge to access the large buyer market both because information technology allows them
to find expressions-of-interest that are otherwise out of reach and also because ICT facil-
itates search for and communication with buyers. We show this in Table 9. Since neither
the variable Online Demandi nor Interneti are dummy variables, we show the average
treatment effect for the group of firms with access to the Internet and with a positive on-
line demand shock in the table footer for easier interpretation of the results.32
     In Column (1) we find that newly-trained Internet firms bid on a significantly higher
number of tenders during an online demand shock, while firms without Internet access do
ity is enhanced--here, by the Winning-contracts training--consistent with the model in sections 3 and
6. Since post-training demand is undefined for firms which do not take the training, the terms
Online Demandi and Interneti × Online Demandi are included in (10) only through their interaction with
Winning-contracts Trainingi .
   31 The order in which the firms were visited was determined by the logistics of the surveying effort and

thus unrelated to contract demand shocks.
   32 The average treatment effect computed is the sum of the table's coefficients for each variable multiplied

by the average value of that variable when the variable is positive.



                                                      26
not. Internet firms also win more tenders at such times, as shown in Column (3). Follow-
ing part (1) of Corollary 4 in Section 6, the fact that an online demand shock exclusively
benefits Internet firms points towards the online market access effect of the Internet.
    Column (4) of Table 9 shows that Internet firms win significantly more non-tender
contracts than non-Internet firms as a result of Winning-contracts training, regardless of
the level of online demand. Following part (2) of Corollary 4, this points towards the
search and communication effect of the Internet, which facilitates finding, bidding on, and
winning both online and offline contracts. Trained firms with Internet access win more
non-tender contracts also when online demand is high.
    Contracts that are won through tenders may be of particular importance, as they are
used by buyers that small and medium-sized firms are otherwise unlikely to gain access
to. In Table 9 we also show that firms that use the Internet and have learned how to
competitively bid on formal contracts win significantly more high-quality, long-lasting
contracts when relative online demand is high. The estimates in Column (5) suggest that
such firms are on average twice as likely to win high quality contracts as firms in the
control group.
    When viewed through the lens of the framework in sections 3 and 6, the results in Ta-
ble 9 indicate that both greater online market access and easier search and communication
for "connected" firms help explain the positive interaction effect between the Winning-
contracts training and Internet access we established in Section 5. A natural question to
ask is whether these results may in part reflect fluctuations in total rather than online de-
mand. In Appendix Table A.11 we repeat (10) but define the demand shock to include
both online and offline tenders. The results are qualitatively similar to those in Table 9. In
light of our framework, insofar as the results in Table 9 are driven in part by total demand,
these patterns in Appendix Table A.11 simply point towards the search and communica-
tion channel, with little to say about online market access. Since we control for offline
demand in (10), we find the interpretation above more plausible.


7.2   Learning-by-doing dynamics in contract-winning
We now show that demand shocks appear to affect also the longer-run trajectory of ICT-
connected firms that have learned how to sell their products to large buyers. In Sub-
section 7.1 we saw that Winning-contracts training induces this particular group--firms
with access to the Internet--to win more tenders in the months after training when a
greater share of demand is online during these same months. To explore learning-by-
doing dynamics in contract-winning, in this sub-section we restrict attention to bids and


                                             27
contracts won several months after the period during which we measure demand shocks--
during the three months before the endline interview.33
    We find evidence indicating that short-run online demand shocks may increase the ex-
tent to which firms with access to the Internet win more tenders because they have learned
how to craft formal bids even in the longer run. We show this in Table 10. Such learning-
by-doing dynamics are not seen for other firms--neither those that lack access to the In-
ternet, nor those that have not learned how to bid on formal tenders. This points towards
longer-run benefits of ability to appeal to large buyers with early access to demand. The
estimates in Table 10 are smaller than those in Table 9 and not statistically significant, but
the patterns are otherwise similar, with one important difference. Firms with access to the
Internet that experience an online demand shock soon after Winning-contracts training
do not win more non-tender contracts nor more total contracts in the longer run. They do,
however, appear to bid on and win more tenders. This suggests that learning-by-doing
dynamics in contract-winning may be especially forceful for formal tenders.34
    In Section 5 we saw that marketing knowledge and the technological ability to access
and interact with buyers positively interact, together increasing Liberian firms' sales. In
this section we have shown that they do so both because Internet use directly expands
the size of the market firms face, and because it facilitates search and communication
with buyers. We have also shown that firms that are given the opportunity to win for-
mal tenders tend to keep winning tenders also in the longer run (see also Atkin et al.,
2017a). These results suggest that the Internet dampens traditional information frictions,
but--perhaps surprisingly--not marketing barriers that prevent information-constrained
suppliers in low-income countries from selling to growth-conductive large buyers. This
may make such barriers the limit to many firms' market in an increasingly online world.
  33 At endline, we asked firms for the dates since the baseline interview on which they bid on tenders and
won contracts. For a subset of tenders, we also observe the opening and closing dates. Ninety percent of
the tenders in our sample are open for bidding less that 30 days, with a mean of 15 days. The tenders that
form part of short-run demand shocks as we measure them and the ones that form part of the outcome we
consider in this sub-section are thus very unlikely to overlap.
   34 Note that, while Table 10 is otherwise identical to Table 9 except with the outcome measured during a

later period of time, Table 10 does not include the Quality of Contracts outcome from Table 9. The reason
is that we cannot be sure when the reported high quality contracts--contracts that last for six months or
more--are won. The endline survey simply asked if the firm had ever won such a contract. We thus take
the conservative approach of assuming that high quality contracts are won in the short run rather than the
long run as defined here.




                                                    28
8   Conclusion
Growing evidence suggests that many productive firms stagnate because of constrained
access to existing demand. Small firms in poor countries rarely win contracts from large
buyers--a particularly growth-conducive form of demand--instead choosing to sell di-
rectly to final consumers. In this paper we uncover an overlooked part of the explana-
tion. We do so through a randomized-controlled trial of a week-long training program
that teaches disadvantaged Liberian firms how to sell their products to large buyers by
bidding on formal tenders. We show that learning how to market products to govern-
ments, corporations, and other large buyers--the details of tender procedures, auxiliary
features of bids many buyers put weight on, and so on--enables Liberian firms to win
more and higher-quality tender and non-tender contracts. This suggests that small and
medium-sized firms face informational barriers to accessing markets that differ from tra-
ditional forms of information frictions. However, we also find that distortionary variation
in marketing ability interacts with more widely studied information frictions. Converting
contract-winning knowledge into market access appears to be difficult without modern
information technology. We show that the treatment effect of the Winning-contracts train-
ing we study is found only among firms that use the Internet, both because such firms
can access a bigger market and because they can more easily search for and communicate
with buyers. We thus begin to unpack how information frictions distort input markets
and thereby exclude firms in poor countries from value chains.




                                            29
References
A BADIE , A LBERTO , ATHEY, S USAN , I MBENS , G UIDO W., & W OOLDRIDGE , J EFFREY. 2017.
  When Should You Adjust Standard Errors for Clustering? NBER working paper no. 24003.
A BEBE , G IRUM , C ARIA , S TEFANO , & O RTIZ -O SPINA , E STEBAN. 2019. The Selection Of
  Talent: Experimental and Structural Evidence From Ethiopia. EDRI working paper.
A BEBE , G IRUM , M C M ILLAN , M ARGARET, & S ERAFINELLI , M ICHEL. 2020. Foreign Di-
  rect Investment and Knowledge Diffusion in Poor Locations: Evidence from Ethiopia. NBER
  working paper no. 24461.
A KER , J ENNY. 2010. Information from Markets Near and Far: Mobile Phones and Agri-
  cultural Markets in Niger. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2, 46­59.
A LFARO -U RENA , A LONSO , M ANELICI , I SABELA , & VASQUEZ , J OSE P. 2019. The Effects
  of Joining Multinational Supply Chains: New Evidence from Firm-to-Firm Linkages. Central
  Bank of Costa Rica mimeo.
A LLEN , T REB. 2014. Information Frictions in Trade. Econometrica, 82(6), 2041­2083.
A LMUNIA , M IGUEL , H JORT, J ONAS , K NEBELMANN , J USTINE , & T IAN , L IN. 2019. Strate-
  gic or Confused Firms? Evidence from "Missing" Transactions in Uganda. CUNEF working
  paper.
A NDERSON , S TEPHEN J., C HANDY, R AJESH , & Z IA , B ILAL. 2018. Pathways to Profits: The
  Impact of Marketing vs. Finance Skills on Business Performance. Management Science,
  64(12), 5559­5583.
A RKOLAKIS , C., PAPAGEORGIOU , T., & T IMOSHENKO , O. 2018. Firm Learning and
  Growth. Review of Economic Dynamics, 27, 146­168.
ATKIN , D AVID , & D ONALDSON , D AVE. 2015. Who's Getting Globalized? The Size and Nature
 of Intranational Trade Costs. NBER Working Paper No. 21439.
ATKIN , D AVID , O SMAN , A DAM , & K HANDELWAL , A MIT K. 2017a. Exporting and Firm
 Performance: Evidence from a Randomized Trial. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(3),
 551­615.
ATKIN , D AVID , C HAUDHRY, A ZAM , C HAUDRY, S HAMYLA , K HANDELWAL , A MIT K., &
 V ERHOOGEN , E RIC. 2017b. Orgnizational Barriers to Technology Adoption: Evidence
 from Soccer-Ball Producers in Pakistan. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(3), 1101­
 1164.
B ASSI , V ITTORIO , & N ANSAMBA , A ISHA. 2019. Screening and Signaling Non-Cognitive
  Skills: Experimental Evidence from Uganda. USC working paper.
B EST, M. C., H JORT, J., & S ZAKONYI , D. 2019. Individuals and Organizations as Sources of
   State Effectiveness. NBER working paper no. 23350.
B ETTINGER , E RIC P., L ONG , B RIDGET T ERRY, O REOPOULOS , P HILIP, & S ANBONMATSU ,
   L ISA. 2012. The Role of Application Assistance and Information in College Decisions:
   Results from the H&R Block FAFSA Experiment. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3),
   1205­1242.


                                            30
B LOOM , N ICHOLAS , M AHAJAN , A PRAJIT, M C K ENZIE , D AVID , & R OBERTS , J OHN. 2010.
   Why Do Firms in Developing Countries Have Low Productivity? American Economic
   Review: Papers and Proceedings, 100(2), 619­623.
B LOOM , N ICHOLAS , E IFERT, B ENN , M AHAJAN , A PRAJIT, M C K ENZIE , D AVID , &
   R OBERTS , J OHN. 2013. Does Management Matter? Evidence from India. The Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, 128(1), 1­51.
B OSIO , E RICA , D JANKOV, S IMEON , G LAESER , E DWARD L., & S HLEIFER , A NDREI. 2020.
  Public Procurement in Law and Practice. NBER Working Paper No. 27188.
B RUHN , M IRIAM , K ARLAN , D EAN , & S CHOAR , A NTOINETTE. 2018. The Impact of Con-
   sulting Services on Small and Medium Enterprises: Evidence from a Randomized Trial
   in Mexico. Journal of Political Economy, 2(126), 635­687.
C ARRANZA , E LIANA , R OBERT G ARLICK , O RKIN , K ATE , & R ANKIN , N EIL. 2019. Job
  Search and Hiring with Two-sided Limited Information about Workseekers' Skills. World Bank
  working paper.
C ARRILLO , PAUL , D ONALDSON , D AVE , P OMERANZ , D INA , & S INGHAL , M ONICA. 2019.
  Allocative Efficiency in Firm Production: A Nonparametric Test Using Procurement Lotteries.
  GWU working paper.
C HERNOZHUKOV, V ICTOR , D EMIRER , M ERT, D UFLO , E STHER , & F ERNANDEZ -VAL ,
  I VAN. 2018. Generic Machine Learning Inference on Heterogenous Treatment Effects in Ran-
  domized Experiments. NBER Working Paper No. 24678.
C HETTY, R AJ , & S AEZ , E MMANUEL. 2013. Teaching the tax code: Earnings responses to
  an experiment with EITC recipients. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(1),
  1­31.
D E L OECKER , J AN , & G OLDBERG , P INELOPI K OUJIANOU. 2014. Firm Performance in a
  Global Market. Annual Review of Economics, 6, 201­227.
D ELLAV IGNA , S TEFANO , & G ENTZKOW, M ATTHEW. 2019. Uniform Pricing in US Retail
  Chains. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(4), 2011­2084.
D ONALDSON , D AVE , & H ORNBECK , R ICHARD. 2016. Railroads and American Economic
  Growth: A "Market Access" Approach. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(2), 799­858.
D ROZD , L. A., & N OSAL , J. B. 2012. Understanding International Prices: Customers as
  Capita. American Economic Review, 102(1), 364­95.
FABER , B ENJAMIN. 2014. Trade Integration, Market Size, and Industrialization: Evidence
  from China's National Trunk Highway System. Review of Economic Studies, 81(February),
  1046­70.
F ERRAZ , C, F INAN , F, & S ZERMAN , D. 2016. Procuring Firm Growth: The Effects of Govern-
   ment Purchases on Firm Dynamics. NBER working paper 21219.
F OSTER , L UCIA , H ALTIWANGER , J OHN , & S YVERSON , C HAD. 2016. The Slow Growth of
   New Plants: Learning about Demand. Economica, January, 201­227.
G OLDBERG , P INELOPI K., & R EED , T RISTAN. 2020. Income Distribution, International Inte-
  gration, and Sustained Poverty Reduction. NBER Working Paper No. 27286.

                                             31
G OURIO , F., & R UDANKO , L. 2014. Customer capital. Review of Economic Studies, 81(3),
  1102­1136.
H ANSMAN , C., H JORT, J., L EON , G., & T EACHOUT, M. 2019. Vertical Integration, Sup-
  plier Behavior, and Quality Upgrading among Exporters. forthcoming, Journal of Political
  Economy.
H ARDY, M ORGAN , & M C C ASLAND , J AMIE. 2017. Are Small Firms Labor Constrained? Ex-
  perimental Evidence from Ghana. NYU working paper.
H JORT, J ONAS , & P OULSEN , J ONAS. 2019. The Arrival of Fast Internet and Employment
  in Africa. American Economic Review, 109(3), 1032­1079.
H OEKMAN , B, & S ANFILIPPO , M. 2018. Firm Performance and Participation in Public Pro-
  curement: Evidence from Sub-Saharan Africa. CEPR Discussion Paper No DP12752.
H ORNBECK , R ICHARD , & R OTEMBERG , M ARTIN. 2019. Railroads, Reallocation, and the Rise
  of American Manufacturing. NBER Working Paper No. 26594.
H ORTACSU , A LI , L UCO , F ERNANDO , P ULLER , S TEVEN L., & Z HU , D ONGNI. 2019. Does
  Strategic Ability Affect Efficiency? Evidence from Electricity Markets. American Eco-
  nomic Review, 109(2), 4302­4342.
H SIEH , C HANG -TAI , & K LENOW, P ETER. 2014. The Life Cycle of Plants in India and
  Mexico. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3), 1035­1084.
J ENSEN , R OBERT. 2007. The Digital Provide: Information (Technology), Market Perfor-
   mance and Welfare in the South Indian Fisheries Sector. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
   122, 879­924.
J ENSEN , R OBERT. 2010. The (perceived) returns to education and the demand for school-
   ing. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(2), 515­548.
J ENSEN , R OBERT, & M ILLER , N OLAN. 2018. Market Integration, Demand and the Growth
   of Firms: Evidence from a Natural Experiment in India. American Economic Review,
   108(12), 3583­3625.
K LING , J EFFREY, M ULLAINATHAN , S ENDHIL , S HAFFIR , E LDAR , V ERMEULEN , L EE , &
  W ROBEL , M ARIAN V. 2012. Comparison friction: Experimental evidence from medi-
  care drug plans. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(1), 199­235.
L ANE , N ATHAN. 2019. The New Empirics of Industrial Policy. Monash working paper.
L EDERMAN , D., O LARREAGA , M., & PAYTON , L. 2010. Export promotion agencies: Do
   they work? Journal of Development Economics, 91, 257­265.
L EE , M. 2017. Government Purchases, Firm Growth and Industry Dynamics. Mimeo UCSD.
M ACCHIAVELLO , R OCCO , & M ORJARIA , A MEET. 2015. The Value of Relationships: Ev-
 idence from a Supply Shock to Kenyan Rose Exports. The American Economic Review,
 105(9), 2911­2945.
M C A FEE , P RESTON R., & M C M ILLAN , J OHN. 1989. Government procurement and inter-
 national trade. Journal of International Economics, 26(3), 291­308.


                                           32
M C K ENZIE , D AVID , & W OODRUFF , C HRISTOPHER. 2014. What Are We Learning from
 Business Training and Entrepreneurship Evaluations around the Developing World?
 The World Bank Research Observer, 29(1), 48­82.
M ITRA , S ANDIP, M OOKHERJEE , D ILIP, T ORERO , M AXIMO , & V ISARIA , S UJATA. 2018.
 Asymmetric information and middleman margins: An experiment with Indian potato
 farmers. Review of Economics and Statistics, 100(1), 1­13.
P OZZI , A., & S CHIVARDI , F. 2016. Demand or Productivity: What Determines Firm
  Growth? RAND Journal of Economics, 47(3), 608­630.
Q UINN , S IMON , & W OODRUFF , C HRISTOPHER. 2019. Experiments and Entrepreneurship
  in Developing Countries. Annual Review of Economics, 11, 225­248.
S TARTZ , M EREDITH. 2018. The Value of Face-to-face: Search and Contracting Problems in
   Nigerian Trade. Stanford working paper.
S YVERSON , C. 2011. What Determines Productivity? Journal of Economic Literature, 49(2),
   326­365.
V ERHOOGEN , E RIC. 2008. Trade, Quality Upgrading and Wage Inequality in the Mexican
  Manufacturing Sector. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123, 489­530.
V ERHOOGEN , E RIC. 2020. Firm-Level Upgrading in Developing Countries. Columbia Uni-
  versity working paper.




                                           33
                          F IGURE 1: S IZE OF F IRMS IN THE S AMPLE
                                Panel A : Sample vs Census Firms




                          Panel B : Sample vs Other Firms on Registry




The two panels in this figure compare the size of firms in the sample with firms in the census (Panel A)
and other firms listed in the non-profit's directory who have more than one employee and are located in
Monrovia (Panel B). In both panels, bars show the share of firms in our sample in each category and the
share of the comparison sample.



                                                  34
                     F IGURE 2: T IMELINE AND E XPERIMENTAL D ESIGN
                                                             Panel A : Timeline




                                           Panel B : Randomization Design


                                                                        Open, Baseline Firms

                                                                                   1,260 Firms
                                                                           Randomization Occurs


                                                          Control Firms                          Treated Firms

                                                                   634 Firms                            620 Firms
                                                                               Endline Survey

                                                                       Firms that Responded
                                                                        to Endline Survey &
                                                                           Gave Consent
                                                                               831 - 5 = 826 Firms



                                          Control Firms                                                      Encouraged Firms

                                                295 Firms                                                            533 Firms
                                                   Building Markets Training                                           Building Markets Training


                        Untrained Firms                   Trained Firms                         Untrained Firms              Trained Firms

                               290 Firms                               5 Firms                         391 Firms                      142 Firms




                             Panel C : Example of Timeline for one firm




Panel A shows the timeline of the experiment evaluated in this paper. The experiment spanned from June
2016 to June 2017, with some pre-baseline interviews conducted before April 2016 by the non-profit. Panel B
shows the number of firms in the sample at every step of the experiment. Open baseline firms are the firms
which were in the non-profits' directory, which never took the training, which have at least one employee
and which are located in Monrovia. These firms were randomly selected for treatment or control. For the
endline survey, the research team tried to reach these firms and was able to track down and interview only
66% of them. Out of the 533 firms which interviewed at endline that were in the treatment group (the
encouraged firms), 142 firms had taken the training. Panel C shows the timeline for a particular firm.




                                                                                    35
                          F IGURE 3: I NTERNET A CCESS AT B ASELINE




This graph plots the distribution of internet usage in the sample measured at baseline.




                                                    36
                              F IGURE 4: T IME S ERIES OF T ENDERS




This figure plots the time series of tenders published in 2016 from the non-profit's database aggregated at
a weekly level. The trend for tenders published online and offline are plotted separately. The dotted lines
represent the period of time when firms were encouraged to take the training while the solid lines mark the
time period when the firms in our sample took the training.




                                                    37
                        TABLE 1: S UMMARY S TATISTICS ON T ENDERS


                                                                     Mean
                              Buyer
                              Public Sector Buyers                    0.51
                              International Organizations             0.47
                              Source
                              Newspaper                               0.57
                              Website                                 0.31
                              Word of mouth                           0.12
                              Sectors
                              Construction and Renovation             0.23
                              Automotive                              0.11
                              Business and Consulting                 0.10
                              Printing and Copying                    0.09

This table presents summary statistics of 1,381 tenders published in Liberia in 2016. The data is based on a
database of tenders compiled by the non-profit.




                                                    38
                     TABLE 2: S UMMARY S TATISTICS ON S AMPLE F IRMS


                                                                    Mean        SD       Observations
 Sectors
 Construction and Renovation                                          0.23     (0.42)         1192
 Food and Beverages                                                   0.16     (0.36)         1192
 Home Essentials                                                      0.13     (0.33)         1192
 Handicrafts and Artisans                                             0.11     (0.32)         1192
 Business and Consulting Services                                     0.09     (0.29)         1192
 Owner Nationality
 Liberian                                                             0.90     (0.30)         1192
 Lebanese                                                             0.05     (0.21)         1192
 Nigerian                                                             0.02     (0.14)         1192
 Indian                                                               0.01     (0.11)         1192
 Other
 Total Number of Employees                                           14.19    (42.62)         1187
 Bid on a tender in the past 6 months (Y=1; N=0)                      0.21     (0.40)          847
 Number of tenders bid on in the past 6 months                        0.65     (1.62)          847
 Won a tender in the past 6 months (Y=1; N=0)                         0.12     (0.32)          876
 Number of tenders won in the past 6 months                           0.30     (1.16)          876
 Proportion of tenders won (conditional on applying)                  0.32     (0.37)          174
 Ever won a contract lasting 6 months or more                         0.76     (0.43)          179
 Speaks at least one Liberian local language                          0.34     (0.47)         1192
 Accessed Internet for business purposes
        (1=Every day ; 7= Never)                                      3.61     (2.67)         1118

 This table presents summary statistics of firms in the sample. The data is based on interviews conducted by
the non-profit. A nationality of the business is determined if at least one of the owners has that particular
nationality. The number of employees includes the owner or manager of the firm.




                                                     39
                                     TABLE 3: B ALANCE TABLE

                                                                    Full Sample       Restricted Sample

                                                                    Diff.   Std.       Diff.        Std.
                                                                   (T - C) Error      (T - C)      Error
 Sectors
 Construction and Renovation                                        -0.00     0.03     -0.02        0.03
 Food and Beverages                                                 -0.02     0.02      0.02        0.03
 Home Essentials                                                    0.00      0.02      0.02        0.03
 Handicrafts and Artisans                                           0.00      0.02      0.00        0.02
 Business and Consulting Services                                   0.00      0.02      0.02        0.02
 Owner Nationality
 Liberian                                                           -0.01     0.02     -0.01        0.02
 Lebanese                                                           -0.00     0.01      0.00        0.01
 Nigerian                                                           -0.00     0.01     -0.00        0.01
 Indian                                                             -0.00     0.01     -0.00        0.01
 Other
 Total Number of Employees                                          -1.79     2.59     -0.66        2.73
 Bid on a tender in the past 6 months (Y=1; N=0)                    -0.02     0.02     -0.03        0.03
 Number of tenders bid on in the past 6 months                      -0.08     0.12     -0.13        0.15
 Won a tender in the past 6 months (Y=1; N=0)                       -0.01     0.02     -0.01        0.03
 Number of tenders won in the past 6 months                         0.09      0.08      0.14        0.11
 Proportion of tenders won (conditional on applying)                -0.02     0.06     -0.04        0.07
 Ever won a contract lasting 6 months or more                       -0.04     0.07      0.01        0.09
 Speaks at least one Liberian local language                        -0.01     0.03     -0.06        0.03
 Accessed Internet for business purposes
        (1=Every day ; 7= Never)                                    0.04      0.17      0.03        0.20
 This table presents balance between firms of the treatment and control groups. "Full Sample" refers to the
total sample at baseline, "Restricted Sample" refers to firms who responded to the endline survey. The data
is based on phone interviews conducted by the non-profit. A nationality of the business is determined if
at least one of the owners has that particular nationality. The number of employees includes the owner or
manager of the firm.




                                                    40
     TABLE 4: E FFECT OF V OUCHER + E NCOURAGEMENT ON T RAINING TAKE - UP

                                                    Winning-Contracts Training
                                                        (1)             (2)
                  Voucher + Encouragement           0.19***                   0.20***
                        for Training                 (0.02)                    (0.02)
                  Controls                               NO                     YES
                  Control Group Mean                    0.01                    0.01
                  Observations                          1192                    1143
 Standard errors are in parentheses and are robust. This table presents coefficients of the regression of
training take-up as recorded by the non-profit on encouragement. Controls include employment, counties
of operation, gender of the owner, sectors, languages used for business, geographical zone and the number
of submitted bids. All controls are measured before baseline.




                                                   41
TABLE 5: E FFECT OF W INNING -C ONTRACTS T RAINING                           ON   E XPECTED F UTURE B ID -
DING ON AND W INNING T ENDERS



                               How many tenders do you                             Of these, how
                               expect your firm to bid on                          many do you
                                 in the next 6 months?                          expect you will win?
                                    (1)                 (2)                     (3)                 (4)
                                                      Treatment-on-the-Treated
   Winning-Contracts       0.85*               1.00**                 0.86**               0.83**
       Training            (0.46)              (0.44)                 (0.40)               (0.38)
                                                              Intent-to-Treat
     Voucher +             0.22*               0.28**                 0.22**               0.23**
   Encouragement           (0.12)              (0.12)                 (0.10)               (0.11)
   Controls           NO                       YES                    NO                   YES
   Control Group Mean 2.04                     2.04                   1.51                 1.51
   Observations       788                      753                    788                  753

Standard errors are in parentheses and are robust. This table shows results from estimating Equation (5).
The top panel presents the Treatment-on-the-Treated while the bottom panel presents the Intent-to-Treat
estimates of attending the training. Controls include employment, counties of operation, gender of the
owner, sectors, languages used for business, geographical zone and the number of submitted bids. All
controls are measured before baseline. All outputs are referring to the period of 6 months preceding the
interview. Columns (1) & (2) refer to the refer to the expectations of the manager about the future bids of
the firm. Columns (3) & (4) refer to the expectations of the manager about the firm's future contracts won
through tenders.




                                                      42
             TABLE 6: E FFECT OF W INNING -C ONTRACTS T RAINING ON C ONTRACTS B ID - ON AND C ONTRACTS W ON


                                                # of tenders              Total # of              # of tenders            # of contracts
                                                   bid on               contracts won                 won                won w/o tender
                                               (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)         (8)
                                                                               Treatment-on-the-Treated
               Winning-Contracts            0.53*       0.59**       1.19***      1.01***     0.24         0.28*       0.95***      0.72**
                   Training                 (0.30)      (0.26)       (0.38)       (0.35)      (0.17)       (0.16)      (0.31)       (0.29)
                                                                                    Intent-to-Treat
                                            0.14*       0.16**       0.31***      0.28***     0.06         0.08*       0.25***      0.20**




43
                 Voucher +
               Encouragement                (0.08)      (0.07)       (0.09)       (0.10)      (0.04)       (0.05)      (0.08)       (0.08)
               Controls                     NO          YES          NO           YES         NO           YES         NO           YES
               Control Group Mean           0.35        0.35         0.48         0.48        0.15         0.15        0.33         0.33
               Observations                 787         752          788          753         789          754         788          753

     Standard errors are in parentheses and are robust. This table shows results from estimating Equation (5). The top panel presents the Treatment-on-
     the-Treated while the bottom panel presents the Intent-to-Treat estimates of the effect of training for firms who took the training. Controls include
     employment, counties of operation, gender of the owner, sectors, languages used for business, geographical zone and the number of submitted bids.
     All controls are measured before baseline. All outputs are referring to the period of 6 months preceding the interview. Columns (1) & (2) refer to
     the number of bids submitted for tenders. Columns (3) to (8) refer to the number of contracts won overall, through a tender process and without a
     tender process.
TABLE 7: E FFECT OF W INNING -C ONTRACTS T RAINING                         ON THE   Q UALITY     OF AND
R EVENUE FROM C ONTRACTS W ON

                                           PANEL A : QUALITY OF CONTRACTS
                                                    Won Long Lasting Contract
                                                     (1)                     (2)
                                                     Treatment-on-the-Treated
              Winning-Contracts            0.33**                0.30***
                  Training                 (0.13)                (0.11)
                                                           Intent-to-Treat
                Voucher +                  0.08***               0.08***
              Encouragement                (0.03)                (0.03)
              Controls           NO                              YES
              Control Group Mean 0.23                            0.23
              Observations       789                             754
                                           PANEL B : REVENUE FROM CONTRACTS
                                               (1)              (2)
                                                     Treatment-on-the-Treated
              Winning-Contracts            11058.0               10362.3
                  Training                 (7989.81)             (6473.52)
                                                           Intent-to-Treat
                Voucher +                  2866.0                2843.4
              Encouragement                (2067.38)             (1852.81)
              Controls           NO                              YES
              Control Group Mean 5322.46                         5322.46
              Observations       789                             754
Standard errors are in parentheses and are robust. This table shows results from estimating Equation (5).
Panel A presents the Treatment-on-the-Treated and the Intent-to-Treat estimates of the effect of training on
the quality of contracts for firms who attended the training. Quality of contracts is measured as whether
firms won long lasting contracts i.e. contracts for longer than 6 months. Panel B presents the results for
Treatment-on-the-Treated and Intent-to-Treat estimates of the training on the revenue from contracts. Con-
trols include employment, counties of operation, gender of the owner, sectors, languages used for business,
geographical zone and the number of submitted bids. All controls are measured before baseline. All out-
puts are referring to the period of 6 months preceding the interview. Appendix Table (A.4) reports results
for additional measures of contract quality.




                                                      44
                 TABLE 8: H OW THE E FFECT OF W INNING - CONTRACTS T RAINING VARIES WITH I NTERNET A CCESS

                                                         # of tenders          Total # of          # of tenders        # of contracts
                                                            bid on           contracts won             won            won w/o tender
                                                         (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)         (8)
                    Voucher + Encouragement              -0.06     -0.13*      0.05      -0.06    -0.04      -0.06   0.10           -0.00
                          for Training                  (0.07)     (0.07)    (0.14)     (0.14)   (0.04)     (0.05) (0.11)          (0.12)
                      Voucher +                        0.49*** 0.70*** 0.48** 0.65*** 0.24** 0.31***   0.24                         0.33*




45
                    Encouragement                       (0.18)  (0.19) (0.23)  (0.24) (0.11)  (0.12) (0.19)                        (0.20)
                      × Internet
                    Controls                              NO         YES       NO        YES       NO         YES      NO            YES
                    Control Group Mean                    0.35       0.35      0.48      0.48      0.15       0.15     0.33          0.33
                    Observations                           739        710       740       711       741        712      740           711
     Standard errors are in parentheses and are robust. This table shows results from estimating Equation (6). Controls include employment, counties of
     operation, gender of the owner, sectors, languages used for business, geographical zone and the number of submitted bids. All controls are measured
     before baseline. Columns (1) & (2) refer to the number of bids submitted for tenders. Columns (3) to (8) refer to the number of contracts won overall,
     through a tender process and without a tender process.
     TABLE 9: H OW THE E FFECT                    OF   W INNING - CONTRACTS T RAINING VARIES                                 WITH I NTERNET             A CCESS       AND     O NLINE D E -
     MAND S HOCKS

                                                                         # of tenders            Total #           # of tenders  # of contracts                     Won long-lasting
                                                                            bid on            of contracts             won      won w/o tender                          ontract
                                                                               (1)                  (2)                  (3)                      (4)                          (5)
         Voucher + Encouragement                                             -0.20                -0.31                0.053                   -0.36**                       -0.02
               for Training                                                  (0.18)               (0.21)               (0.09)                   (0.18)                       (0.06)
         Voucher + Encouragement                                              -0.02                0.02                 -0.08                    0.09                        -0.02
            × Online Demand                                                  (0.11)               (0.08)               (0.05)                   (0.08)                       (0.03)
         Voucher + Encouragement                                             -0.17                 0.43                -0.16                    0.58**                        0.07
                × Internet                                                   (0.37)               (0.31)               (0.18)                   (0.27)                       (0.11)




46
         Voucher + Encouragement
            × Online Demand
                × Internet                                                   0.24*                 0.02                0.15**                    -0.13                       0.06*
                                                                             (0.14)               (0.09)               (0.06)                   (0.08)                       (0.03)
         Controls                                                             YES                  YES                  YES                      YES                          YES
         Control Mean                                                         0.35                 0.48                 0.15                     0.33                         0.23
         Observations                                                         710                  711                  712                      711                          712
         Computed ATE (Internet, +ve Demand)                                  1.44                 0.36                 0.27                     0.12                         0.26
     This table shows results from estimating Equation (10). It presents the heterogeneity of treatment effect with respect to Internet access at baseline and the online demand shock. Standard
     errors are in parentheses and are robust. Controls include employment, counties of operation, gender of the owner, sectors, languages used for business, geographical zone, the number
     of submitted bids, total number of tenders published in the sector from the predicted date of training, share of different types of tenders in the sector (tenders from local or international
     organizations, local or international governments, local or international private firms, local or international NGOs. All controls are measured before baseline. Columns (1) refers to the
     number of bids submitted for tenders. Columns (2) to (4) refer to the number of contracts won overall, through a tender process and without a tender process. Column (5) refers to
     whether firms won a contract lasting longer than 6 months.
     TABLE 10: H OW THE E FFECT OF W INNING - CONTRACTS T RAINING VARIES                                                          WITH       I NTERNET A CCESS               AND     O NLINE
     D EMAND S HOCKS IN THE L ONG -T ERM

                                                                                         # of tenders             Total #           # of tenders  # of contracts
                                                                                            bid on             of contracts             won      won w/o tender
                                                                                                (1)                   (2)                  (3)                       (4)
                    Voucher + Encouragement                                                    0.00                  -0.12                0.04                     -0.16
                          for Training                                                        (0.11)                (0.13)               (0.04)                   (0.12)
                    Voucher + Encouragement                                                    -0.06                 -0.03                -0.03                    0.00
                       × Online Demand                                                        (0.08)                (0.06)               (0.03)                   (0.05)
                    Voucher + Encouragement                                                    -0.03                0.35*                 -0.04                   0.39**
                           × Internet                                                         (0.28)                (0.21)               (0.10)                   (0.18)
                    Voucher + Encouragement
                       × Online Demand




47
                           × Internet                                                          0.17                  0.03                 0.05                     -0.03
                                                                                              (0.11)                (0.06)               (0.03)                   (0.05)
                    Controls                                                                   YES                  YES                   YES                      YES
                    Control Mean                                                               0.13                  0.22                 0.06                      0.16
                    Observations                                                               712                   712                  712                       712
                    Computed ATE (No Internet, No Demand)                                      0.67                 -0.01                 0.11                     -0.12
     This table presents the heterogeneity of treatment effect with respect to Internet access at baseline and the online demand shock on outputs measured after the demand shock. At endline,
     we asked firms for the dates since the baseline interview on which they bid on tenders and won contracts. For a subset of tenders, we also observe the opening and closing dates. Ninety
     percent of the tenders in our sample are open for bidding less that 30 days, with a mean of 15 days. The tenders that form part of short-run demand shocks as we measure them and the
     ones that form part of the outcome we consider in this sub-section are thus very unlikely to overlap. Two firms in our sample took the training in November, 2016 (the last date training
     date offered by the non-profit we partner with), which does not allow us to properly ensure that there is no overlap. For these two firms, we only count tenders and contracts applied to
     and won on or after February 2017. Standard errors are in parentheses and are robust. Controls include employment, counties of operation, gender of the owner, sectors, languages used
     for business, geographical zone, the number of submitted bids, total number of tenders published in the sector from the predicted date of training, share of different types of tenders in the
     sector (tenders from local or international organizations, local or international governments, local or international private firms, local or international NGOs. All controls are measured
     before baseline. Column (1) refers to the number of bids submitted for tenders. Columns (2) to (4) refer to the number of contracts won overall, through a tender process and without a
     tender process.
A       Appendix

                                                TABLE A.1: ATTRITION


                                                                      Not Interviewed        Interviewed       Diff.     P-Val.
    Sectors
    Construction and Renovation                                              0.20                 0.25        -0.05       0.04
    Food and Beverages                                                       0.16                 0.16          0.00      0.97
    Home Essentials                                                          0.12                 0.13         -0.01      0.69
    Handicrafts and Artisans                                                 0.11                 0.12         -0.01      0.58
    Business and Consulting Services                                         0.08                 0.10         -0.02      0.22
    Owner Nationality
    Liberian                                                                 0.87                 0.92        -0.04       0.02
    Lebanese                                                                 0.05                 0.04          0.01      0.29
    Nigerian                                                                 0.04                 0.01        0.02        0.01
    Indian                                                                   0.01                 0.01         -0.01      0.18
    Other
    Total Number of Employees                                                12.08               15.11         -3.03      0.26
    Bid on a tender in the past 6 months (Y=1; N=0)                          0.17                 0.22         -0.05      0.12
    Number of tenders bid on in the past 6 months                            0.55                 0.70         -0.14      0.23
    Won a tender in the past 6 months (Y=1; N=0)                             0.09                 0.13         -0.04      0.07
    Number of tenders won in the past 6 months                               0.19                 0.35         -0.15      0.07
    Proportion of tenders won (conditional on applying)                      0.29                 0.33         -0.04      0.57
    Ever won a contract lasting 6 months or more                             0.82                 0.73          0.09      0.21
    Speaks at least one Liberian local language                              0.30                 0.36         -0.05      0.07
    Accessed Internet for Business Purposes
          (1 = Every day ; 7 = Never)                                        3.69                 3.57          0.12      0.48
    Treatment Group                                                          0.67                 0.64          0.03      0.34
This table presents differential attrition between firms who responded to endline interviews and firms who did not. The data is based
on phone interviews conducted by the non-profit. A nationality of the business is determined if at least one of the owners has that
particular nationality. The number of employees includes the owner or manager of the firm.




                                                                48
                 TABLE A.2: S UMMARY S TATISTICS OF N ON - ATTRITERS

                                                                    Mean       SD      Observations
   Sectors
   Construction and Renovation                                       0.25     (0.43)         828
   Food and Beverages                                                0.16     (0.36)         828
   Home Essentials                                                   0.13     (0.34)         828
   Handicrafts and Artisans                                          0.12     (0.32)         828
   Business and Consulting Services                                  0.10     (0.30)         828
   Owner Nationality
   Liberian                                                          0.92     (0.28)         828
   Lebanese                                                          0.04     (0.20)         828
   Nigerian                                                          0.01     (0.11)         828
   Indian                                                            0.01     (0.12)         828
   Other
   Total Number of Employees                                        15.11    (45.69)         825
   Bid on a tender in the past 6 months (Y=1; N=0)                   0.22     (0.41)         587
   Number of tenders bid on in the past 6 months                     0.70     (1.65)         587
   Won a tender in the past 6 months (Y=1; N=0)                      0.13     (0.34)         609
   Number of tenders won in the past 6 months                        0.35     (1.31)         609
   Proportion of tenders won (conditional on applying)               0.33     (0.37)         129
   Ever won a contract lasting 6 months or more                      0.73     (0.45)         119
   Speaks at least one Liberian local language                       0.36     (0.48)         828
   Accessed Internet for Business Purposes
         (1 = Every day ; 7 = Never)                                 3.57     (2.67)         741
This table presents summary statistics of firms who responded to the endline survey. The data is based on
phone interviews conducted by the non-profit. A nationality of the business is determined if at least one of
the owners has that particular nationality. The number of employees includes the owner or manager of the
firm.




                                                    49
    TABLE A.3: E FFECT OF V OUCHER + E NCOURAGEMENT ON T RAINING TAKE - UP

                              PANEL A : BASED ON ATTENDANCE
                                              General Procurement              Bid Compilation
                                               Training (Part 1/2)            Training (Part 2/2)
                                                 (1)           (2)                 (3)      (4)
          Voucher + Encouragement             0.19***           0.20***       0.16***       0.17***
                for Training                   (0.02)            (0.02)        (0.01)        (0.02)
          Controls                                NO                 YES            NO          YES
          Control Group Mean                      0.01                0.01         0.01         0.01
          Observations                           1192                1143          1192         1143
                                    PANEL B : SELF-REPORTED
                                                                         How Many Training
                                              Did Your Firm Go              Sessions did
                                              Through Training            Your Firm Attend
                                                 (1)         (2)             (3)          (4)
           Voucher + Encouragement            0.14***        0.16***     0.33***          0.36***
                 for Training                  (0.04)         (0.04)      (0.11)           (0.11)
           Controls                               NO            YES          NO                 YES
           Control Group Mean                     0.51          0.51         0.68               0.68
           Observations                            789          754          789                 754
 Standard errors are in parentheses and are robust. This table presents coefficients of the regression of
training take-up as recorded by the non-profit on encouragement. Controls include employment, counties
of operation, gender of the owner, sectors, languages used for business, geographical zone and the number
of submitted bids. All controls are measured at baseline. Panel A measures training attendance using data
collected by the non-profit, while Panel B measures attendance based on self-reported attendance by the
Firms. Columns (1) to (4) refer to the two parts of the training delivered by the non-profit. Columns (1)
and (2) refer to the "General Procurement" training. Column (3) and (4) refer to the "Bid Compilation"
training. The General Procurement training is a requirement for the Bid Compilation training. Panel B
refers to training take-up as reported by the firm. This includes all types of training, not only the training
studied in the scope of this paper.




                                                       50
     TABLE A.4: E FFECT OF W INNING -C ONTRACTS T RAINING ON B IDDING ON T ENDERS , P ROPORTION OF ALL R ELEVANT
     T ENDERS B ID - ON AND W ON , AND ON W ORKING WITH I NTERNATIONAL C LIENTS


                                          Bid on tenders              Proportion of all            Proportion of all
                                            in the past               relevant tenders             relevant tenders            Ever worked with
                                             6 months                      bid on                        won                  international clients
                                          (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)           (7)            (8)
                                                                               Treatment-on-the-Treated
         Winning-Contracts            0.09          0.13           0.05**        0.05**         0.02*         0.02**         0.31**         0.29**
             Training                 (0.11)        (0.10)         (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.01)        (0.01)         (0.13)         (0.12)
                                                                                      Intent-to-Treat




51
           Voucher +                  0.02          0.04           0.01**        0.01**         0.01*         0.01**         0.08**         0.08**
         Encouragement                (0.03)        (0.03)         (0.01)        (0.01)         (0.00)        (0.00)         (0.03)         (0.03)
         Controls           NO                      YES            NO            YES            NO            YES            NO             YES
         Control Group Mean 0.17                    0.17           0.01          0.01           0.00          0.00           0.29           0.29
         Observations       787                     752            787           752            789           754            789            754

     Standard errors are in parentheses and are robust. This table shows results from estimating Equation (5). The top panel presents the Treated on the
     Treated Estimate while the bottom panel presents the Intent to Treat estimate. Controls include employment, counties of operation, gender of the
     owner, sectors, languages used for business, geographical zone and the number of submitted bids. All controls are measured at baseline. All outputs
     are referring to the period of 6 months preceding the interview. Columns (1) & (2) refer to whether the firm submitted bids for tenders. Columns (3)
     & (4) refer to the proportion of tenders the firm applied to over total number of tenders in its sector(s). Columns (5) & (6) refer to the proportion of
     tenders the firm won over total number of tenders in its sector(s). Columns (7) & (8) refer to whether the firm ever worked with international clients.
                 TABLE A.5: B ASELINE C ORRELATION B ETWEEN F IRM C HARACTERISTICS AND I NTERNET A CCESS

                                                                                                 # of contracts   Ability to
                                                Total #        # of tenders # of tenders           won w/o      access tenders
                                            of employees          bid on        won                  tender      easily (1-10)
                                                  (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)                 (5)
                         Internet              14.05***           1.06***          0.32***            0.08              1.93***




52
                                                (3.92)             (0.14)           (0.06)           (0.12)              (0.53)
                         Constant               5.09***           0.13**           0.04*             0.50***            5.71***
                                                 (1.04)           (0.06)           (0.02)             (0.08)             (0.39)
                         Observations             546               546              544               546                265
     Standard errors are in parentheses and are robust. This table looks at the correlation of baseline Internet usage with firm characteristics correlated
     with unobservable firm quality. All variables are measured at baseline.
TABLE A.6: H OW E FFECT OF W INNING - CONTRACTS T RAINING ON C ONTRACT Q UAL -
ITYVARIES WITH I NTERNET A CCESS

                                                       PANEL A : QUALITY OF
                                                           CONTRACTS
                                                      Won Long Lasting contract
                                                         (1)                 (2)
                 Voucher + Encouragement            -0.01          -0.03
                       for Training                 (0.04)         (0.04)
                   Voucher +                        0.21***        0.26***
                 Encouragement                      (0.08)         (0.08)
                   × Internet
                 Controls                           NO        YES
                 Control Group Mean                 0.23      0.23
                 Observations                       741       712
                                                    PANEL B : REVENUE FROM
                                                         CONTRACTS
                                                         (1)                 (2)
                   Voucher +                        -812.82        -1431.60
                 Encouragement                      (742.22)       (1121.16)
                   Voucher +                        9917.22**      10523.54**
                 Encouragement                      (4454.00)      (4281.64)
                   × Internet
                 Controls                           NO             YES
                 Control Group Mean                 5322.46        5322.46
                 Observations                       741            712
Standard errors are in parentheses and are robust. The table presents results from estimating Equation
(5) Controls include employment, counties of operation, gender of the owner, sectors, languages used for
business, geographical zone and the number of submitted bids. All controls are measured at baseline. All
outputs are referring to the period of 6 months preceding the interview. In Panel A, the outcome variable is
an indicator for whether or not the firm ever had a contract longer than 6 months. In Panel B, the outcome
variable is the revenue from contracts over the past 6 months.




                                                    53
     TABLE A.7: H OW E FFECT OF W INNING - CONTRACTS T RAINING VARIES                           WITH I NTERNET      A CCESS C ONTROLLING           FOR
     I NTERACTION WITH O THER F IRM C HARACTERISTICS

                                    # of tenders              Total #            # of tenders        # of contracts        Won long lasting        Revenue from
                                       bid on              of contracts              won            won w/o tender            contract            contracts (USD)
                                           (1)                   (2)                    (3)                  (4)                     (5)                   (6)
          V+E                     0.19                  -0.18                 0.02                  -0.20                  -0.06                  -1711.25
      for Training                (0.21)                (0.31)                (0.12)                (0.27)                 (0.09)                 (4401.27)
        Voucher +                 0.41*                 0.52*                 0.29***               0.23                   0.28***                9649.83***
      Encouragement               (0.21)                (0.26)                (0.11)                (0.22)                 (0.09)                 (3552.41)




54
        × Internet
      Controls            YES                           YES                   YES                   YES                    YES                    YES
      Controls Interacted
       w/ Treatement      YES                           YES                   YES                   YES                    YES                    YES
      Control Group Mean 0.35                           0.48                  0.15                  0.33                   0.23                   5322.46
      Observations        739                           740                   741                   740                    741                    741
     Standard errors are in parentheses and are robust. Controls include employment, counties of operation, gender of the owner, sectors, languages
     used for business, geographical zone and the number of submitted bids. All controls are measured at baseline. The interaction of all controls with
     treatment are also included. Column (1) refers to the number of bids submitted for tenders. Columns (2) to (4) refer to the number of contracts won
     overall, through a tender process and without a tender process. Column (5) refers to whether firms won long term contracts while column (6) refers
     to the total value of contracts won by firms.
                                                 TABLE A.8: R ESULTS OF LASSO P ROCEDURE

       Variable                                                                                            Times_Kept       Average_Coefficient
       Of the total number of employees, how many are permanent employees?                                      1                0.00260
       Of the total number of employee, how many are temporary employees?                                       1                0.00590
       Of the total number of employees how many are family members of the owner(s)?                           0                      .
       Have you ever responded to a tender or submitted a bid?                                                 99                 0.0310
       At least one of the owners has an Americo-Liberian name                                                  0                     .
       Have you responded to a tender or submitted a bid in the past 6 months?                                 67                 0.0438
       Number of tenders submitted in the past six months                                                      55                 0.0107




55
       Number of contracts won through tenders in the past six months                                          78                 0.0553
       Do you import?                                                                                           0                     .
       Have you ever had a contracts for the government?                                                        0                     .
       Have you ever had a contracts for an NGO?                                                               10                 0.0487
       Have you ever had a contracts for an international client?                                              46                 0.0378
       How often do you use the Internet for business purposes?                                               194                  0.122
     This table presents the results of the LASSO procedure developped in section 5.3.2. The LASSO estimation predicts what variables, interacted with
     treatment, best explain the heterogeneity if the effect observed. The first column shows the number of times each variable was kept out of the 200
     LASSO estimations. The second column shows the average coefficient of each variables, accross LASSO procedures.
      TABLE A.9: B ASELINE C ORRELATION B ETWEEN F IRM C HARACTERISTICS AND I NTERNET-B ASED D EMAND S HOCK

                                                                                                 # of contracts           Ability to
                                                     Total #       # of tenders     # of tenders   won w/o              access tenders
                                                 of employees         bid on            won          tender              easily (1-10)
                                                       (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)                 (5)
                   Online Demand Shock                -0.05             0.01             0.00              0.00               0.01




56
                                                     (0.10)            (0.01)           (0.00)            (0.01)             (0.02)
                   Constant                         11.96***           0.64***         0.20***           0.52***            6.90***
                                                     (1.70)             (0.06)          (0.03)            (0.05)             (0.18)
                   Observations                        582              582              580               582                285
     Standard errors are in parentheses and are robust. This table shows the correlation between the share of tenders published online in the week before
     the encouragement and baseline characteristics.
        TABLE A.10: H OW THE EFFECT ON T RAINING TAKE - UP VARIES WITH I NTERNET                                 AND    O NLINE D EMAND S HOCKS

                                                                                         Training Take-up
                                                                                                  (1)
                                                    Assignment to Treatment                    0.11***
                                                                                                (0.03)
                                                    Voucher + Encouragement                      0.02
                                                       × Online Demand                          (0.01)
                                                    Voucher + Encouragement                     -0.01
                                                           × Internet                           (0.05)




57
                                                    Voucher + Encouragement
                                                       × Online Demand
                                                           × Internet                            0.00
                                                                                                (0.01)
                                                    Controls                                     YES
                                                    Control Mean                                 0.01
                                                    Observations                                 1077
     This table presents the results from estimating Equation (10). It shows the heterogeneity of treatment effect with respect to Internet access at baseline
     and the internet-based demand shock on take up of both types of training.Standard errors are in parentheses and are robust. Controls include
     employment, counties of operation, gender of the owner, sectors, languages used for business, geographical zone, the number of submitted bids,
     total number of tenders published in the sector, share of different types of tenders in the sector (tenders from local or international orgnizations, local
     or international governments, local or international private firms, local or international NGOs. All controls are measured at baseline.
     TABLE A.11: H OW              THE     E FFECT     OF   W INNING - CONTRACTS T RAINING VARIES                                 WITH I NTERNET             A CCESS       AND       O VERALL
     D EMAND S HOCKS

                                                                         # of tenders            Total #           # of tenders  # of contracts                     Won long-lasting
                                                                            bid on            of contracts             won      won w/o tender                         contract
                                                                               (1)                  (2)                  (3)                      (4)                          (5)
         Voucher + Encouragement                                             -0.30                -0.43**              -0.01                   -0.41**                       -0.06
               for Training                                                  (0.22)                (0.21)              (0.08)                   (0.18)                       (0.07)
         Voucher + Encouragement                                              0.02                0.05*                -0.01                    0.05**                        0.00
             × Total Demand                                                  (0.03)               (0.02)               (0.01)                   (0.02)                       (0.01)
         Voucher + Encouragement                                              0.01                 0.51                -0.11                    0.61**                        0.13
                × Internet                                                   (0.38)               (0.32)               (0.17)                   (0.26)                       (0.11)




58
         Voucher + Encouragement
             × Total Demand
                × Internet                                                    0.04                 -0.02               0.03**                   -0.05*                        0.01
                                                                             (0.04)               (0.03)               (0.02)                   (0.03)                       (0.01)
         Controls                                                             YES                  YES                  YES                      YES                          YES
         Control Mean                                                         0.35                 0.48                 0.15                     0.33                         0.23
         Observations                                                         710                  711                  712                      711                          712
         Computed ATE (Internet, +ve Demand)                                  0.28                 0.35                 0.13                     0.22                         0.14
     This table shows results from estimating Equation (10). It presents the heterogeneity of treatment effect with rspect to Internet access at baseline and the online demand shock. Standard
     errors are in parentheses and are robust. Controls include employment, counties of operation, gender of the owner, sectors, languages used for business, geographical zone, the number
     of submitted bids, total number of tenders published in the sector from the predicted date of training, share of different types of tenders in the sector (tenders from local or international
     organizations, local or international governments, local or international private firms, local or international NGOs. All controls are measured before baseline. Columns (1) refers to the
     number of bids submitted for tenders. Columns (2) to (4) refer to the number of contracts won overall, through a tender process and without a tender process. Column (5) refers to
     whether firms won long term contracts i.e. contracts longer than six months.
59
