                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE MISSING INFLATION PUZZLE:
                    THE ROLE OF THE WAGE-PRICE PASS-THROUGH

                                         Sebastian Heise
                                          Fatih Karahan
                                          Ayegül ahin

                                       Working Paper 27663
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27663


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020




We are very grateful to David Dam and Meghana Gaur for superb research assistance. We thank
our discussant Slavik Viacheslav for many insightful comments and sharing his codes with us.
We also thank Susanto Basu, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Giuseppe Moscarini, Emi Nakamura,
Giorgio Primiceri, and Ken West for helpful comments and suggestions. We thank the
participants of the NBER Summer Institute 2020 Monetary Economics Group and the Annual
Research Conference of the Central Banks of Ukraine and Poland for their comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27663.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Sebastian Heise, Fatih Karahan, and Ayegül ahin. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Missing Inflation Puzzle: The Role of the Wage-Price Pass-Through
Sebastian Heise, Fatih Karahan, and Ayegül ahin
NBER Working Paper No. 27663
August 2020
JEL No. E24,E31

                                         ABSTRACT

Price inflation in the U.S. has been sluggish and slow to pick up in the last two decades. We show
that this missing inflation can be traced to a growing disconnect between unemployment and core
goods inflation. We exploit rich industry-level data to show that weakening pass-through from
wages to prices in the goods-producing sector is an important source of the slow inflation pick-up
in the last two decades. We set up a theoretical framework where markups and pass-through are a
function of firms' market shares and show that increased import competition and rising market
concentration reduce pass-through from wages to prices. We then use industry-level data and find
strong support for these two channels consistent with the implications of our model.


Sebastian Heise                                 Ayegül ahin
Federal Reserve Bank of New York                Department of Economics
Research and Statistics Group                   University of Texas at Austin
33 Liberty Street                               2225 Speedway
New York, NY 10045                              Austin, TX 78712
sebastian.heise@ny.frb.org                      and NBER
                                                aysegul.sahin@austin.utexas.edu
Fatih Karahan
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
yfkarahan@gmail.com
1       Introduction
Price inflation in the U.S. has remained sluggish and below the Federal Reserve's inflation
target of 2% during the decade-long expansion following the Great recession. This behavior of
price inflation has been considered puzzling by many policymakers and academics especially
given that the unemployment rate stood at 3.5% at the end of 2019--its lowest level in almost
half a century.1 In this paper, we revisit this growing disconnect between unemployment
and inflation and show that the missing inflation can be accounted for by the declining pass-
through from wages to prices in the goods-producing sector. We attribute this decline to
rising import competition and increased market concentration and provide strong empirical
support for these two channels using rich industry-level data. We also show that these two
explanations are consistent with the predictions of a theoretical framework in which markups
and pass-through are a function of firms' market shares as in Atkeson and Burstein (2008).
    The left panel of Figure 1 shows the evolution of the cumulative consumer price index
(CPI) in the U.S. starting from the business cycle trough for each of the past five economic
expansions. As the figure shows, each recovery is associated with a lower cumulative con-
sumer price inflation compared to the previous one, with cumulative CPI increasing by 25%
in the first 20 quarters of the recovery following the 1981-82 recession, by 15% following the
1990-91 recession, and by less than 10% over 20 quarters in the last expansion.
    While the evolution of consumer price inflation over time is informative, the duration
of expansions is an increasingly misleading indicator of labor market recovery given the
emergence of jobless recoveries. We therefore propose a novel but simple measure of labor
market recovery that is consistent across expansions--the unemployment recovery gap--and
consider the evolution of price inflation with respect to this new measure. Our new metric
computes the share of the rise in the unemployment rate during the preceding recession that
has been reversed during the current expansion. An unemployment recovery gap of 100%
thus implies that the unemployment rate has declined back to its pre-recession trough.2 In
the right panel of Figure 1, we plot the evolution of cumulative CPI inflation relative to
this new metric. The 1970s and the early 1980s clearly stand out as expansionary periods
with inflation picking up rapidly after the end of the recessions. The three most recent
    1
     NY Times Upshot: Janet Yellen and the Case of the Missing Inflation, June 14, 2017; Living Life Near
the ZLB, John C. Williams, Remarks at 2019 Annual Meeting of the Central Bank Research Association
(CEBRA), New York City, July 18, 2019.
   2
     There are alternative measures of labor market utilization that capture wage-growth better than the
unemployment rate such as the NEI developed by Hornstein et al. (2014), the tightness measure developed
in Moscarini and Postel-Vinay (2017a) and the aggregate hours gap in Faberman (2019). These alterna-
tive measures of labor market utilization typically start in 1994 due to CPS redesign. We focus on the
unemployment recovery gap measure due to its simplicity and availability of a longer time series.



                                                   1
                                        Figure 1: Evolution of CPI Inflation During Economic Expansions
                                       (a) Inflation over Time                           (b) Inflation versus Unemployment Recovery
                              40




                                                                                                                      40
 Cumulative Inflation Growth (%)




                                                                                         Cumulative Inflation Growth (%)
                       30




                                                                                                               30
               20




                                                                                                       20
      10




                                                                                              10
 0




                                                                                         0
                                   0      10             20           30            40                                     0     40            80          120            160
                                       Quarters since Peak Unemployment Rate                                                    Cumulative Unemployment Recovery
                                       1975Q2 - 1979Q2            1982Q4 - 1989Q1                                              1975Q2 - 1979Q2          1982Q4 - 1989Q1
                                       1992Q3 - 2000Q4            2003Q2 - 2006Q4                                              1992Q3 - 2000Q4          2003Q2 - 2006Q4
                                       2009Q4 - 2019Q3                                                                         2009Q4 - 2019Q3




expansions exhibit a milder rise in cumulative inflation. Thus, even taking into account the
emergence of jobless recoveries, the behavior of inflation changed considerably after 1990.
This observation is consistent with the decline in the slope of the price Phillips curve as
documented in detail in Stock and Watson (2019) and the references therein.
     We examine whether inflation in goods or in services is primarily responsible for the slow-
down in consumer price inflation and identify core goods inflation as the main driver of the
change in inflation dynamics. While core goods prices rose by about 20% as unemployment
fell from recessionary peak to trough during the 1982-89 expansion, core goods prices barely
increased in the most recent expansion. At the same time, the recovery of core services
inflation has been roughly similar in all expansions. We analyze a counterfactual scenario in
which goods prices behaved in the 2009-2020 expansion in the same way as they did during
the 1982-89 expansion, and show that around 50% of the missing inflation relative to the
1980s expansion can be traced to goods prices. Interestingly, our empirical analysis shows
that the change in inflation dynamics is not driven by a differential behavior of wages. Wage
inflation has been similar in goods and in services in the last two recessions. This result is
consistent with Galí and Gambetti (2019) and Stock and Watson (2019) who find a more
stable Phillips curve for wages.
     These findings suggest that the changing pass-through from wage changes to price changes
is a promising explanation for the missing core goods inflation. To investigate this possibility,
we estimate the impulse responses to changes in wage inflation on both the consumer and
producer price inflation following Jordà (2005). We uncover a striking change in the relative
behavior of wage and price inflation: pass-through from wages to prices was significant
and positive until the early 2000s, but then dropped sharply and has been statistically


                                                                                         2
indistinguishable from zero in the last two decades.
    Our paper proposes two potential explanations for the disappearance of wage-price pass-
through: rising import competition and increasing market concentration. A substantial
literature has documented an increase in import competition in the U.S. manufacturing
sector since China's WTO entry in the early 2000s (e.g., Autor et al. (2013)). At the same
time, recent work has pointed out that market concentration in manufacturing has increased
(e.g., Autor et al. (2020)). We theoretically examine how these two channels affect pass-
through by setting-up a model with imperfect competition à la Atkeson and Burstein (2008).
In the model, there is a continuum of industries populated by firms that have market power.
Each industry contains both foreign and domestic firms, where the former are assumed to
face a different wage process than the latter. Firms set prices taking into account their
strategic interaction with other firms, and internalize the effects of changing their price on
their market share. We derive a pass-through equation that links price changes to firms'
productivity, input prices, and the endogenous markup, and show that the pass-through of
wage shocks into prices depends on the structure of a firm's industry.
    The model generates two main implications: first, when foreign firms account for a larger
share of the market, fewer firms experience the wage shock. As a result, fewer firms are
compelled to adjust their price, causing domestic firms to absorb more of the shock into their
markup in order to preserve market share against their foreign competitors. The model thus
predicts that rising import penetration reduces pass-through. Second, domestic firms with
a higher market share are more sensitive to the strategic interaction with their competitors.
In response to a wage shock, they change their price by less in order to remain competitive
against the unaffected foreign firms. Since the average firm in a more concentrated industry
tends to have a higher market share, more concentrated industries have lower wage-price
pass-through.
    We examine these implications using detailed industry-level data from various data
sources. Our analysis focuses on producer price inflation to link wages and prices at the
industry-level, and uses the manufacturing sector as a proxy for the goods-producing sector.
We implement the theoretically derived pass-through regression empirically and estimate
impulse responses for manufacturing and services industries separately in our disaggregated
data. We find that pass-through is significant in services industries for up to seven quarters
but insignificant or negative in manufacturing. Over a one-year horizon, we find that there
is essentially no pass-through from wages to producer prices in manufacturing, while we es-
timate a pass-through of about 10% in services using an OLS estimation. This result implies
that a 10% increase in labor costs is associated with a 1.0% increase in service prices.
    As highlighted by our theory, an important caveat for interpreting the OLS pass-through


                                              3
coefficients is that the source of the wage growth could reflect improvements in productivity.3
In that case, wage growth does not constitute a cost-push shock for firms and therefore does
not need to pass through to prices. We address this concern using two approaches. First,
we control for productivity and find that including this control does not change our main
finding. Second, we consider an instrumental-variables approach. The instrument we choose
is the job-to-job transitions rate. This choice builds on the insights in Moscarini and Postel-
Vinay (2017a), who show using a job-ladder model that inflationary wage growth arises when
firms try to poach employees of other firms, since poachers bid up the wages of employed
workers and incumbents raise wages to increase retention. We build on the empirical work
of Karahan et al. (2017) and Moscarini and Postel-Vinay (2017b), and use the realized job-
to-job transitions as instrument. The exclusion restriction behind this instrument is that
the competition between workers does not affect prices directly, for example by affecting
firms' productivity; wages are affected due to competition and prices only due to increasing
unit labor costs. We find high and positive pass-through for services but insignificant and
negative pass-through for manufacturing.
    We then turn to our two hypotheses and show that higher import penetration and higher
market concentration are correlated with lower pass-through. We exploit the availability
of a longer time series in manufacturing to document that the pass-through from wages to
prices in that sector has declined over the last three decades, consistent with the rise in trade
and concentration during that period. While pass-through was positive and significant until
the early 2000s, it has been essentially zero since then. We then document that industries
that are exposed to more import competition exhibit lower wage-price pass-through. We
focus specifically on import competition from China, based on the well-documented effects
of Chinese entrants on competition and employment (Gutiérrez and Philippon (2017), Autor
et al. (2013)). Our empirical results imply that while an industry with no imports from China
exhibits a pass-through from wages to prices of about 2.5%, pass-through would be cut in
half in an industry in which the share of sales originating from China is 10%. Consistent
with our second hypothesis, we also find that high market concentration is linked to lower
pass-through. While a doubling of wages translates into a 14% price increase in a perfectly
competitive industry, it would only correspond to a 4% price increase in an industry where
top-4 firms market share is 50%. While our empirical strategy cannot distinguish between
the import penetration and market concentration channels, we document that they are
positively correlated across industries, suggesting that both could reflect the same underlying
   3
    A long-standing literature addresses the various conceptual and econometric difficulties of pass-through
regressions more generally, mostly in the context of exchange-rate pass-through. See for example, Campa
and Goldberg (2005) and Nakamura and Zerom (2010).



                                                     4
mechanism as argued by Amiti and Heise (2020). Coupled with rising import penetration
and market concentration over the last decades, these findings offer an explanation for the
declining pass-through.
    Our theory and empirical findings suggest a simple mechanism for the declining pass-
through in manufacturing. The entry of foreign competitors into the U.S. market caused
many domestic firms to exit, contributing to the increasing U.S. domestic market concentra-
tion (as argued by Gutiérrez and Philippon (2017)). Consequently, the surviving, relatively
large U.S. firms were able to charge on average higher markups, which made it possible for
them to at least partially absorb cost-push shocks without passing them to their consumers.
These firms take into account that by raising their price they lose market share to foreign
competitors that may not have experienced the same shock. In contrast, firms which oper-
ate in more competitive markets have low markups and are therefore forced to pass through
shocks more fully.
    Our paper is closely related to the recent literature examining the puzzling inflation
dynamics during and after the Great recession. Del Negro et al. (2015), Carvalho et al.
(2017), Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015), and Coibion et al. (2019) all emphasize the role
of inflation expectations in accounting for the behavior of inflation, while Bugamelli et al.
(2015), Forbes (2019), and Obstfeld (2020) point to the global aspects of inflation. Our
analysis complements these papers by explicitly focusing on the disappearing pass-through
from wages to prices in the goods sector and linking it to important changes in the U.S.
economy in the last two decades.
    Our analysis is also consistent with the recent literature on the changing nature of the
wage and price Phillips curves. We find that despite the decoupling of unemployment and
prices in the goods sector in the recent decades, there is no disconnect between unemployment
and wages once changing unemployment dynamics are taken into account--a finding that
echoes Stock and Watson (2019).
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 defines our measure of labor
market recovery and establishes the aggregate facts regarding behavior of inflation, wages
and productivity during expansions. Section 3 introduces our theory and develops a pass-
through equation which we then implement empirically to analyze the pass-through of wages
to prices in manufacturing and services. Section 4 investigates the effect of rising import
competition and increasing market concentration. Finally, Section 5 concludes.




                                             5
2       Changing Inflation Dynamics and Goods Inflation
We begin our analysis by showing that the slower pick-up of the consumer price inflation
during expansions is largely attributable to the changing behavior of goods prices. The
behavior of prices for services is in line with earlier expansions.
    Our comparison of inflation across different recessions needs to take into account the
changing output/unemployment dynamics (see, for example, Jaimovich and Siu (2012) or
Galí et al. (2012)). One possibility is that inflation may have been slow to pick up in more
recent recessions simply because the labor market has become slower to recover. That is
why studying the evolution of inflation over time could be misleading.
    To have a consistent metric of labor market recovery over time, we propose a simple
measure of labor market recovery--the unemployment recovery gap--and consider the evo-
lution of price inflation with respect to this new measure. We consider the share of the
rise in the unemployment rate during the preceding recession that has been reversed during
the following expansion. Specifically, for each recession, we identify the peak quarterly un-
employment rate, upeak and compute the increase in the unemployment rate relative to its
preceding trough, utrough . This allows us to evaluate the progress in the unemployment rate
upeak - ut as a fraction of the unemployment gap upeak - utrough . We refer to this metric as
the unemployment recovery gap and define it as

                                                       upeak - ut
                                   U Recoveryt =                     .                                (1)
                                                     upeak - utrough

For example, a value of one indicates that the unemployment rate is back to its pre-recession
trough. As is well documented, U Recoveryt takes longer to achieve in more recent expan-
sions, consistent with the emergence of jobless recoveries. Our new measure captures the
fact that employment-output dynamics have changed over time and is simple and easy to
track.
    We begin our analysis by studying the relationship between cumulative price growth with
the unemployment recovery gap in the last four expansions. Figure 2 shows the cumulative
growth in consumer prices (CPI-U core inflation) for core goods and for core services rela-
tive to the unemployment recovery gap starting from the peak unemployment rate in each
episode.4
    This figure establishes our first fact: Growth in core goods prices has slowed notably over
    4
    Our motivating facts are based on aggregate price data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). We
obtain the quarterly, seasonally adjusted Consumer Price Index (CPI-U) for goods excluding food and energy
(Core Goods) and for services excluding energy services (Core Services). Our measure of unemployment is
the quarterly, seasonally adjusted unemployment rate of workers 16 years and older from the BLS.



                                                    6
                         Figure 2: Inflation versus Unemployment Recovery from Four Previous Recessions
                                  (a) 1982-1990 Expansion                                                                     (b) 1991-2000 Expansion
            40




                                                                                                        40
                    30




                                                                                                                30
 Cumulative Growth (%)




                                                                                             Cumulative Growth (%)
          20




                                                                                                      20
 10




                                                                                             10
            0




                                                                                                        0
                         0     20      40    60    80    100     120     140    160                                  0     20      40    60    80    100     120     140    160
                             Cumulative Unemployment Recovery - Percent of Rise                                          Cumulative Unemployment Recovery - Percent of Rise




                                  (c) 2003-2007 Expansion                                                                     (d) 2009-2020 Expansion
            40




                                                                                                     40


                                                            Core CPI
                                                            Core Goods CPI
                                                            Core Services CPI
                    30




                                                                                                             30
 Cumulative Growth (%)




                                                                                          Cumulative Growth (%)
           20




                                                                                                   20
  10




                                                                                          10
            0




                                                                                                     0




                         0     20      40    60    80    100     120     140    160                                  0     20      40    60    80    100     120     140    160
                             Cumulative Unemployment Recovery - Percent of Rise                                          Cumulative Unemployment Recovery - Percent of Rise




time and accounts for a large share of the weakening inflation-unemployment relationship
over time. While core goods prices rose by about 20% as unemployment fell from peak to
trough following the 1981-82 recession (Figure 2a), after the 2001-02 and 2007-09 recessions
core goods prices barely picked up (Figures 2c and 2d). At the same time, the recovery of
core services inflation has been roughly similar across expansions.
    We also construct analogous sets of figures for three alternative measures of recovery in
Appendix C and show that our finding is robust to these other measures. Figure A.1 shows
the cumulative price growth against the cumulative GDP growth since peak unemployment
and Figure A.2 plots price growth against time since peak unemployment. Figure A.3 shows
price growth against the recovery of the employment-to-population ratio from its recessionary


                                                                                      7
Figure 3: Counterfactual Inflation for the 2003-2007 and 2009-2020 expansions using core
goods inflation in 1982.
                                     (a) 2003-2007 Expansion                                                                     (b) 2009-2020 Expansion
                       40




                                                                                                                   40
 Cumulative Growth (%)




                                                                                             Cumulative Growth (%)
                 30




                                                                                                             30
          20




                                                                                                      20
   10




                                                                                               10
             0




                                                                                                         0
                            0       20        40      60        80       100       120                                  0       20        40      60        80       100       120
                                Cumulative Unemployment Recovery - Percent of Rise                                          Cumulative Unemployment Recovery - Percent of Rise

                                          Core CPI 2003                                                                               Core CPI 2009
                                          Core CPI 2003 (1982 Goods Inflation)                                                        Core CPI 2009 (1982 Goods Inflation)
                                          Core CPI 1982                                                                               Core CPI 1982




trough. All three figures paint a similar picture as Figure 2.
    To isolate the role of declining goods inflation in accounting for low CPI inflation, we
compute the counterfactual cumulative inflation that would have prevailed had goods prices
behaved in the same was as they did following the 1981-82 recession. Specifically, we compute
the path of counterfactual inflation for the 2003-2007 and 2009-2020 expansions using the
core goods CPI in the expansion following the 1981-82 recession. We keep the core CPI in
services and the weights of two sectors at their current levels. Figure 3 shows that around
50% of the weakening of inflation in the 2003-2007 and 2009-2020 expansions relative to the
1980s expansion can be traced to goods prices. This finding implies that the behavior of
core goods inflation is the key to understanding the changing behavior of inflation.

Role of Labor Costs

One possibility is the differential behavior of labor costs in for goods and services. Slower
inflation pickup for goods prices might simply be a reflection of slower wage growth in goods-
producing industries than in services. To examine this possibility, we consider two measures
of labor cost growth for the two most recent expansions in Figure 4: hourly earnings of
production workers (top panels), and unit labor costs (bottom panels).5 The top panels
of the figure show that wage dynamics were similar in both goods and services sectors. In
particular, the data do not show a slowdown in wage growth in the goods-producing sector.
   5
     We use average hourly earnings of production and non-supervisory workers, seasonally adjusted, and
unit labor costs from the BLS.


                                                                                         8
Figure 4: Cumulative growth in wages (top panels) and in unit labor costs (bottom panels)
relative to unemployment recovery gap
                               (a) Wage Growth: 2003-2007 Expansion                                                                   (b) Wage Growth: 2009-2020 Expansion
                         35




                                                                                                                            35
                                                                                 Goods
                                                                                 Services
                       30




                                                                                                                                 30
 Cumulative Growth (%)




                                                                                                           Cumulative Growth (%)
                  25




                                                                                                                            25
             20




                                                                                                                       20
       15




                                                                                                                 15
  10




                                                                                                            10
                         5




                                                                                                                            5
                         0




                                                                                                                            0
                                0     20      40    60    80    100     120     140    160                                             0     20      40    60    80    100     120     140    160
                                    Cumulative Unemployment Recovery - Percent of Rise                                                     Cumulative Unemployment Recovery - Percent of Rise




                         (c) Unit Labor Cost: 2003-2007 Expansion                                                          (d) Unit Labor Cost: 2009-2020 Expansion
                                                                                                                           20
                         20




                                                                        Manufacturing Only
                                                                        Total
                                                                                                   Cumulative Growth (%)
 Cumulative Growth (%)




                                                                                                                           10
                         10




                                                                                                                           0
                         0




                                                                                                                           -10
                         -10




                               0      20     40     60      80    100      120    140    160                                          0      20     40     60     80     100    120    140      160
                                    Cumulative Unemployment Recovery - Percent of Rise                                                     Cumulative Unemployment Recovery - Percent of Rise




    While hourly earnings are informative, they do not control for potential differences in
productivity growth in goods and services sectors. The bottom panels therefore show overall
unit labor costs for the U.S. economy along with the unit labor costs in manufacturing.
The figures show that unit labor cost in manufacturing did not grow in the 2003-2007 ex-
pansion despite declining unemployment. Therefore, lack of a pick-up in goods inflation is
not puzzling. However, the 2009-2020 expansion looks different with the unit labor cost in
manufacturing picking up faster than overall labor costs after the unemployment gap closed.
Therefore, we conclude that goods inflation did not pick up despite improving labor market
conditions and rising labor costs in the 2009-2020 expansion. These findings imply that lack
of pass-through from labor costs to prices in the goods sector is likely an important channel


                                                                                               9
which we examine directly next. .

Role of Pass-trough from Wages to Prices

We analyze pass-through from wages to prices directly using aggregate data and local pro-
jections method following Jordà (2005). In particular, we estimate the impulse response of
price inflation to changes in wage inflation for each quarter h = 0, ..., 20

                                          8                  8
                 price       wage                  price             wage
                 t +h =  + h t    +             j  t -j +          j t -j + zt + t ,        (2)
                                         j =1               j =1

         price                                    wage
where t   +h is price inflation in quarter t + h, t    is wage inflation in quarter t, and zt is
a control for the unemployment gap to capture that price inflation will be lower when the
unemployment gap is higher. We measure price inflation based on two measures: the Core
CPI as above and a Core Producer Price Index (PPI) capturing the inflation of finished goods
less food and energy. The producer price index captures the prices charged by producers of
goods, both to consumers and to other firms. We measure wage inflation as average hourly
earnings of production and supervisory workers. Our sample starts in 1964 for the CPI
and in 1974 for the PPI. As shown in Jordà (2005), the regression can be approximately
interpreted as a VAR under a Cholesky decomposition.
    Figures 5a and 5b present the impulse responses of an innovation in average hourly
earnings on both the Core CPI and the Core PPI, respectively. We find a strong positive
pass-through of wage changes to both the CPI and the PPI, which rises and peaks at about
11 quarters for the CPI and at 8 quarters for the PPI. We next estimate pass-through over
25-year rolling windows and plot the resulting peak pass-through in figures 5c and 5d at
different points in time. The figures highlight that both for the CPI and the PPI pass-
through has declined significantly. Pass-through was significant and positive until the early
2000s, then dropped sharply and is currently indistinguishable from zero.
    While our aggregate pass-through estimates show a stark decline in pass-through, they
have two main shortcomings. First, we cannot distinguish the exact sectors that are driving
the decline in pass-through. Second, time-variation is limited in scope and lack of shocks or
instruments leads to a potential simultaneity bias. To address these issues, in the remainder
of empirical analysis we rely on rich within-industry variation using detailed data on wages
and prices.




                                                 10
                                            Figure 5: Aggregate Pass-Through
        (a) Impulse Response of CPI to Earnings                              (b) Impulse Response of PPI to Earnings
    3                                                                    3



    2
                                                                         2


    1
                                                                         1

    0
                                                                         0

 -10            4           8              12          16          20    0          4             8              12         16          20
                                Quarters                                                              Quarters




                    (c) Pass-Through, CPI                                               (d) Pass-Through, PPI
    3
                                                                         3

    2
                                                                         2

    1
                                                                         1

    0
                                                                         0


 -1                                                                     -1

 1990        1995      2000         2005        2010        2015        1990     1995       2000         2005        2010        2015
                      End year of the 25-year period                                       End year of the 25-year period




3        Pass-Through from Wages to Prices
Our analysis so far suggests that a decline in the pass-through of labor costs to prices could
be behind the weaker inflation observed in the last two decades. In this section, we first
introduce a theoretical framework in which pass-through is based on fundamentals such as
the market structure, the labor share, and productivity. We then implement our empiri-
cal analysis using industry-level data and interpret our findings in light of our theoretical
framework. We find that pass-through from wages to prices in goods-producing industries
is negligible, while it remains significant and positive in services.


3.1        A Framework Linking Pass-Through and Competition
Our setup follows closely the framework developed in Atkeson and Burstein (2008). The
model consists of several agents. At the lowest level of aggregation are individual firms,
which produce varieties. The varieties are aggregated into industries. These industries are


                                                                   11
aggregated into two sectors, goods and services. To focus on pass-through and to facilitate
the model's exposition, we do not explicitly model a household sector.

3.1.1   Setup

There are two sectors, goods and services. Production in each sector is carried out by
a competitive firm using the output of a continuum of industries k  [0, 1], which are
aggregated according to the CES production function
                                      ^     1                            /( -1)
                                                          ( -1)/
                              Ys =              ys (k )            dk             ,         (3)
                                        0

where ys (k ) denotes the output produced by industry k in sector s  {G, S } and  is the
elasticity of substitution between industries. Standard arguments imply that the demand
curve for goods of industry k is then obtained as
                                                                   -
                                                      ps (k )
                                     ys (k ) =                          Ys ,                (4)
                                                       Ps
            ´1
where Ps = ( 0 ps (k )1- dk )1/(1-) .
    Each industry is populated by a finite number of firms, Ns (k ), which are indexed by i.
These firms can either be foreign or domestic. The industry-specific aggregator of varieties
is given by
                                                       /(-1)
                                          Ns (k)
                            ys (k ) =              ys (k, i)(-1)/                     ,     (5)
                                            i=1

where  is the elasticity of substitution across varieties, and ys (k, i) is the quantity of firm
i's variety in industry k . The demand for variety (k, i) is then given by

                             ys (k, i) = ps (k, i)- ps (k )- Ps- Ys ,                       (6)

                  Ns (k)        1- 1/(1- )
where ps (k ) = ( i =1 ps (k, i)  )        .
   Each firm has a constant returns to scale production function that combines labor l and
capital k according to
                                          y = Al k 1-                                   (7)

where A is total factor productivity, l is labor, and k is capital. Standard cost minimization
formulates the marginal cost of the firm to produce ys (k, i) amount of output as a function




                                                      12
of wage, w, and the rental rate of capital, r, as

                                                         1  1-
                                           cs (k, i) =     w r .                                    (8)
                                                         A

Factor prices are determined competitively and taken as given by each firm.6 We allow wages
to be potentially different for domestic and foreign firms; in particular, below we will study
wage shocks that only affect domestic firms.
    As in Atkeson and Burstein (2008), we assume that varieties are more substitutible across
firms in the same industry than across industries,  >  > 1. Firms compete under Bertrand
competition, taking as given the prices chosen by other firms when setting their price, and
taking as given input costs. Since there is only a finite number of firms, each firm takes
into account the effect of its price setting on the price index ps (k ). Firms therefore face an
effective elasticity of demand of

                                 Es (k, i) =  (1 - s (k, i)) + s (k, i),                            (9)

where s (k, i) = (ps (k, i)ys (k, i))/( i ps (k, i )ys (k, i )) is firm i's market share in industry k .
Intuitively, firms with a higher market share are less concerned with competition from firms
within their industry, and are focused more on competition across industries, which lowers
their effective demand elasticity.

3.1.2      Pass-Through of Shocks

Each firm solves
                                                                     -              -
                                                         ps (k, i)        ps (k )
                         max [ps (k, i) - cs (k, i)]                                    Ys ,       (10)
                           p                              ps (k )          Ps

where cs (k, i) is the marginal cost of firm c in industry k . The solution of this problem,
taking into account that firms take into consideration the impact of their own price setting
on the industry's price index, is

                                                      Es (k, i)
                                      ps (k, i) =                 cs (k, i),                       (11)
                                                    Es (k, i) - 1

where Ms (k, i)  Es (k, i)/(Es (k, i) - 1) is the firm's markup. Firms with a larger market
share set higher markups since they face less elastic demand.
  6
      We have omitted the constant for simplicity and all details are delegated to Appendix A.




                                                       13
   In Appendix A, we show that we can derive the pass-through of shocks into prices as

              d log ps (k, i) = d log Ms (k, i) - d log A + d log wi + (1 - )d log r.                 (12)

Thus, pass-through of wage shocks is equal to  plus a term that captures the adjustment
of the markup. This specification will be our key estimating equation below.
    Our model structure allows us to express the change in the markup as a function of other
variables related to market structure. Using the definition of the markup and the effective
demand elasticity, we find that the change in the markup can be written as

                        d log Ms (k, i) = -s (k, i) [d log ps (k, i) - d log ps (k )] ,               (13)

where s (k, i) = -( log Ms (k, i)/ log ps (k, i))  0 is the elasticity of the markup with
respect to a firm's own price. We therefore have from equation (13) that a firm's pass-
through is given by

           d log ps (k, i) = -s (k, i) [d log ps (k, i) - d log ps (k )] - d log A + d log wi ,       (14)

where we have assumed that r is constant. Solving this equation for d log ps (k, i), we find

                          s (k, i)                       1                      
    d log ps (k, i) =                d log ps (k ) -              d log A +              d log wi .   (15)
                        1 + s (k, i)                 1 + s (k, i)           1 + s (k, i)

This equation highlights the key mechanisms that affect pass-through of wage shocks: first,
there is a direct effect coming from the change in wi . Second, there is an indirect effect that
operates via the change in the industry's price index, ps (k ). The relative strength of the
two channels is modulated by the markup elasticity s (k, i). Firms with a higher markup
elasticity put a higher weight on the aggregate price index. The equation also illustrates
that increases in productivity tend to reduce prices.
    The markup elasticity is increasing in a firm's market share, holding everything else fixed,
ds (k, i)/ds (k, i) > 0, and satisfies s (k, i) = 0 if s (k, i) = 0. Equivalently, if all firms in
an industry have the same market share, s (k, i) = 1/Ns (k ), then ds (k, i)/dNs (k ) < 0. It
follows from equation (15) that when adjusting their price in response to a shock, firms with
a higher market share put greater emphasis on the movement of the industry's overall price
index than firms with a lower market share.
    We can now discuss the two main implications of the theory. First, assuming that foreign
firms do not experience domestic wage shocks, a higher share of foreign firms in an industry
implies that fewer firms experience a given domestic wage shock. From equation (15), firms


                                                      14
place some weight on the industry's overall price index, ps (k ), when adjusting their price.
Since the direct effect on this index is smaller when fewer firms are affected by the wage shock,
domestic firms change their price ps (k, i) by less in response to the shock when foreign firms
are more important in an industry. Consequently, pass-through falls. Intuitively, domestic
firms absorb more of the shock into their markup in order to preserve market share against
their foreign competitors which were unaffected by the shock.
    Second, since s (k, i) is increasing in firms' market share, firms with a higher market
share are more sensitive to the strategic interaction with their competitors, placing more
emphasis on the industry's price index ps (k ) relative to the direct effect of a wage shock.
When some firms in the industry are foreign, the industry's price index moves by less than
the direct wage effect. As a result, pass-through is less than complete. As concentration
in an industry rises, the market share of the average firm tends to go up, increasing the
emphasis on the industry's price index, and pass-through falls.
    We summarize these insights in the following proposition.

Theorem 3.1. Consider an industry populated by ND  1 domestic firms and NF 
1 foreign firms with symmetric market shares. Consider a wage shock which only affects
domestic firms.

  1. If ND + NF = N < , pass-through is less than . Holding fixed the ratio ND /N , a
     decline in N leads to a reduction in pass-through.

  2. A higher share of domestic firms in the industry, ND /N , increases pass-through.

Proof. See Appendix A.2.

Our empirical analysis is built on these insights and rely on industry-level data to examine
the change in pass-through over time.


3.2    Estimating Pass-through From Wages to Prices
We analyze changes in prices in response to wage growth across industries using disaggregated
industry-level data on producer prices, wages, and productivity. As a first step, we implement
our estimating equation (12) using the same local projection framework as before. We then
estimate standard pass-through regressions at an annual horizon and examine the role of the
labor share and the causal impact of wages on prices.




                                               15
3.2.1      Pass-through estimates: Local Projections

We estimate impulse response functions similar to specification (2) for each quarter h =
0, ..., 20

                                        8                        8
  ln(pi,t+h ) =  + h  ln(wit )+               j  ln(pi,t-j )+          j  ln(wi,t-j )+ Xit + i + t + it , (16)
                                       j =1                     j =1


where pit is the producer price index in industry i and period t, wit is the industry's wage
index, and Xit is a set of time-varying controls such as the change in TFP as emphasized in
our theoretical specification above. While we do not observe industry-specific capital costs,
we control for fixed differences across industries by including industry fixed effects i , and
we control for macroeconomic trends by adding time fixed effects t . We also control for
the changing age and gender composition of an industry's workforce with Xit to control for
compositional changes in an industry's work force. The coefficient h captures the pass-
through of wage changes to price changes h quarters ahead. If markups are constant and
capital costs are uncorrelated with wage changes, then according to the simple framework
above h is the labor share . The coefficient is identified by comparing how much of a
higher wage growth in one sector relative to the others translates into a higher growth in
producer prices in that sector.
    Our empirical implementation combines several publicly available datasets. For price
data, we use the seasonally-adjusted, industry-level Producer Price Index (PPI) series from
the BLS. We analyze producer prices in this section because producer prices are available
at the industry-level, allowing for a clean mapping between industry-level wages and prices.
Moreover, as shown above, the decline in pass-through over time in the aggregate data was
similar in consumer and producer prices. To compare goods and services, we focus on the
manufacturing sector as a proxy for goods-producing industries since we have a long and
consistent time series for this sector.7 For wages, we obtain average weekly earnings from
the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW) from the BLS, and seasonally
adjust them using the Census Bureau's X-12 ARIMA program. Our baseline pass-through
dataset combines the price and the wage data at the 5-digit NAICS level. We generate
time-consistent NAICS industries by concording the NAICS codes using the correspondences
provided by the U.S. Census Bureau. In total, we have information for 255 5-digit industries,
of which 148 are in manufacturing. The first available year where we have price information
for goods and services is 2003. We exclude petroleum and coal products (NAICS 324) from
all analyses. Appendix B provides more details.
  7
      Manufacturing accounted for about 63% of employment in goods-producing industries in the last decade.


                                                       16
                                      Figure 6: Impulse Response Functions




                                                           .04
 .04




                                                           .02
 .02




                                                           0
 0




                                                           -.02
 -.02




                                                           -.04
 -.04




                                                           -.06
        0     4        8              12      16      20          0   4       8              12   16   20
                           Quarters                                               Quarters


            (a) Manufacturing and Services                                (b) Manufacturing
 .1
 .05
 0
 -.05
 -.1




        0     4        8              12      16      20
                           Quarters


                     (c) Services


    To estimate the regression in (16), we compute the four quarter log change in each
industry's producer price index,  ln(pit ), the four quarter log change in wages,  ln(wit ),
and the four quarter log change in TFP,  ln(Ait ).
    The top left panel of Figure 6 shows the estimated impulse response function using all
industries in our dataset. Pass-through of wage shocks increases over the first quarters until
its peak in quarter 3 at about 0.03, and then declines again and becomes insignificant in
quarter 6. However, the result masks considerable heterogeneity across goods and services.
The right panel of Figure 6 presents the impulse response function for manufacturing indus-
tries only. Pass-through is statistically insignificant at most horizons, and is in fact negative
from quarter 10 onwards. In contrast, the bottom panel of Figure 6 shows that pass-through
in services is significantly positive for 9 quarters, with an average value of about 0.04. Thus,
the positive relationship between wage changes and price changes found in the aggregate
appears to be entirely due to the pass-through in service-producing industries.




                                                      17
3.2.2   Pass-through estimates: Regression Analysis

For the remainder of the paper, we focus on a simpler specification and estimate contempo-
raneous pass-through at h = 0. This specification will allow us to more easily add different
interaction terms and control variables going forward, and maps directly into our theoretical
specification above. Specifically, we estimate

                          ln(pit ) =   ln(wit ) + Xit + i + t +      it .                   (17)

We weight the regression by an industry's total sales in 2012, and use Driscoll-Kraay standard
errors to account for cross-sectional and time series correlation.
    Table 1 presents the results. As before, we initially do not separate between goods and
services. The results in Column (1) show that in this specification the contemporaneous
pass-through from wage changes to price changes is about 0.06. As expected, an increase
in productivity has a negative effect on price changes. A 10% increase in productivity
translates to a 0.8% decline in price growth. Column (2) includes separately coefficients for
wage growth in manufacturing and services sectors. These terms are computed as  ln(wit )
times a dummy for whether the industry is a manufacturing or a service industry. We do
not control for TFP in Column (2), and add it in in Column (3) to analyze how productivity
growth affects the pass-through coefficient. In both regressions, we find that the correlation
between wage changes and price changes is insignificant in the manufacturing sector, both
economically and statistically, and about 0.10 in services, confirming our earlier finding.
Importantly, the pass-through of wages to prices is relatively unchanged when controlling
for productivity.
    Clearly, the interpretation of the pass-through coefficient is subject to several concerns.
One important concern is related to the measure of labor costs. Wage growth represents an
increase in labor costs to firms only to the extent that labor is used in firms operating in that
industry and is not substitutable in the short run. In the simple model derived above, even
if markups and productivity are constant, wage changes translate to a price change only to
the extent of the industry's share of labor in total output, which is given by . Through this
lens, the lower pass-through rates estimated for manufacturing in Columns (1)­(3) might be
due to differences in labor's share in output across industries rather than due to differences
in pricing behavior.
    To address this concern, we replace wage growth with the interaction of wage growth
with the industry's labor share (with and without controlling for TFP). For manufacturing,
we calculate the labor share in each industry as the industry's payroll divided by its total
shipments in a given year based on the Annual Survey of Manufacturers (ASM) from 2003-


                                               18
                 Table 1: Pass-Through Regressions for Goods versus Services

                                 (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)      (5)                (6)
                              Aggregate      No TFP       With TFP       Aggregate No TFP            With TFP
  Wage                         0.0616
                               (0.0167)
  TFP                          -0.0793                    -0.0757        -0.0788                     -0.0778
                                (0.0149)                   (0.0141)       (0.0155)                    (0.0155)
  Wage Manuf                                  0.0107        0.0216
                                             (0.0179)      (0.0186)
  Wage Services                              0.102         0.0917
                                             (0.0323)      (0.0286)
  Wage × LS                                                                0.182
                                                                          (0.0760)
  Wage × LS Manuf                                                                        -0.0642       0.0581
                                                                                         (0.107)       (0.108)
  Wage × LS Services                                                                     0.242         0.197
                                                                                         (0.103)      (0.0852)
 Time Fixed Effects               Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
 Industry Fixed Effects           Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
 R2                              0.0184       0.0116        0.0197         0.0169       0.00863        0.0170
 Observations                    12727        12727         12727          12727         12727         12727

 TFP is total factor productivity. LS refers to the labor share. Driscoll-Kraay standard errors in parentheses.
 All regressions are weighted by an industry's total sales in 2012.
 
  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01


2016. For non-manufacturing industries, we calculate the labor share as total payroll divided
by sales from the censuses in 2002, 2007, and 2012, and assume that the labor shares remain
constant until a new data release is available. We then estimate

                           ln(pit ) = it  ln(wit ) + Xit + i + t +             it .                    (18)

This regression controls for heterogeneity in labor shares across industries. If pass-through
in each industry was equal to the labor share, then the estimated coefficient  would be
equal to one.
    The results presented in Columns (4), (5) and (6) show that the lower pass-through in
manufacturing is not simply due to a lower labor share in that sector. When we do not
differentiate between manufacturing and services, we find a pass-through of 18% in column

                                                    19
(4). When we estimate them separately, we find a pass-through of 20% in services (when
controlling for productivity), implying that a 10% increase in labor costs is associated with
a 2% increase in service prices in an industry that uses only labor. The pass-through in
manufacturing is still estimated to be small and insignificant. Table A.1 in Appendix D
shows that not weighting the observations by sales in 2012 produces similar results. Table
A.2 in Appendix D shows that the results are similar when we do not include industry or
time fixed effects.

Identifying the Causal Effect of Labor Costs on Prices

A second concern is regarding the interpretation of  as the causal effect of labor costs on
prices. Wage growth can be driven by various factors such as changes in worker composition,
improvements in labor productivity, and increases in labor demand in tight labor markets.
Only the part of wage growth that is in excess of productivity growth constitutes a cost push
shock to the firm. We next try to isolate the inflationary component of wage growth and
measure the response of prices to the cost-push shock we identify exploiting an instrumental
variable approach.
    We build on the insights in Moscarini and Postel-Vinay (2017a) who show using a job
ladder model embedded in a New Keynesian framework that inflationary wage growth occurs
when it represents competitive pressures in hiring and retention. Such pressure materializes
when firms try to poach employees of other firms, which leads the poachers to bid up the
wages of employed workers and incumbent firms raising their wages to increase retention.
Wage growth due to such a mechanism is inflationary precisely because it raises wages for
people without raising their productivity.
    To implement this idea and isolate the wage growth due to competition between employ-
ers, we build on empirical work in Karahan et al. (2017) and Moscarini and Postel-Vinay
(2017b). These papers show that when the frequency of job-to-job transitions increases,
wage growth accelerates more than it does in response to improvements in the job-finding
rate for the unemployed, consistent with a large class of job ladder models such as Burdett
and Mortensen (1998) and Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002). We use the realized job-to-job
transitions to instrument for wage growth. In other words, controlling for productivity, the
variation in wage growth predicted by job-to-job transitions is the inflationary component
of wage growth. The exclusion restriction behind this instrument is that the competition
between firms for workers does not affect firms' pricing decisions directly; rather, wages are
affected due to competition and prices change only in response to increasing unit labor costs.
    We construct the instrument using publicly available, quarterly job-to-job transition



                                             20
                                          Table 2: IV Regressions

                                             (1)        (2)           (3)        (4)
                                                Services               Manufacturing
                                             Wage  Price              Wage      Price
               TFP                           -0.0622     0.0223 0.0544               -0.0190
                                            (0.0522)    (0.0528) (0.0199)            (0.253)
              J2J                            1.030                     4.940
                                             (0.521)                  (7.205)
               Wage Services                             1.234
                                                         (0.560)
               Wage Manuf                                                             -2.699
                                                                                     (4.138)
              Time Fixed Effects               Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes
              Industry Fixed Effects           Yes           Yes        Yes           Yes
              R2                                            -1.087                   -7.055
              Observations                    4994           4994      7730           7730
              F-Statistic                     15.82                    3.49

              TFP is total factor productivity. Driscoll-Kraay standard errors in parentheses.
              
               p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01


rates from the Longitudinal Employer Household-Dynamics (LEHD).8 The publicly avail-
able LEHD data provide job-to-job transition rates at the two-digit sector level, separately
by gender and education level, since 2000. Using this information, we impute the job-to-job
transition rate for each of the 5-digit industries in our sample as a weighted average over the
job-to-job transition rates by gender and education within the associated two-digit sector,
using the gender and education shares of workers in our disaggregated industries as weights.
The instrument therefore picks up time variation in job-to-job transitions for the aggregate
sector level and in the composition of workers in a given industry. There is less variation in
manufacturing, since the LEHD treats manufacturing as a single sector (31 - 33). We then
estimate the baseline pass-through specification (17) via instrumental variables, separately
for goods and for services, where we instrument for the wage change of industry i in sector
S with the first-stage regression

                                S
                               wit =  S JtoJit
                                            S
                                               +  S Xit
                                                     S    S
                                                        + i + S
                                                              t +
                                                                              S
                                                                              it ,               (19)
  8
      We use the job-to-job transition rates calculated using separations.




                                                       21
             S
where JtoJit    is the moving average of industry i's job-to-job transition rate in quarter t and
its three lags for sector S .
    The first-stage estimates in column 1 of Table 2 show that job-to-job transitions are a good
instrument for the change in wages in the services sector. The IV estimates in column (2)
show that pass-through in the services sector is basically one-for-one. For the manufacturing
sector, we find that the first-stage is somewhat weaker, but still significant, due to the lack of
variation in job-to-job transitions data across industries within manufacturing (column (3)).
We find that pass-through in the manufacturing is negative and not precisely estimated due
to lack of detailed job-to-job transitions data in manufacturing industries.
    Overall, the IV estimates in Table 2 confirm the conclusions of the reduced-form findings.
Cost-push shocks pass through to prices one for one in service-producing industries, whereas
there is little or no pass-through in manufacturing.9


3.3     Pass-Through in Manufacturing Over Time: 1993-2016
Our aggregate analysis has shown that the behavior of goods inflation changed after 2000 ac-
counting for around half of the missing inflation in the 2003-2007 and 2009-2020 expansions.
To connect the missing goods inflation to low pass-through in manufacturing, we now focus
on estimating the time trend in manufacturing pass-through. While the PPI data are only
available from 2003 onward for most service-providing industries, a longer time series going
back to 1993 exists for manufacturing industries. For this purpose, we extend our concor-
dance of 5-digit NAICS industries back to that year. We use only manufacturing industries
and estimate pass-through coefficients for different time periods using the specification in
(17).
    Table 3 presents our findings. The first column shows that over the extended period, the
average pass-through is positive but very small. In the second column, we allow the pass-
through coefficient to vary over time. Specifically, we estimate the effect for the periods before
and after 2003 by interacting the wage change with a dummy for these periods. Our results
indicate a sizable change in the price pass-through: For the period prior to 2003, increases
in wages did translate into increases in prices. The pass-through declined substantially to
essentially zero after 2003. The results are more stark when we interact the change in wages
with the labor share of the industry in column (4). We find a pass-through of 31% per unit
of labor for the pre-2003 period while we estimate no pass-though for the later period. This
specification shows that the decline in pass-through is not accounted for by the decline in the
   9
     We also examined a Bartik-style instrument for minimum wages, which we constructed by aggregating
state-level data to the industry-level using employment shares. The first-stage regressions were generally
insignificant.


                                                   22
                     Table 3: Pass-Through Regressions in Manufacturing

                                      (1)          (2)            (3)                  (4)
                                      All       Pre/Post          All               Pre/Post
  Wage                              0.0223
                                   (0.0135)
  TFP                              -0.169        -0.167       -0.179                -0.177
                                   (0.0193)      (0.0192)     (0.0196)              (0.0195)
  Wage × Pre-2003                                0.0471
                                                 (0.0182)
  Wage × Post-2003                             -0.0000794
                                                (0.0182)
  Wage × LS                                                     0.140
                                                               (0.106)
  Wage × LS × Pre-2003                                                               0.311
                                                                                     (0.138)
  Wage × LS × Post-2003                                                              -0.0607
                                                                                     (0.155)
 Time Fixed Effects                  Yes           Yes           Yes                   Yes
 Industry Fixed Effects              Yes           Yes           Yes                   Yes
 R2                                 0.0372        0.0350        0.0431                0.0418
 Observations                       12913         12913         12913                 12913

 TFP is total factor productivity. Driscoll-Kraay standard errors in parentheses.
 Columns (2) and (4) include interactions with a dummy variable for the year being before or after 2009.
 
  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01


labor share of the manufacturing sector. The finding is also consistent with our aggregate
local projections above, which showed a sharp decline in pass-through in the early 2000s.


3.4    Taking Stock
Our empirical analysis established a number of important facts. First, we estimate a high
pass-through from labor costs to producer prices in the services sector in the 2003-2016 pe-
riod. We estimate pass-through to be around 25 percent per unit of labor using an OLS
specification. Using an instrumental variables approach, we find complete pass-through.
Second, we estimate very little or no pass-through from labor costs to prices in manufac-
turing in the post-2003 period. Our data analysis extended to the 1993-2016 period for the
manufacturing sector shows that this was not the case in the pre-2003 period. Pass-through

                                                   23
in manufacturing was positive around 30 percent per unit of labor in the 1993-2003 period--
similar to what we found for services--but vanished in the post-2003 period. In the next
section, we evaluate potential explanations for this change.


4        Why Did Pass-Through Disappear in Manufacturing?
There are various changes in the U.S. economy that coincided with the change in wage-to-
price pass-through that we document in the aggregate and industry-level data. Motivated
by our theoretical analysis, we consider the roles of two notable changes. The first is the
rise in import penetration. With increasing import penetration into the U.S. economy, an
increasingly higher fraction of domestic sales are accounted for by imported goods. The
second is the rising concentration in product and to a lesser extent in labor markets with a
small number of firms accounting for a higher fraction of total sales or employment. Both of
the trends are quite prominent and could have potentially affected firms' pricing behavior.
Our theoretical model captures the mechanism through which they affect pricing behavior
of firms.
     A substantial literature has documented an increase in import competition in the U.S.
manufacturing sector since China's WTO entry in the early 2000s (e.g., Autor et al. (2013)).
This literature has documented substantial effects of Chinese import competition on U.S.
employment and other outcomes (e.g., Pierce and Schott (2016). A commonly used mea-
sure to quantify import competition is the import penetration which measures the fraction
of domestic consumption of manufacturing goods that is imported. Figure 7a shows the
evolution of import penetration from China in the average 5-digit NAICS industry in our
sample in the U.S. manufacturing sector over time. While in the early 1990s imports from
China accounted for only about 1% of sales in the average manufacturing industry in the
U.S., imports from China rose to about 10% of total manufacturing sales in 2016.10 As high-
lighted by Theorem 3.1, a larger number of foreign firms not subject to U.S. wage shocks
would make an industry's price index less responsive to wage changes. Given its striking rise,
import penetration therefore could account for the declining pass-through in manufacturing
that we documented in the previous section.
     A second important change in the U.S. economy is the rising market concentration as
documented by Autor et al. (2020). Figure 7b shows the sales share of top 20 firms in the
manufacturing sector.11 There was a gradual increase in the concentration of sales in top
    10
     Autor et al. (2013) and Pierce and Schott (2016) show that the sharp increase in imports from China
over this period led to a significant decline in employment in the manufacturing sector.
  11
     Figures A.9a and A.9b in Appendix B show that the patterns are similar for the sales share of the top
4 firms and the HHI.


                                                   24
      Figure 7: Rising import penetration and concentration in the manufacturing sector


                            (a) Import Penetration from China                                                                   (b) Concentration
                .12




                                                                                                        .65
                .1




                                                                                                                .63
                                                                                            Top-20 Market Share
       Import Penetration
                     .08




                                                                                                       .61
              .06




                                                                                                .59
        .04




                                                                                                        .57
                .02




                                                                                                        .55
                0




                            1993   1996   1999   2002   2005   2008   2011   2014   2017                          1996   1999    2002   2005    2008   2011   2014
                                                        Year                                                                               Year




20 firms over time. Rising market concentration could also potentially affect firms' pricing
decisions. As highlighted by Theorem 3.1, decreasing competition causes firms to internalize
more the strategic nature of the pricing game and to focus more on their price relative to
the industry's price index. As a result, increasing concentration could generate declining
pass-through.
    We use our industry-level data to examine whether the import penetration channel and
the market concentration channel affected wage-to-price pass-through in the manufacturing
sector.


4.1               The Role of the Rise in Import Penetration
We examine the import penetration channel using extensive cross-sectional data. In partic-
ular, we investigate whether pass-through is lower in industries with a higher exposure to
trade. We proxy for trade competition in an industry with the level of import penetration
from China. Specifically, we compute import penetration of industry i as

                                                           CN                    ImportsCN
                                                                                         it
                                                        IPit  =                                        ,                                                             (20)
                                                                       Salesit - Exportsit + Importsit

where ImportsCNit  are imports by industry i from China in year t, Importsit and Exportsit
are the industry's total imports and exports, respectively, and Salesit are the total sales in
that industry. We obtain imports and exports for each NAICS industry each year from the



                                                                                       25
U.S. Census Bureau, available via Peter Schott's website.12 Total sales for each industry
are obtained from the ASM. A higher import penetration implies that a larger share of an
industry's U.S. sales is accounted for by imports from China, suggesting that U.S. firms in
that sector are heavily exposed to foreign competition.
   We interact our measure of import competition in each industry with the wage change.
We then estimate the modified pass-through regression

                                                       CN      CN
              ln(pit ) = 0  ln(wit ) + 1  ln(wit )  IPit  + IPit  + Xit + t +            it ,   (21)

          CN
where IPit     is industry i's import penetration from China in year t.13
    The first column of Table 4 presents the results from this regression. We find that higher
import penetration significantly lowers pass-through in a given industry. While an industry
with no imports from China exhibits a pass-through from wages to prices of about 2.5%,
pass-through would be cut in half in an industry in which the share of sales originating from
China is 10%. Since our regression incorporates time fixed effects and therefore picks up
the aggregate increase in import penetration, this finding does not simply reflect our earlier
result that pass-through in manufacturing fell over time, while at the same time import
penetration rose. Instead, the results indicate that industries that experience high import
penetration from China exhibit relatively lower pass-through.
    In column (2), we estimate a similar specification where instead of interacting the wage
change with the level of import penetration we use its change since 1997, similar to the
measure in Autor et al. (2013). The result is relatively similar to before: an industry that
experienced a 10 percentage point increase in import penetration from China since 1997
exhibits pass-through of wages to prices that is about 1.1 percentage points lower than an
industry with no Chinese imports.
    As an alternative, we next construct a dummy variable for whether in a given year an
industry's import penetration is above the 75th percentile of import penetration across all
industries in that year. We also construct the complementary dummy for industries below
the 75th percentile. Since the cut-off is recomputed in each year, the set of industries where a
given dummy is equal to one changes from year to year. The point estimate in column (3) of
Table 4 shows that industries with a high level of import penetration exhibit a pass-through
from wages to prices that is lower than the pass-through in industries with low import pene-
tration. However, the effect is statistically insignificant. In column (4), we instead choose as
cutoff the 90th percentile of import penetration. We find that industries with import pen-
etration from China below the 90th percentile in a given year exhibit significantly positive
 12
      https://sompks4.github.io/sub_data.html
 13
      In a slight abuse of notation. We do not have quarterly import penetration data.

                                                     26
                  Table 4: Pass-Through Regressions and Import Penetration

                                 (1)          (2)           (3)       (4)            (5)        (6)
                                                             Within Year              Across Years

                                 IP          IP           75th Pct   90th Pct      75th Pct   90th Pct
  Wage                        0.0247       0.0245
                              (0.0139)     (0.0137)
  Wage × IP                    -0.128       -0.115
                              (0.0662)     (0.0658)
  TFP                         -0.169      -0.170          -0.171     -0.170        -0.168     -0.170
                              (0.0196)    (0.0196)        (0.0196)   (0.0195)      (0.0196)   (0.0195)
  Wage × Low IP                                            0.0228    0.0231        0.0289     0.0242
                                                          (0.0144)   (0.0137)      (0.0144)   (0.0136)
  Wage × High IP                                           0.0132    -0.0430       -0.0527    -0.0750
                                                          (0.0214)   (0.0220)      (0.0259)    (0.0258)
 Time Fixed Effects             Yes          Yes            Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
 Industry Fixed Effects         Yes          Yes            Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
 R2                            0.0375       0.0382         0.0376     0.0374        0.0386     0.0377
 Observations                  12398        12305          12398      12398         12398      12398

 IP refers to import penetration. Driscoll-Kraay standard errors in parentheses.
 
   p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01


pass-through, while pass-through is in fact negative in industries with high competition from
China.
    In Columns (5) and (6) of Table 4, we instead use the 75th percentile and the 90th per-
centile of import penetration from China across all years as cutoff. This regression analyzes
whether pass-through is lower for an industry once it crosses a fixed threshold level of import
penetration. Since import penetration rises over time, more industries are classified as hav-
ing a large import penetration in later years than in earlier years. The regression indicates
again that industries with low import penetration exhibit significantly higher pass-through
from wages to prices while industries with high import penetration do not.
    Overall, our results support the conjecture of Theorem 3.1. Industries that are exposed
to higher degree of competition from abroad do not raise their prices as much in response to
increasing wages, and therefore exhibit lower increase in price inflation. As import penetra-
tion has risen significantly over the last decades, pass-through in manufacturing overall has
declined.


                                                     27
          Table 5: Different Measures of Concentration Measures in 1995 and 2012

                                      1995                               2012
  Top-4 Sales Share                  33.2%                              36.6%
  Top-20 Sales Share                 59.9%                              63.6%
  Sales HHI                          0.052                              0.065
  Top-4 Employment Share 27.6%                                          27.1%
  Top-20 Employment Share 49.5%                                         48.6%
  Employment HHI          0.045                                         0.046
  Sales concentration is for 1997, the earliest year available from the Census Bureau on a NAICS basis.
  Employment concentration is from the NETS database.


4.2     The Role of the Rise in Market Concentration
The increase in import concentration in the U.S. coincided with the rise in market concen-
tration which we refer to as the market concentration channel. Various recent papers have
focused on the role of rising market concentration on the aggregate economy and connected
the rise in market power to the increase in markups and the decline in the labor share.14
Our theory above suggests that a rise in concentration should lead to a decline in wage-price
pass-through.
    We evaluate the effect of rising market concentration on pass-through from wages to
prices using different measures of sales concentration. In particular, we use three measures:
the share of sales of the top-4 firms and of the top-20 firms in an industry, respectively, and
the HHI of the 50 largest firms. All three of these measures are obtained from the Census
of Manufacturing in 1997, 2002, 2007, and 2012, and linearly interpolated in between census
years.15 As an alternative measure of concentration, we also use employment concentration,
which we obtain from Walls & Associates' National Establishment Time-Series (NETS)
database for 1993-2014. NETS contains an annual time series of establishment sales and
employment, among other measures, for more than 40 million establishments collected by
Dun and Bradstreet.16 We compute the share of employees working for the top-4 and top-20
employers, respectively, in our data in each year, and similarly compute an employment HHI.
Table 5 shows the increase in concentration measures from 1995 to 2012. The increase is
more pronounced for sales-based measures as discussed in Hershbein et al. (2018).
  14
    See for example De Loecker et al. (2020) and Autor et al. (2020)
  15
    We do not include data from the 1992 census since it is only reported on an SIC basis, and concentration
measures are difficult to map from SIC to NAICS industries
 16
    Recent work using these data is for example Rossi-Hansberg et al. (2018)




                                                    28
          Table 6: Pass-Through and Concentration in Manufacturing (1993-2016)

                                 (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)    (5)                      (6)
                                             Sales                          Employment
                               Top-4        Top-20        HHI         Top-4   Top-20                   HHI
  Wage                        0.143        0.177        0.114        0.119          0.132         0.0613
                              (0.0347)     (0.0574)     (0.0279)     (0.0321)       (0.0396)      (0.0199)
  Wage × SC 4                 -0.205
                              (0.0566)
  TFP                         -0.181       -0.182       -0.182      -0.171          -0.172        -0.168
                              (0.0205)     (0.0204)     (0.0211)    (0.0197)        (0.0196)      (0.0195)
  Wage × SC 20                             -0.185
                                           (0.0762)
  Wage × Sales HHI                                      -0.690
                                                         (0.233)
  Wage × EC 4                                                       -0.213
                                                                    (0.0773)
  Wage × EC 20                                                                      -0.159
                                                                                    (0.0631)
  Wage × Emp HHI                                                                                       -0.305
                                                                                                      (0.190)
 Time Fixed Effects             Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes              Yes
 Industry Fixed Effects         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes              Yes
 R2                            0.0626       0.0588       0.0623       0.0433         0.0424           0.0418
 Observations                   8705         8705         8585        11741          11741            11741

 SC refers to sales concentration. Driscoll-Kraay standard errors in parentheses.
 SC 4 (EC 4) is the sales (employment) share of the top 4 firms.
 SC20 and EC 20 are defined analogously
 
  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01


   We estimate the equation

            ln(pit ) = 0  ln(wit ) + 1  ln(wit )  Cit + Cit + Xit + i + t +                    it ,           (22)

where Cit is the measure of concentration used. We report the results in Table 6 using
different measures of market concentration. As reported in the table, the effect of market
concentration is negative and significant for all measures of market concentration. For ex-
ample, using the top-4 market share of sales as measure of concentration, column 1 indicates


                                                   29
that a 1% wage increase translates into a 0.14% price increase in an industry with zero
concentration. In comparison, an industry with top-4 market concentration of nearly 50%,
at the 75th percentile of concentration across industries, would raise prices in response to
the same shock by only about 0.04%. Coupled with the observation that concentration mea-
sures increased over time as we documented in Table 5, our findings suggest that increasing
market concentration has weakened the pass-through from wages to prices. This finding is
consistent with Theorem 3.1.
    Equation (15) from our theoretical framework is key to understand the intuition of why
market concentration can also lead to lower pass-through. When firms set high markups,
they are able to at least partially absorb cost-push shocks into their markup without passing
through the rising costs to consumers. Firms take into account that by raising their price
they lose market share to competitors that did not experience the same shock. As a result,
firms absorb part of the shock into their markup, changing their price by less in response
to input shocks. In a relatively competitive market there is little room for firms to absorb
cost-push shocks, and firms therefore pass them through more fully.


4.3    Import Penetration versus Market Concentration
While our theoretical and empirical analyses provide strong support for rising import pen-
etration and increasing market concentration as sources of declining pass-through, we not
identify the relative quantitative importance of these two channels. In this subsection we
document that they are positively correlated across industries. In related work, Amiti and
Heise (2020) study how import penetration and market concentration affect markups. They
argue that the increase in import penetration and market concentration reflects the same
underlying mechanism.
    Figures 8a and 8b show that import penetration and concentration are in fact closely
related. In these figures, we sort all industries by their average market concentration over
the period 1997-2012, and assign them to equally spaced buckets. We then take the average
of the increase in total import penetration from all countries between 1997 and 2012 across all
industries in the bucket. For the top-4 market share measure, we drop industries where the
top four firms have a market share of more than 70% ­ these industries are small, and behave
somewhat differently. The size of each bubble is proportional to the sales of each industry in
2012 from the Census of Manufacturing. The figure highlights a strong positive relationship
between market concentration and the growth in overall import penetration between 1997
and 2012. Industries with a high average concentration also exhibit a strong increase in
import competition. Figures A.10a and A.10b in Appendix B plot similar figures for import


                                              30
                                             Figure 8: Import Penetration versus Market Concentration


                                         (a) Top-4 Share                                                             (b) Top-20 Share
               .5




                                                                                                .5
                          .4




                                                                                                           .4
   Chg. Import Penetration




                                                                                    Chg. Import Penetration
                 .3




                                                                                                  .3
         .2




                                                                                          .2
 .1




                                                                                  .1
               0




                                                                                                0
                               0        .2            .4           .6   .8                                      .2   .4           .6           .8   1
                                               Top-4 Sales Share                                                          Top-20 Sales Share




penetration with respect to China only and find similar results. This finding suggests that our
two findings of import competition and concentration affecting pass-through are reflecting the
same mechanism, and provides further evidence in support of our Theorem 3.1. As foreign
exporters entered U.S. markets and raised import penetration, many domestic firms exited,
increasing U.S. domestic concentration, as documented by Gutiérrez and Philippon (2017).
Through the lens of our model, the remaining large firms are able to charge relatively higher
markups, but are forced to adjust these in response to wage shocks due to the increased
competition from foreign firms in order to preserve market share.


4.4                                Cross-Country Evidence
Since rising import penetration and increasing market concentration are affecting many
countries, we expect to see a similar pattern in the cross-country data. While a detailed
micro-data based analysis is beyond the scope of our paper, our analysis of core goods
and services inflation in Canada, U.K., and the Eurozone show that these countries also
experienced a growing disconnect between goods inflation and labor market conditions. See
Figure A.6 in Appendix C for Canada, Figure A.7 for the UK, and Figure A.8 for the
Euro zone, respectively. Since these countries have also been experiencing rising import
competition and increase in concentration, it is likely that the same forces are in at work in
these countries.



                                                                             31
5      Conclusions
In this paper, we have shown that a significant part of the missing inflation after the most
recent recessions can be attributed to the lack of inflation in the goods-producing sector. We
have traced this slowdown in goods inflation to a decline in the pass-through of wage shocks
to prices in manufacturing. Motivated by our theory of price setting with variable markups,
our empirical findings based on extensive industry-level data confirm that rising import
competition and increasing market concentration are important drivers of this declining
pass-through from labor costs to prices. In related work, Amiti and Heise (2020) argue
that the rise in import penetration and market concentration reflect the same underlying
mechanism.
    Our paper complements the well-established literature on the role of anchoring of infla-
tion expectations in explaining recent inflation dynamics such as Del Negro et al. (2015),
Carvalho et al. (2017), Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015), and Coibion et al. (2019). We
document an additional channel operating via core goods inflation, which can account for
the sluggishness of goods inflation relative to services inflation. This observation is also re-
lated to the flattening of the price Phillips Curve as discussed in Stock and Watson (2019).
An open question remains to which extend import competition, rising market concentration,
and inflation expectations interact--an issue we leave to future work.
    Our findings have important implications for implementation of monetary policy. Central
bankers typically view the declining unemployment rate as a precursor to rising inflation.
We show that globalization and rising concentration alleviated the trade-off between unem-
ployment and inflation. Declining unemployment and improving labor market conditions
pose less of an inflation threat than before as is evident from the last decade. In addition,
globalization of the inflation process increased the importance of coordination of monetary
policy among central banks as emphasized by Obstfeld (2020).


References
Amiti, M. and S. Heise (2020): "U.S. Market Concentration and Globalization," Mimeo.
Atkeson, A. and A. Burstein (2008): "Pricing-to-market, trade costs, and international relative
    prices," American Economic Review, 98, 1998­2031.
Autor, D., D. Dorn, L. F. Katz, C. Patterson, and J. Van Reenen (2020): "The fall of the
    labor share and the rise of superstar firms," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135, 645­709.
Autor, D. H., D. Dorn, and G. H. Hanson (2013): "The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market
    Effects of Import Competition in the United States," American Economic Review, 103, 2121­68.



                                                 32
Bugamelli, M., S. Fabiani, and E. Sette (2015): "The age of the Dragon: The effect of imports
  from China on firm-level prices," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 47, 1091­1118.
Burdett, K. and D. T. Mortensen (1998): "Wage Differentials, Employment Size, and Unem-
  ployment," International Economic Review, 39, 257­273.
Campa, J. M. and L. S. Goldberg (2005): "Exchange Rate Pass-Through into Import Prices,"
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 87, 679­690.
Carvalho, C., S. Eusepi, E. Moench, and B. Preston (2017): "Anchored Inflation Expecta-
  tions," .
Coibion, O. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2015): "Is the Phillips Curve Alive and Well after all?
  Inflation Expectations and the Missing Disinflation," American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
  nomics, 7, 197­232.
Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko, and M. Ulate (2019): "Is Inflation Just Around the Corner?
  The Phillips Curve and Global Inflationary Pressures," in AEA Papers and Proceedings, vol. 109,
  465­69.
De Loecker, J., J. Eeckhout, and G. Unger (2020): "The rise of market power and the
  macroeconomic implications," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135, 561­644.
Del Negro, M., M. P. Giannoni, and F. Schorfheide (2015): "Inflation in the Great Reces-
  sion and New Keynesian Models," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7, 168­96.
Faberman, R. J. (2019): "The Shadow Margins of Labor Market Slack," .
Forbes, K. (2019): "Inflation Dynamics: Dead, Dormant, or Determined Abroad?" Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity Conference Draft.
Galí, J., F. Smets, and R. Wouters (2012): "Slow recoveries: A Structural Interpretation,"
  Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 44, 9­30.
Galí, J. and L. Gambetti (2019): "Has the U.S. Wage Phillips Curve Flattened? A Semi-
  Structural Exploration," Working Paper 25476, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gutiérrez, G. and T. Philippon (2017): "Declining Competition and Investment in the US,"
  Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hershbein, B., C. Macaluso, and C. Yeh (2018): "Concentration in US local labor markets:
  evidence from vacancy and employment data," Tech. rep., Working paper.
Hornstein, A., M. Kudlyak, and F. Lange (2014): "Measuring Resource Utilization in the
  Labor Market," FRB Economic Quarterly, 100, 1­21.
Jaimovich, N. and H. E. Siu (2012): "The Trend is the Cycle: Job Polarization and Jobless
  Recoveries," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Jordà, Ò. (2005): "Estimation and inference of impulse responses by local projections," American
  economic review, 95, 161­182.
Karahan, F., R. Michaels, B. Pugsley, A. ahin, and R. Schuh (2017): "Do job-to-job
  transitions drive wage fluctuations over the business cycle?" American Economic Review, 107,
  353­57.



                                               33
Moscarini, G. and F. Postel-Vinay (2017a): "The job ladder: Inflation vs. reallocation,"
  Unpublished draft, Yale University.
------ (2017b): "The relative power of employment-to-employment reallocation and unemployment
  exits in predicting wage growth," American Economic Review, 107, 364­68.
Nakamura, E. and D. Zerom (2010): "Accounting for Incomplete Pass-Through," Review of
  Economic Studies, 77, 1192­1230.
Obstfeld, M. (2020): "Global Dimensions of U.S. Monetary Policy," International Journal of
  Central Banking, 16, 73­132.
Pierce, J. R. and P. K. Schott (2016): "The surprisingly swift decline of US manufacturing
  employment," American Economic Review, 106, 1632­62.
Postel-Vinay, F. and J.-M. Robin (2002): "Equilibrium Wage Dispersion with Worker and
  Employer Heterogeneity," Econometrica, 70, 2295­2350.
Rossi-Hansberg, E., P.-D. Sarte, and N. Trachter (2018): "Diverging trends in national
  and local concentration," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Stock, J. H. and M. W. Watson (2019): "Slack and Cyclically Sensitive Inflation," Working
  Paper 25987, National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                              34
A       Theory
A.1     Detailed Derivations
A.1.1    Cost Function

The firm's production function is
                                            y = Al k 1- .                                    (23)

The firm's cost function is
                                       C (y ) = min {wl + kr} ,                              (24)
                                               {l,k}

where w and r are the cost of labor and capital, respectively, taken as given by the firm.
Minimization of the cost function (24) subject to the production function (23) implies

                                           w     r
                                             =     k.                                        (25)
                                           r   1-w

The firm's cost function can thus be re-written, using the optimized quantities and plugging
in for l, as
                                                 1
                                      C (y ) =      rk.                                 (26)
                                               1-
From the production function (23), we can substitute for l and then solve for k as a function
of output y . This yields
                                               -
                                    1     
                               k=                 r- w y.                                (27)
                                    A 1-
Thus, the cost function is
                                                         -
                                        1                       1 1- 
                          C (y ) =                                r w y.                     (28)
                                       1-         1-            A

Marginal costs are therefore
                                                            -
                                         1                      1 1- 
                             c(y ) =                              r w ,                      (29)
                                        1-        1-            A

as claimed in the main text, where we omit the constant.

A.1.2    Market Structure and Demand Elasticity

Since there is only a finite number of firms, each firm takes into account the effect of its price
setting on the price index ps (k ). We can define the effective elasticity of demand for a firm



                                                  35
as
                                    d log ys (k, i)              log ps (k )
                     Es (k, i)  -                   =  - ( -  )                .                            (30)
                                    d log ps (k, i)              log ps (k, i)
From the definition of an industry's price index ps (k ) = (               i   ps (k, i)1- )1/(1-) , we have that

                                    log ps (k )             ps (k, i)1-
                                                  =                      1-
                                                                            ,                               (31)
                                    log ps (k, i)            i ps (k, i)


We now define firms' market share as

                               ps (k, i)ys (k, i)             ps (k, i)1-       ps (k, i)1-
               s (k, i) =                             =                    1-
                                                                              =             .               (32)
                               i ps (k, i )ys (k, i )         i ps (k, i )       ps (k )1-

Using this expression, we can re-express the demand elasticity (30) as

                 Es (k, i) =  - ( -  )s (k, i) =  (1 - s (k, i)) + s (k, i).                                (33)

Thus, the firm's demand elasticity is a weighted average of the within-industry and across-
industry elasticities of substitution.

A.1.3    Price Setting

The firm's profit maximization problem
                                                                     -               -
                                                         ps (k, i)        ps (k )
                      max [ps (k, i) - cs (k, i)]                                        Ys                 (34)
                        p                                 ps (k )          Ps

leads to the first-order condition

               (1 -  )ps (k, i)- + ps (k, i)--1 cs (k, i) p(k )- Ps Ys
                                                            dps (k )                                        (35)
            + ( -  )ps (k, i)- ps (k )--1 Ps Ys                       [ps (k, i) - cs (k, i)] = 0.
                                                           dps (k, i)

Substituting in the derivative of the price index,
                                                                       
                                           dps (k )         ps (k )
                                                     =                                                      (36)
                                          dps (k, i)       ps (k, i)

and using the definition of the market share s (k, i) = (ps (k, i)/ps (k ))1- yields

                                             - ( -  )s (k, i)
                            ps (k, i) =                           cs (k, i).                                (37)
                                          ( - 1) - ( -  )s (k, i)



                                                     36
Using the definition of the demand elasticity (30), this equation becomes

                                            Es (k, i)
                            ps (k, i) =                 c(k, i) = Ms (k, i)cs (k, i),                 (38)
                                          Es (k, i) - 1

where Ms (k, i) denotes the firm's markup.

A.1.4    Pass-Through

From equation (38), we can derive the pass-through of shocks into prices as

              d log ps (k, i) = d log Ms (k, i) + d log cs (k, i)
                                                                                                      (39)
                               = d log Ms (k, i) - d log A + d log wi + (1 - )d log r.

The change in the markup is given by

d log Ms (k, i) = d log [ - ( -  )s (k, i)] - d log [( - 1) - ( -  )s (k, i)]
                          -                        -                      s (k, i)
                = -                     +                                             d log s (k, i)
                      - ( -  )s (k, i) ( - 1) - ( -  )s (k, i)  log s (k, i)
                                 ( -  )s (k, i)
                =                                                 [(1 -  )d log ps (k, i) - (1 -  )d log ps (k )]
                  [ - ( -  )s (k, i)] [( - 1) - ( -  )s (k, i)]
                               s (k, i)
                =                                 [d log ps (k ) - d log ps (k, i)]
                                         -
                    -
                       - s (k, i) 1 - -1 s (k, i)

                = -s (k, i) [d log ps (k, i) - d log ps (k )] ,
                                                                                                      (40)

where s (k, i) = -( log Ms (k, i)/ log ps (k, i))  0 is the elasticity of the markup with
respect to a firm's own price. We therefore have that a firm's pass-through is given by

 d log ps (k, i) = -s (k, i) [d log ps (k, i) - d log ps (k )] - d log A + d log wi +(1 - )d log r. (41)

Solving this equation for d log ps (k, i) and assuming d log r = 0 , we find

                          s (k, i)                       1                      
    d log ps (k, i) =                d log ps (k ) -              d log A +              d log wi ,   (42)
                        1 + s (k, i)                 1 + s (k, i)           1 + s (k, i)

which is our main pass-through equation, equation (15).
   Finally, the derivative of the markup elasticity with respect to the market share s (k, i)




                                                        37
is given by

                                         -                     -                     -     
ds (k, i)       -
                     - s (k, i)    1-       (k, i)
                                         -1 s
                                                      + 1-        (k, i)
                                                               -1 s
                                                                                +    -1    -
                                                                                               - s (k, i)
          =                                                                         2                        > 0.
ds (k, i)                                                       -
                                         -
                                             - s (k, i)   1-       (k, i)
                                                                -1 s
                                                                                                            (43)


A.2     Proof of Theorem
Part 1: From the definition of s (k, i), if firms have positive market share then s (k, i) > 0.
From the pass-through equation (15), firms' change in price is then a combination of the
change in the industry's price index ps (k ) and their own wage cost shock. From the definition
of an industry's price index ps (k ) = ( i ps (k, i)1- )1/(1-) , we have that

                               log ps (k )        ps (k, i)1-
                                             =                 1-
                                                                  = s (k, i).                               (44)
                               log ps (k, i)       i ps (k, i)


Thus, a firm's effect on the industry's price index is equal to the firm's market share. With
symmetric firms, each firm's effect is equal to 1/Ns (k ).
    Since by assumption there are both domestic and foreign firms in the industry and foreign
firms are unaffected by domestic wage shocks, it follows that the change in the industry's
price index is less than the wage effect,

                                        d log ps (k ) < d log wi .                                          (45)

From the pass-through equation (15), the affected firms therefore change their price by

                       s (k, i)                                           (1 + s (k, i))
 d log ps (k, i) =                d log ps (k ) +              d log wi <                d log wi , (46)
                     1 + s (k, i)                 1 + s (k, i)            1 + s (k, i)

and thus pass-through is less than .
   For the second part of the claim, note that as N increases, firms' market shares decline by
the assumption of symmetric market shares. Since, as shown by (43), ds (k, i)/ds (k, i) > 0,
a reduction in market share lowers s (k, i). From the pass-through equation (15), pass-
through rises since firms put a higher weight on the direct cost shock and a lower weight on
the industry price index. As N  , s (k, i)  0 and pass-through converges to .
Part 2:
   From the pass-through equation (15), firms' change in price is a combination of the
change in the industry's price index ps (k ) and their own wage cost shock. As ND,s (k )/Ns (k )


                                                     38
declines, the change in the industry's price index due to the wage change becomes smaller and
smaller, since fewer firms are subject to the shock and all firms are symmetric. Therefore,
pass-through of each firm falls. In the limit, as the industry consists only of foreign firms,
d log ps (k ) = 0 and pass-through converges to /(1 + s (k, i)).


B     Data Description
The PPI collects the average monthly selling prices for domestically produced goods and
services at various levels of industry disaggregation. Indices for most manufacturing indus-
tries go back to the 1980s, while comprehensive coverage for most service industries does not
begin until 2003. The PPI accounts for the near universe of output in the goods-producing
sector and approximately three-quarters of the output in the service-providing sector. We
obtain all available 5-digit series and fill in missing observations using linear interpolation if
data are missing for fewer than three consecutive months. We do not impute values when
data for an industry are missing for three or more consecutive months.
    Since some 5-digit NAICS codes change over time or are aggregated differently, we con-
struct time-consistent NAICS codes using the list of NAICS revisions from 1997 to 2017
provided by the U.S. Census Bureau. We splice together NAICS codes referring to the same
industry when the industry's code changes, and combine disaggregated codes into one if
a given 5-digit code can be written forward or backward from more disaggregated 6-digit
codes. This aggregation is performed by taking a weighted average over the changes in
the industry-level PPI series involved, using total shipments from the Economic Census in
2002 as weight. We remove seasonality from the PPI series using the Census' X-12-ARIMA
Seasonal Adjustment program, and aggregate the price indices to the quarterly frequency
by taking the three-month averages. We exclude mining, agriculture, and utilities from all
analyses since prices in the former two are driven mostly by commodity prices while in the
latter prices are subject to regulation. We also exclude NAICS starting with 324, petroleum
and coal products manufacturing, since these series fluctuate significantly based on the oil
price.
    For wages, we obtain weekly average earnings data from the Quarterly Census of Employ-
ment and Wages (QCEW) from the BLS. The QCEW reports the number of establishments,
monthly employment, and the weekly average wage for workers covered by State unemploy-
ment insurance (UI) laws and Federal workers covered by the Unemployment Compensation
for Federal Employees (UCFE) program. Overall, the data cover more than 95 percent of
U.S. jobs. The QCEW data are collected by state agencies and reported to the BLS, and
represent the total compensation paid during the calendar quarter, including bonuses, stock

                                               39
options, severance pay, and so on for most states. We use national-level data by 5-digit
NAICS industry, and use the weekly average wage of each quarter for our analyses. For
most industries, the data cover the period from 1990 to 2018. We create time-consistent
NAICS codes using the same mapping as before and seasonally adjust the data.
    We merge into our baseline dataset information on industry productivity, using estimates
of multifactor productivity (MFP) from the BLS. For the manufacturing sector, the BLS pro-
vides annual MFP estimates at the four digit NAICS level, and at greater disaggregation for
some industries. The data are available for the 1987-2016 period. Whenever MFP is missing
for an industry at a given aggregation level, we use the finest higher level of aggregation avail-
able. For non-manufacturing industries, the BLS does not provide productivity estimates
with the same level of granularity. For these industries, we therefore use MFP measures at
the two or three digit NAICS level from the Integrated Industry-Level Production Account
(KLEMS) tables provided by the BLS, and use for each industry the productivity value
at the next available higher level of aggregation. Since the productivity data end in 2016,
our final dataset for both goods and services spans the period from 2003-2016, and for the
manufacturing sector alone from 1993-2016.
    We construct several additional controls. We obtain quarterly employment by gender,
education, and age from the Quarterly Workforce Indicators (QWI) at the four digit NAICS
and three digit NAICS levels from 1990 to 2018. For each industry and quarter, we compute
the share of male and female workers, as well as the share of high-skilled and medium-skilled
workers, defined by those who have a Bachelor's degree or higher, and those who have a
high school or equivalent degree (no college), respectively. We generate the shares of young,
middle-aged, and older workers by defining young workers as those aged below 24 years,
middle-aged as those 25-54, and older as those 55 and older. We merge the information into
our dataset using the finest level of aggregation available.




                                               40
C                           Additional Figures
C.1                         Alternative Measures of Recovery

                             Figure A.1: Inflation versus GDP Growth from Four Previous Recessions
                               (a) 1982-1990 Expansion                                                         (b) 1991-2000 Expansion
           40




                                                                                              40
                   30




                                                                                                      30
Cumulative Growth (%)




                                                                                   Cumulative Growth (%)
         20




                                                                                            20
10




                                                                                   10
           0




                                                                                              0

                        0         10            20             30            40                            0      10            20             30        40
                               Cumulative GDP Growth - Percent of Rise                                         Cumulative GDP Growth - Percent of Rise




                               (c) 2003-2007 Expansion                                                         (d) 2009-2020 Expansion
           40




                                                                                              40




                                                         Core CPI
                                                         Core Goods CPI
                                                         Core Services CPI
                   30




                                                                                                      30
Cumulative Growth (%)




                                                                                   Cumulative Growth (%)
          20




                                                                                            20
 10




                                                                                   10
           0




                                                                                              0




                        0         10            20             30            40                            0      10            20             30        40
                               Cumulative GDP Growth - Percent of Rise                                         Cumulative GDP Growth - Percent of Rise




                                                                              41
                                       Figure A.2: Inflation from Four Previous Recessions
                            (a) 1982-1990 Expansion                                                        (b) 1991-2000 Expansion
           40




                                                                                          40
                   30




                                                                                                  30
Cumulative Growth (%)




                                                                               Cumulative Growth (%)
         20




                                                                                        20
10




                                                                               10
           0




                                                                                          0
                        0      10             20           30            40                            0      10             20           30       40
                            Quarters since Peak Unemployment Rate                                          Quarters since Peak Unemployment Rate




                            (c) 2003-2007 Expansion                                                        (d) 2009-2020 Expansion
           40




                                                                                          40


                                                     Core CPI
                                                     Core Goods CPI
                                                     Core Services CPI
                   30




                                                                                                  30
Cumulative Growth (%)




                                                                               Cumulative Growth (%)
          20




                                                                                        20
 10




                                                                               10
           0




                                                                                          0




                        0      10             20           30            40                            0      10             20           30       40
                            Quarters since Peak Unemployment Rate                                          Quarters since Peak Unemployment Rate




                                                                          42
Figure A.3: Inflation versus Employment-to-Population Ratio from Four Previous Recessions
                                    (a) 1982-1990 Expansion                                                                                        (b) 1991-2000 Expansion




                                                                                                                          40
           40




                                                                                                                                  30
Cumulative Growth (%)




                                                                                                               Cumulative Growth (%)
                 30




                                                                                                                        20
        20




                                                                                                               10
10         0




                                                                                                                          0
                        0   20     40      60    80      100     120     140     160      180      200                                 0   20      40      60     80      100      120     140     160      180   200
                                 Cum. Employment-Population Ratio Recovery - Percent of Rise                                                    Cum. Employment-Population Ratio Recovery - Percent of Rise




                                    (c) 2003-2007 Expansion                                                                                        (d) 2009-2020 Expansion
           40




                                                                                                                          40
                                                                                 Core CPI
                                                                                 Core Goods CPI
                                                                                 Core Services CPI
                   30




                                                                                                                                  30
Cumulative Growth (%)




                                                                                                               Cumulative Growth (%)
          20




                                                                                                                        20
10




                                                                                                               10
           0




                                                                                                                          0




                        0   20      40      60     80      100      120     140     160      180         200                           0   20      40      60     80      100      120     140     160      180   200
                                 Cum. Employment-Population Ratio Recovery - Percent of Rise                                                    Cum. Employment-Population Ratio Recovery - Percent of Rise




                                                                                                          43
                            Figure A.4: Wage Growth versus GDP Growth from Four Previous Recessions
                                (a) 1982-1990 Expansion                                                           (b) 1991-2000 Expansion
           40




                                                                                                 40
                   30




                                                                                                         30
Cumulative Growth (%)




                                                                                      Cumulative Growth (%)
         20




                                                                                               20
10




                                                                                      10
           0




                                                                                                 0
                        0          10            20             30              40                            0      10           20            30          40
                                Cumulative GDP Growth - Percent of Rise                                           Cumulative GDP Growth - Percent of Rise




                                (c) 2003-2007 Expansion                                                           (d) 2009-2020 Expansion
           40




                                                                                                 40


                                                                     Goods
                                                                     Services
                   30




                                                                                                         30
Cumulative Growth (%)




                                                                                      Cumulative Growth (%)
         20




                                                                                               20
10




                                                                                      10
           0




                                                                                                 0




                        0          10            20             30              40                            0      10            20             30         40
                                Cumulative GDP Growth - Percent of Rise                                           Cumulative GDP Growth - Percent of Rise




                                                                                 44
                                       Figure A.5: Wage Growth from Four Previous Recessions
                                (a) 1982-1990 Expansion                                                            (b) 1991-2000 Expansion
             40




                                                                                                40
Cumulative Percent Change




                                                                                   Cumulative Percent Change
                                                                                                        30
                     30




                                                                                               20
            20




                                                                                     10
  10




                                                                                                0
             0




                            0   20      40        60      80       100    120                                  0   20      40        60      80       100   120
                                 Months since Peak Unemployment Rate                                                Months since Peak Unemployment Rate




                                (c) 2003-2007 Expansion                                                            (d) 2009-2020 Expansion
             40




                                                                                                40


                                                                   Goods
                                                                   Services
Cumulative Percent Change




                                                                                   Cumulative Percent Change
                     30




                                                                                                        30
            20




                                                                                               20
  10




                                                                                     10
             0




                                                                                                0




                            0   20      40        60      80       100    120                                  0   20      40        60      80       100   120
                                 Months since Peak Unemployment Rate                                                Months since Peak Unemployment Rate




                                                                              45
C.2                          International Evidence
C.2.1                         Canada

               Figure A.6: Inflation versus Unemployment Recovery from Four Previous Recessions
                                  (a) 1982-1990 Expansion                                                               (b) 1991-2000 Expansion
            40




                                                                                                  40      30
                    30
 Cumulative Growth (%)




                                                                                       Cumulative Growth (%)
                                                                                                 20
          20




                                                                                        10
 10




                                                                                                  0
            0




                         0     20      40    60    80    100     120     140    160                            0     20      40    60    80    100     120     140    160
                             Cumulative Unemployment Recovery - Percent of Rise                                    Cumulative Unemployment Recovery - Percent of Rise




                                  (c) 2003-2007 Expansion                                                               (d) 2009-2020 Expansion
            40




                                                                                                  40




                                                              Core CPI
                                                              Core Goods CPI
                                                              Services CPI
                                                                                                          30
                    30
 Cumulative Growth (%)




                                                                                       Cumulative Growth (%)
                                                                                                20
          20




                                                                                       10
 10




                                                                                                  0
            0




                         0     20      40    60    80    100     120     140    160                            0     20      40    60    80    100     120     140    160
                             Cumulative Unemployment Recovery - Percent of Rise                                    Cumulative Unemployment Recovery - Percent of Rise




                                                                                  46
C.2.2                             United Kingdom

                    Figure A.7: Inflation versus Unemployment Recovery from Two Previous Recessions
                                     (a) 1993-2000 Expansion                                                                 (b) 2011-2020 Expansion




                                                                                                               50
              50




                                                                                                                                                        Core CPI
                                                                                                                                                        Core Goods CPI
                        40




                                                                                                               40
                                                                                                                                                        Services CPI
  Cumulative Growth (%)




                                                                                       Cumulative Growth (%)
                  30




                                                                                                               30
            20




                                                                                                               20
     10




                                                                                                               10
 0




                                                                                                               0
              -10




                                                                                                               -10
                             0    20     40    60   80    100 120 140 160 180                                        0    20     40    60   80    100 120 140 160 180
                                 Cumulative Unemployment Recovery - Percent of Rise                                      Cumulative Unemployment Recovery - Percent of Rise




C.2.3                             Eurozone

                    Figure A.8: Inflation versus Unemployment Recovery from Two Previous Recessions
                                     (a) 1993-2000 Expansion                                                                 (b) 2011-2020 Expansion
              15




                                                                                                               15




                                                                                                                                                      Core CPI
                                                                                                                                                      Core Goods CPI
                                                                                                                                                      Core Services CPI
 Cumulative Growth (%)




                                                                                       Cumulative Growth (%)
                                                                                                      10
                10




                                                                                          5
    5




                                                                                                               0
              0




                             0     20     40   60    80   100 120 140 160 180                                        0    20     40    60   80    100 120 140 160 180
                                 Cumulative Unemployment Recovery - Percent of Rise                                      Cumulative Unemployment Recovery - Percent of Rise




                                                                                  47
C.3                                          Other figures

                                                                        Figure A.9: Trends in Manufacturing


                                                      (a) Top-4 Share                                                                                               (b) HHI




                                                                                                                             .06
                    .4




                                                                                                                             .058
                    .38
 Top-4 Market Share




                                                                                                                 .056
            .36




                                                                                                             HHI
                                                                                                         .054
     .34




                                                                                                                             .052
                    .32




                                                                                                                             .05
                    .3




                                     1996     1999    2002      2005    2008     2011   2014                                                 1993     1996   1999   2002    2005   2008   2011   2014
                                                                   Year                                                                                                    Year




                                             Figure A.10: Market Concentration versus Import Penetration from China


                                                      (a) Top-4 Share                                                                                         (b) Top-20 Share
                                    .5




                                                                                                                                            .3
 Chg. Import Penetration from China




                                                                                                         Chg. Import Penetration from China
                                                                                                                                      .25
                             .4




                                                                                                                                .2
                     .3




                                                                                                                        .15
             .2




                                                                                                                  .1
    .1




                                                                                                           .05
                    0




                                                                                                                            0




                                         0           .2             .4            .6           .8                                                .2          .4             .6            .8            1
                                                             Top-4 Sales Share                                                                                      Top-20 Sales Share



Note: Figures consider only industries with increasing exposure to China reflected in an increase in import
                                 penetration from China of at least 3%.




                                                                                                    48
D     Additional Tables

Table A.1: Pass-Through Regressions for Goods versus Services, Unweighted Regressions

                            (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)         (5)              (6)
                         Aggregate     No TFP     With TFP      Aggregate    No TFP          With TFP
 Wage                     0.0314
                          (0.00865)
 Wage Manuf                            0.00665       0.0123
                                      (0.00979)     (0.0103)
 Wage Services                        0.0847       0.0750
                                       (0.0229)     (0.0207)
 TFP                                               -0.0727                                    -0.0714
                                                    (0.0129)                                   (0.0130)
 Wage × LS                                                        0.133
                                                                 (0.0529)
 Wage × LS Manuf                                                              -0.0485          -0.00525
                                                                             (0.0477)          (0.0480)
 Wage × LS Services                                                          0.257             0.218
                                                                             (0.0883)          (0.0775)
Time Fixed Effects           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes               Yes
Industry Fixed Effects       Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes               Yes
R2                         0.00424     0.00621       0.0133      0.00464     0.00580            0.0127
Observations                12999       12999        12999        12782       12782             12782

TFP is total factor productivity. LS refers to the labor share. Driscoll-Kraay standard errors in parentheses.

 p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                                   49
Table A.2: Pass-Through Regressions for Goods versus Services with Different Fixed Effects

                             (1)           (2)             (3)         (4)           (5)             (6)
                           Time FE     Industry FE        No FE      Time FE     Industry FE        No FE
  Wage Manuf                0.0221        0.0401          0.0631
                           (0.0220)      (0.0242)         (0.0267)
  Wage Services            0.0687        0.111            0.105
                           (0.0304)      (0.0283)         (0.0269)
  TFP                     -0.0912       -0.0831        -0.0982       -0.0910      -0.0829         -0.0950
                           (0.0158)      (0.0122)       (0.0142)      (0.0161)     (0.0130)        (0.0139)
  Wage × LS Manuf                                                     -0.0992       0.280            0.296
                                                                      (0.139)      (0.191)          (0.195)
  Wage × LS Services                                                  0.191       0.312            0.365
                                                                      (0.100)     (0.0986)         (0.0970)
 Constant                                                  -0.0179                                 -0.00965
                                                          (0.0264)                                 (0.0299)
 Time Fixed Effects          Yes            No              No         Yes           No               No
 Industry Fixed Effects       No           Yes              No          No          Yes               No
 R2                         0.0287        0.0588          0.0503      0.0289       0.0563           0.0483
 Observations               12727         12727           12727       12727        12727            12727

 TFP is total factor productivity. LS refers to the labor share. Driscoll-Kraay standard errors in parentheses.
 All regressions are weighted by an industry's total sales in 2012.
 
  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                                     50
