                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


THE EFFECT OF MENTORING ON SCHOOL ATTENDANCE AND ACADEMIC OUTCOMES:
       A RANDOMIZED EVALUATION OF THE CHECK & CONNECT PROGRAM

                                           Jonathan Guryan
                                          Sandra Christenson
                                            Ashley Cureton
                                               Ijun Lai
                                             Jens Ludwig
                                          Catherine Schwarz
                                             Emma Shirey
                                           Mary Clair Turner

                                         Working Paper 27661
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w27661

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2020


 The research reported here was supported by the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department
 of Education, through grant R305A120809 to Northwestern University, by the Eunice Kennedy
 Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) of the National
 Institutes of Health, through grant 5R01HD067500, and by the William T. Grant Foundation. The
 opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not represent views of the Institute for
 Education Sciences, the U.S. Department of Education, NICHD or the William T. Grant
 Foundation. This research could not have been completed without the hard work and support of
 Madeline Aden, Roseanna Ander, Eric Betzold, Philip Cook, Gretchen Cusick, Sarah Emmons,
 Megan Ferrier, Nathan Hess, Rachael Maguire, Farah Mallah, Angie Pohl, Letisha Smith, Karen
 Stout, Veronica Wald and Michael Weis. We are also very thankful to everyone who worked with us
 to support this research project at the Chicago Public Schools and SGA Youth and Family Services,
 including David Moskowitz, Carrie Bergen, Drew Beres, Molly Burke, Joshua Gray, Kimberlyn
 McNutt, Paige Ponder, Erin Starkey and Cynthia Wright. The views expressed herein are those of the
 authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2020 by Jonathan Guryan, Sandra Christenson, Ashley Cureton, Ijun Lai, Jens Ludwig, Catherine
 Schwarz, Emma Shirey, and Mary Clair Turner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
 two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
 is given to the source.
The Effect of Mentoring on School Attendance and Academic Outcomes: A Randomized
Evaluation of the Check & Connect Program
Jonathan Guryan, Sandra Christenson, Ashley Cureton, Ijun Lai, Jens Ludwig, Catherine Schwarz,
Emma Shirey, and Mary Clair Turner
NBER Working Paper No. 27661
August 2020
JEL No. I20

                                           ABSTRACT

In response to budget problems, many urban school systems reduced resources for getting students
to come to school, like truancy officers. Chicago, for instance, went from 150 truancy officers
down to, in 1991, a total of zero. Is that a good idea? We explore here the effects of increased
support by a pro-social adult, or "social capital," delivered through a structured student monitoring
and mentoring program called Check & Connect (C&C). We carried out a large-scale randomized
controlled trial with C&C in partnership with the Chicago Public Schools (CPS) to students in
grades 1-8. Program participation decreased absences in grades 5-7 by 4.2 days, or 22.9 percent,
but with no detectable effects on students in grades 1-4. We also did not find statistically
significant effects on learning outcomes such as test scores or GPA, or any detectable spillovers to
other students within the schools where the program was administered. The modest impacts per
dollar spent, compared to previous evidence on either low-cost "nudges" or relatively intensive,
higher-cost interventions, raise the possibility that, for very disadvantaged students, there may be
decreasing but then increasing returns to program intensity for the problem of student
disengagement.

Jonathan Guryan                                   Jens Ludwig
Northwestern University                           Harris School of Public Policy
Institute for Policy Research                     University of Chicago
2040 Sheridan Road                                1307 East 60th Street
Evanston, IL 60208                                Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                          and NBER
j-guryan@northwestern.edu                         jludwig@uchicago.edu

Sandra Christenson                                Catherine Schwarz
University of Minnesota                           University of Chicago
Educational Psychology 56                         catherinemschwarz@gmail.com
E River Pkwy Minneapolis,
MN 55455                                          Emma Shirey
chris002@umn.edu                                  University of Chicago
                                                  emmacshirey@gmail.com
Ashley Cureton
Johns Hopkins University                          Mary Clair Turner
School of Education                               Northwestern University
2800 North Charles Street                         MaryClair.Turner@u.northwestern.edu
Baltimore, MD 21218
acureto4@jhu.edu

Ijun Lai
Mathematica
ijun.lai@gmail.com


A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27661
INTRODUCTION

        A key social-policy priority in the United States is to improve high school graduation

rates for disadvantaged urban youth. Each of the nation's 10 largest public-school districts has a

graduation rate below 80 percent (Common Core of Data, 2015). In Chicago, the site of our

study, the four-year graduation rate is 77 percent overall (Common Core of Data, 2015) and

about 57 percent for African American males (Healey, Nagaoka, & Michelman, 2014). Whatever

increases we have seen in high school graduation rates over time have not been enough to keep

pace with the changing demand in the labor market (Goldin & Katz, 2010; Murnane, 2013).

Given the strong relationship between graduation and a range of other outcomes such as crime

and health (Cutler & Lleras-Muney, 2010; Meara, Richards, & Cutler, 2008), inequality in

schooling contributes to inequality in many other domains of American life.

        While the decision to drop out of high school has received a great deal of attention, the

problems that lead to dropout almost always start much earlier: with chronic school absences, or

truancy. In Chicago, the site of this study, almost half of high school students miss at least 10

percent of the school year (over three weeks of missed school), a common threshold for chronic

absence (Allensworth & Evans, 2016). These problems begin much earlier still: 12.9 percent of

elementary students missed over four weeks of school (Jackson, Marx, & Richards, 2012), a

group that is at greatly elevated risk of future high school dropout (Cook et al., 2016;

Schoeneberger, 2011).1 Similar patterns are seen in almost every major urban school system.

        Unfortunately, very little is currently known about modifiable risk and protective factors

that contribute to truancy, much less about the most effective possible remedies. While school


1
 Truancy is also associated with drug and alcohol use, early initiation of sexual activity, teenage pregnancy, and
crime (Allensworth & Easton, 2007; Dryfoos, 1990; Hallfors et al., 2002; Huizinga & Jacob-Chien, 1998; Tait,
2004). For example, data from Illinois state prisons found that of the 182 male youth incarcerated in three medium-
security youth prisons, 74 percent had previously been labeled chronically truant (Jackson & Marx, 2013).

                                                                                                                  2
districts have developed a wide range of policies and administrative systems to enforce truancy

laws since schooling became compulsory in the late 19th century, few if any of these efforts have

ever been subject to rigorous evaluation. Almost all of this research is observational and may

confound the causal effects of truancy prevention programs with those of hard-to-measure

attributes associated with either program implementation decisions (for school- or district-level

analyses) or selection into program participation (for student-level analyses).

        Perhaps partly in response to the field's limited understanding about the value of truancy

prevention, such efforts often receive low priority in education policy decisions. For example, in

the 1970s Chicago employed 150 truancy officers to serve the city's roughly 600 elementary,

middle and high schools (WBEZ, 2014). Responding to budget pressures in 1991, in order to

save $4 million the Chicago school board reduced the number of truancy officers to ... zero. 2

That raises the question: Is this type of de-emphasis on truancy prevention a good idea or a bad

idea?

        The contribution of this paper is to carry out one of the few large-scale randomized

controlled trials (RCTs) of a promising intervention to reduce truancy. The intervention we study

here focuses on one important risk / protective factor identified by previous observational

studies: social capital. Dating back at least to Coleman (1988), social scientists have thought the

level of support children have from adults is strongly correlated with schooling outcomes. In

many of our nation's most distressed urban areas it is challenging for adults to invest as much

time and attention in children's outcomes as might be required because poverty, irregular (or

long) work schedules, crime, transportation problems, child care challenges, and untreated




2
 Similar financial restrictions have led to reduced numbers of truancy officers in Santa Rosa, CA and Las Vegas
(Los Angeles Times, 2003; Las Vegas Review-Journal, 2009).

                                                                                                                  3
mental or physical health problems make doing so difficult. These problems may be exacerbated

when households have just a single adult that must handle all of the family's responsibilities.

       The specific intervention we test seeks to supplement and support the social capital that

parents can provide by randomly assigning students within the Chicago Public Schools (CPS) to

receive Check & Connect (C&C). This program is a school-based, structured mentoring program

that is designed to promote student engagement through relationship building, problem solving,

and persistence for marginalized students. C&C has four components: (1) a mentor who works

with individual students and their families, (2) regular check-ins by the mentor, (3) timely

personalized interventions to reestablish student connection to school and learning, and (4)

engagement with parents.

       Two cohorts of students were assigned to the program to determine its impact on student

attendance and achievement. The first cohort consisted of 487 participating students in 23

randomly selected elementary schools on the south and west sides of Chicago, who received

C&C services during academic year (AY) 2011-12 and 2012-13 (including summers). The

second cohort included 348 students in nine of the original 23 schools who received C&C

services during AY 2013-14 and 2014-15 (including summers); 70 of the participating students

in the second cohort were randomly selected from among the participating students from the first

cohort. In general, students were eligible to receive C&C services if they had between 10 and 35

absences the previous school year. (More details are below). To detect spillover effects on non-

participating students, we randomized at three different levels: the school, the grade, and the

student. We used student-level, longitudinal administrative data collected by CPS to measure the

program's impact on attendance, grades, and standardized tests scores.




                                                                                                   4
       Our findings suggest that C&C generated statistically significant reductions in absences

for middle school-aged students, but not for elementary school-aged students. Based on estimates

of the effects of treatment on the treated (TOT), we find that participation in C&C decreased

student absences among students who began the program in grades 5-7 by a statistically

significant 4.2 days, or 22.9 percent relative to the control complier mean. We do not find

statistically significant effects of participating in C&C among students who began the program in

grades 1-4. Across the two cohorts, the effect of participating in C&C was about 50 percent

larger in the second year of the intervention than the first. While this difference was not

statistically significant, it suggests that the development of relationships between the mentor and

student could be an important mechanism through which the mentoring program is effective. We

did not find statistically significant effects of C&C on academic learning outcomes such as

achievement test scores or grade point average, although the size of our 95 percent confidence

intervals do not allow us to rule out modest impacts on these outcomes.

       While C&C was effective in that it improved key outcomes for a target population of

students, it is useful to compare C&C to other interventions that have an impact on student

engagement outcomes, as interventions vary in cost, complexity of implementation, and the

mechanisms through which they affect change in student behavior and outcomes. As

implemented in this project, the C&C program cost about $1700 per student per year. This

translates to a cost of approximately $400 per incremental day of attendance brought about by

the intervention for the 5th-7th grade students.

       By way of comparison, other recent interventions attempted to improve attendance by

leveraging insights from behavioral science to "nudge" people through information provision.

This sort of intervention has the benefit of being automatized, low-cost, and scalable. For



                                                                                                  5
example, Rogers and Feller (2018) and Robinson et al. (2018) find that a mail-based intervention

providing parents of frequently-absent students with information about their students' attendance

record decreases absences by about one day, at a cost of $6-$11 per additional attendance-day. It

is clear this type of intervention operates through a different set of mechanisms than a more

comprehensive and costly person-centered intervention like C&C, which suggests that a broader

set of outcomes besides attendance may be required for evaluating relative effectiveness and

cost-effectiveness. Other intensive interventions with costs similar to C&C have been shown to

be effective at improving student engagement, even when school attendance was not the primary

focus of the intervention (Heller et al., 2017) and to simultaneously produce large gains in other

outcomes like school engagement, high school graduation, and delinquency.

        It may ultimately turn out that for very economically-disadvantaged student populations,

like those in our Chicago study, there may be decreasing but then increasing returns to program

intensity to address the problems of attendance and school disengagement. That is, the impacts

per dollar spent may be non-linear: potentially highest from the least-intensive and most-

intensive programs compared to those of "medium" intensity. This is an important hypothesis for

future research to examine. 3

        The next section reviews previous studies and relevant literature on the causes of

absenteeism and attempts to combat it. Section three provides a detailed description of the C&C

model. Section four discusses our experimental design including a description of how

randomization was carried out for each cohort. Section five reviews our data for this study, as




3 A similar program of research seeks to understand the effectiveness of different levels of intensity for
interventions for promoting college attendance and persistence for low-income students; see for example Bettinger
and Evans (2019), Hyman (2019), and Oreopoulos and Ford (2019).

                                                                                                                    6
well as descriptive statistics and balance tests. Section six describes the analysis plan. The results

are discussed in section seven, and we conclude in section eight.

PRIOR STUDIES

       In order to understand what policies and programs might reduce student absenteeism, it is

helpful first to understand what causes it. Balfanz and Byrnes (2012) categorize absent students

by their agency and decisions to attend school, distinguishing between those who cannot attend

(due to illness or housing instability), those who refuse to attend (to avoid bullying or unsafe

conditions), and those who choose not to attend (because they are uninterested in school). The

risk and protective factors that contribute to students falling into different categories can be

school-based or within the family or community (see for example Chang and Romero, 2008).

       Surely these different factors often interact in their effects. For example, a child with a

sick younger sibling may stay home to provide care if the parent is unable to get off work to

provide care themselves. Many affluent parents who have the advantage of working in more

accommodating jobs, or being able to afford paid child care, would be able to send the child to

school in the same case of sibling illness. Should we attribute the absence then to illness, or

workplace problems, or unaffordable child care, or something else?

       Recognizing these complexities, much of the research that has been done around student

absenteeism argues that illness or health issues are the primary barrier to school attendance

(Ehrlich et al., 2014; Kearney, 2008). This conclusion is often drawn from information collected

through school administrative data, which may not be designed to detect more nuanced factors

driving student absenteeism, especially those that occur outside of the school setting. However,

further analyses reveal the significant role out-of-school economic and family circumstances

may play in absenteeism. For example, one national survey found that children in single-mother



                                                                                                     7
families are twice as likely as children in two-parent families to report missing at least 11 days of

school the previous school year for health-related reasons (Bloom, Jones, & Freeman, 2013) and

an analysis of administrative data from six states found students living in poverty are also more

likely to be chronically absent (Balfanz & Byrnes, 2012).

       Similarly, absences that stem from school refusal behavior are hard to quantify, as such

behavior may be indicated by tardiness or incomplete absences, the definitions of which vary by

district (Kearney, 2008). One study found that truancy rates jump for students who are

transitioning school levels (elementary school to middle school and middle school to high

school), which may indicate absences that are driven by student reluctance or anxiety about

adjusting to a new environment, peers, and schedule (Garrison, 2006).

       Students attending urban schools are also more likely to miss school. In a national survey

of eighth grade students, those attending urban or city schools were more likely to report being

absent three or more times in the past month than eighth grade students attending rural or

suburban schools (Child Trends Databank, 2015). One study found that schools in high-poverty

urban areas have up to one-third of their students chronically absent (Balfanz & Byrnes, 2012).

       High levels of truancy clustered around certain grades reflect a pattern of absences that

seem to evolve with the age of the student. A meta-analysis of administrative data from Oregon,

Nebraska, Florida, and West Virginia found that chronic absenteeism goes down in third and

fourth grades before sharply increasing in middle school, especially for students in 6th ­ 8th

grades (Balfanz & Byrnes, 2012). This pattern makes clear that rather than being a static

condition, absenteeism is often caused by multiple and shifting barriers to attendance.

       Interventions to address student absenteeism often target one or only a few specific

barriers to attendance. Clinical or medically-based interventions are sometimes deployed to



                                                                                                    8
target youth with anxiety-based problems through pharmacotherapy or cognitive-behavioral

strategies. Some work to influence the out-of-school environment of the student--by providing

earlier family-school engagement or after-school programs. Others focus on providing additional

professional development to teachers working with at-risk youth (Kearney, 2008).4

        Some of these programs yield encouraging results in previous (mostly observational)

studies: a review of absenteeism-prevention programs found that alternative education programs

and behavioral programs may have positive impacts on attendance, academic performance, and

graduation (Klima, Miller, & Nunlist, 2009). Conditional cash transfers to incentivize school

attendance in Colombia have been shown to be effective in improving student outcomes (Angrist

et al., 2002; Angrist, Bettinger, & Kremer 2006; Barrera-Osorio et al., 2008). However,

providing financial incentives for improved attendance seems to be less common in the United

States than outside of it. The results of the Opportunity NYC conditional cash transfer program,

including the limited impacts on children's attendance and other schooling outcomes, may have

contributed to dampened enthusiasm for this approach in the U.S. (Riccio et al., 2013).

        One potential limitation of many strategies is that they fail to support the personal

relationships that are often vital for success within a socialized system, referred to initially by

Coleman (1988) as "social capital." Social capital exists in the relations between actors and,

much in the same way that physical and financial capital do, facilitates productive activity.

Coleman (1988) divides social capital into three forms: obligations and expectations, information

channels, and social norms. Each of these forms provides a structure that promotes action and




4
 Oreopolous et al. (2017) evaluate a program that combined mentoring, academic and other supports with the goal
of improving a broad set of academic outcomes. The program, called Pathways to Education, included "mentoring,
daily tutoring, and group activities, combined with intermediate and long-term incentives to reinforce a minimum
degree of mandatory participation" and found positive effects on high school graduation and postsecondary
enrollment rates.

                                                                                                                   9
may be targeted to support a specific behavior, like attending school. It is possible that mentoring

programs designed to engage at-risk students may form and utilize social capital in a way that

helps a student to change their behavior. Mentoring programs may develop trusted relationships

that create perceived obligations by the student. Mentors may also provide information and

influence social norms.

        There is some evidence of the effectiveness of mentoring programs. Randomized

controlled trials of Big Brothers Big Sisters, a national community-based and school-based

mentoring program, have found significant impacts on improving academic achievement

(Grossman et al., 2012; Bayer, Grossman, & DuBois, 2015; Herrera et al., 2007; Schwartz, et al.,

2011) and decreasing unexcused absences (Grossman et al., 2012; Herrera et al., 2007; Schwartz

et al., 2011). Other mentoring programs have also been found to improve socioemotional

outcomes, including self-reported measures of depression (Herrera, DuBois, & Grossman, 2013),

peer connectedness and self-esteem (Karcher, 2008), and pro-social behavior (Schwartz et al.,

2011). One challenge with these studies is that they typically rely on self-reported outcomes.

This may confound the effect of the intervention on actual behavior and outcomes with the

possibility that youth assigned to mentors may be less willing to report socially undesirable

outcomes for fear of disappointing their mentor (known in the survey research literature as

"social desirability bias").

THE CHECK & CONNECT (C&C) PROGRAM

        In response to Chicago Public School concerns about truancy, and the decision several

decades earlier to phase out all truancy officers for budget reasons, we visited the U.S.

Department of Education's What Works Clearinghouse (WWC) for what the available evidence

suggests is best practice for improving school attendance. WWC suggested one intervention that



                                                                                                 10
seemed particularly promising: Check & Connect, developed at the University of Minnesota by

Sandra Christenson and other colleagues from the University of Minnesota, as well as various

school personnel.

       C&C is a structured mentoring program that aims to reduce the number of days that

students miss school and to increase students' engagement with academic activities when they

are in school. C&C has been implemented in several school districts around the United States,

beginning in the Minneapolis Public Schools. C&C typically targets students who are at risk of

disengagement or dropping out of school--often measured by high rates of absenteeism or poor

academic performance--and assigns them to a mentor, who is typically an in-school staff

member. Mentors are asked to monitor the attendance and school performance of the students on

their caseload; serve as case managers, connecting students to social service and school-based

resources that the mentors think might help the student to overcome barriers to school

attendance; and develop relationships with the students on their caseload.

       C&C is standardized in the sense that there is a manual and a set of training materials

that can be used to implement the program, but it is also adaptive in the sense that mentors are

encouraged to assess why different students are not coming to school and tailor the ways they

intervene with students to match what they think students need.

       The C&C manual and training directs mentors to support student engagement through

two primary channels (Christenson, Stout, and Pohl, 2012). The "Check" component centers on

monitoring student performance--tracking attendance, grades, and behavior referrals--for signs

of disengagement. Mentors then deliver personalized interventions to students designed to boost

engagement as part of the "Connect" piece. These interventions are supposed to be based on

information the mentor has about the student's school engagement level and family



                                                                                                   11
circumstances and to be shaped around available school and community resources. Mentors are

also encouraged to connect with families of students, to partner with parents to increase student

engagement, and to function as liaisons between home and school. In this study, mentors

formally met with students, one-on-one or in small groups, an average of five times a month.

Mentors also had informal check-ins with students through encounters that took place at recess,

in the lunchroom, and hallway, among other school environments. On average, they connected

with guardians through home visits or phone twice a month, although the level of family

engagement varied substantially by mentor.

         While there have been several previous randomized controlled trials of C&C, the most

encouraging results to date have been limited to studies focusing on students receiving special

education services (Sinclair, Christenson & Thurlow, 2005; Sinclair et al., 1998). 5 The two RCTs

that have been carried out with more general samples of high school students to date have

yielded more mixed results. For example, Maynard, Kjellstrand and Thompson (2014) find some

evidence for impacts on grades and disciplinary referrals, but no detectable impacts on the key

outcome C&C was designed to change: absences. Heppen et al. (2017) found no detectable

effects on any of the key student outcomes they examine, including educational attainment,

academic performance, or various types of engagement such as attendance. However, this could

be due to limitations of the studies themselves, which include small samples (just N=134

treatment-group students in Maynard et al. and N=276 treatment students in Heppen et al.) and in

the case of Maynard et al., high rates of sample attrition (27 percent) that differed for treatment




5 C&C has also been implemented in a number of places outside of Minneapolis, but not structured to be studied
like RCTs. For example, Tulsa and San Diego used C&C to support students at risk of discontinuing school or to
serve youth with disabilities; Florida, Missouri, and Utah have developed state-wide initiatives that implement C&C
in schools that have a high rate of students at risk of disengagement. The program has also been delivered to juvenile
offenders and post-secondary students, although these contexts have been less common.

                                                                                                                  12
vs. control. In the case of Heppen et al., a high percentage of students was so credit deficient

prior to C&C intervention from 9th grade performance that it was not possible for them to

graduate on time. These results may indicate that C&C is more suitable for elementary or middle

school youth than older students. 6

        The current study builds on this existing work by focusing on students earlier in their

schooling careers (elementary and middle school), where beneficial impacts may be more likely,

and on general samples of students who have exhibited previous absenteeism, not just restricted

to those eligible for special education services. We also examine two full cohorts of program

participants to try to improve statistical power through larger sample sizes relative to some

previous research. Specifically, C&C was implemented in the CPS by a social service agency

called SGA Youth and Family Services (SGA). Mentors were selected and hired by SGA to

work as full-time C&C mentors. SGA initially hired 15 mentors to work in 23 CPS schools, and

when mentors quit or were fired SGA hired replacements. SGA also employed a full-time project

manager who served as the supervisor of the C&C mentors. The SGA project manager oversaw

the work of the mentors, organized and led weekly meetings of the mentors, and provided

guidance and feedback to mentors about how to work most effectively with the students. In

addition, a project manager within CPS oversaw the implementation of the C&C program,

oversaw the SGA project manager, and helped to collect data on participation and

implementation. Once or twice each year, consultants from the research team at the University of

Minnesota conducted training sessions with the C&C mentors to provide professional

development and guidance on how to implement the C&C program with fidelity.



6In addition, C&C's effect on elementary school students has been evaluated in the past (Anderson et al. 2004;
Lehr, Sinclair, & Christenson, 2004), these studies were not experimental and have relied on comparing student
outcomes to baseline measures, rather than a randomized control group.

                                                                                                                 13
           Based on this previous work and conversations with CPS about the context and

characteristics of the students to be targeted for intervention, the current study involved

intervention for two years. Two cohorts of students received C&C services for two years each,

and a small subset of students received the program for all four years.

EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN

           In order to identify the causal effects of C&C on not just participating students but also

others within the school, our research design involved random assignment of schools, and grades

within schools, and students within grades. The specific eligibility criteria we used to identify

students for cohort 1 (who participated AY 2011-12 and 2012-13) were somewhat different from

those for cohort 2 (for whom the intervention took place during AY 2013-14 and 2014-15).

Students who participated were assigned a C&C mentor and remained with that mentor for the

full two years unless the mentor quit or was fired (in which case they were assigned a new

mentor), or if the student moved too far away for it to be feasible for the mentor to continue

providing services.

Cohort 1 Random Site Selection and Random Assignment

           The cohort 1 randomization design is depicted in Figure 1. Random assignment took

place in three steps. First, in collaboration with CPS, we went through a process of choosing 69

schools serving grades K-8 to be a part of the study. 7 We tried to choose schools that were

broadly representative of the district in terms of the demographic and socioeconomic

characteristics of the students, and we wanted to ensure that the schools had a large enough

group of students in each grade with absences in the range of 10-35 days in the prior year. We

also took geographic location into consideration because in cohort 1, the C&C mentors were to



7   A total of 70 schools were invited to participate. One school declined.

                                                                                                        14
be initially assigned to two schools each. We wanted to ensure that these schools were

geographically close enough together to enable mentors to travel back and forth between them

regularly. The 69 selected schools are mostly on the south and west sides of Chicago, in

neighborhoods that range from some of the very poorest in the city and the country, to some with

moderate poverty levels by a Chicago benchmark (but still quite high-poverty within the national

distribution). The free or reduced-price lunch rates ranged from 71.2 to 99.8 percent in 2010-11

for the schools that were selected for the cohort 1 study.

         We placed those 69 schools into groups of three, matching on geographic location,

student race and ethnic demographics, and school-level absence rates, and randomly selected one

school from within each group of three to be the location for treatment in the cohort 1 study. We

conducted this first round of school-level random selection to allow for estimates of spillover

effects on control students within the schools where C&C was implemented.

         Then within each of the 23 cohort 1 study schools, we randomly selected five grades

between the first and seventh to offer the program. 8 The remaining two grades were in the

control group and were intended to help identify spillover effects under the assumption that

spillover effects might be more pronounced within grades than across grades.

         Among the five selected grades we then placed students into groups of three, matched

based on baseline absences, and randomly selected one of the three students to be offered




8
  In CPS, the K-8 schools are called elementary schools even though they include students in grades that would
commonly be in middle schools or junior high schools. Most elementary schools in CPS include grades K-8, and
most high schools include grades 9-12. There are very few middle schools in CPS. We chose not to offer the
program to students who would be in 8th grade in the first year of the study because the program was planned to last
for two school years, and we thought it would be logistically difficult for mentors to follow students from their
elementary school to a high school.

                                                                                                                 15
treatment. Students who had 10 to 35 absences in the prior year were eligible to be selected for

the offer to participate in the C&C program. 9

         The students selected for treatment were sorted within school and grade in descending

order based on baseline absences and were approached and offered the chance to participate in

C&C in that order. In our analysis we always include all students randomly selected for

treatment regardless of whether they were approached and offered the chance to participate.

Thus, the ordering of students for the offer of treatment does not bias our results. The ordering

did induce students with higher baseline absence rates to be more likely to be compliers, which

means that if there are heterogeneous treatment effects the estimated effects of participating are

for students with baseline absence rates somewhat towards the higher end of the 10 to 35 range.

We include all students, not just those offered treatment, because we re-randomized some cohort

1 treatment group students into treatment and control groups in cohort 2 in a way that was not

conditional on having been offered treatment in cohort 1. Though restricting the analysis to

randomization blocks that include students who were offered treatment could generate an

unbiased estimate of the treatment effect in cohort 1, it is necessary to include all randomized

students from cohort 1 in the analysis to maintain the validity of randomization for cohort 2.

         From the list of students randomly selected for treatment, students were offered the

chance to participate until the predetermined caseload for the mentor serving each school was

filled. Schools were put into two categories based on the school's enrollment. A total of 15



9 Because the size of the randomization blocks were not all multiples of three, some of the "triples" had 2, 4, or 5
students in them. In the main analyses reported below, we ignore the grouping of students into triples because, aside
from the existence of the handful that had 2, 4 or 5 in them, within each student triplet the probability of being
selected for treatment was constant at 1/3. If each block of students had exactly 3 students, the triple fixed effects
would therefore be uncorrelated with treatment assignment and omitting them would not cause bias. In practice,
while this is not literally the case, because there are few blocks that do not have exactly 3 students, excluding the
triple fixed effects does not change the point estimates appreciably. We report results including triple fixed effects in
an appendix table..

                                                                                                                     16
mentors were either assigned to one larger school ­ large enough to support a caseload of 30 plus

a comparison group ­ or to two smaller schools. Mentors assigned to a larger school began the

school year with a caseload of 30 students all in a single school, while mentors assigned to two

schools began with caseloads of 15 in each of the two schools for a total of 30 students.

Cohort 2 Random Site Selection and Random Assignment

       In the summer between the end of cohort 1 and the beginning of cohort 2, we conducted a

second round of random assignment. The cohort 2 randomization design is depicted in Figure 2.

There was enough funding to support nine mentors and based on feedback from the mentors and

from CPS, we decided to assign each of the mentors to a caseload from a single school for cohort

2. Nine of the 15 mentors were invited to continue. Of the original 23 schools in the cohort 1

study, several were closed as a part of school closings that occurred at the end of the 2012-13

school year. The nine schools where the nine returning mentors primarily worked were selected

to continue the program for cohort 2.

       Within the cohort 2 study schools, we placed students into five randomization blocks.

Three of the randomization blocks were for students who had been in the cohort 1 study, one

block for students who had been assigned to treatment in cohort 1, one for students who had been

assigned to control in cohort 1 who had baseline absences between 10-35, and one for students

who had been assigned to control in cohort 1 who had baseline absences outside the 10-35 range.

This will allow us to experimentally test whether getting four years of participation generates

larger effects than two years of participation. The program was offered to students who were in

grades 1-7 in the first year of cohort 1; students in both cohort 1 and cohort 2 studies were

therefore in grades 1-5 in the first year of cohort 1, and in grades 3-7 in the first year of cohort 2.

To fill in the two earlier grades for cohort 2, so that we would also have data on 1st and 2nd grade



                                                                                                    17
students in cohort 2 (and so cover a similar range of grades as in cohort 1), we created a

randomization block of students who were in 1st and 2nd grade in the first year of cohort 2. We

also created a block of students who were new to the cohort 2 schools since the randomization

for cohort 1. Since the probability of selection into treatment was not equal across all

randomization blocks in cohort 2, we include randomization block fixed effects in all cohort 2

models. Finally, we offered principals at the schools the opportunity to nominate students to be

in the study. Students nominated by principals were placed in their own randomization block

within each school and subject to random assignment. 10

DATA, DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS, AND TESTS OF BASELINE BALANCE

         In this section we describe the student-level school records we use to measure baseline

characteristics and outcomes, document the level of disadvantage among the students in our

study sample, and confirm that random assignment appears to have been carried out correctly.

Data

         The data for this study are drawn from longitudinal student-level records from the

Chicago Public Schools (CPS) for AY 2010-2011 through 2014-2015, and program participation

data collected by C&C mentors and a CPS project manager. The CPS data include

demographics, attendance, enrollment, misconduct, and achievement outcomes. The

demographic data include each student's birth date, race / ethnicity, eligibility for free and

reduced-price lunch, and an indicator for having a learning disability (indicated by having an

Individualized Education Plan, or IEP).




10
  In a few cases, principals submitted lists of nominated students after randomization had already taken place for
their school. In these cases, we followed the initial random assignment for nominated students who were already
subject to random assignment in one of the other randomization blocks, and then created a randomization block
consisting of the nominated students who were not in one of the other randomization blocks.

                                                                                                                     18
         Because a critical focus of C&C is to reduce student absences, measures of attendance

and absences are the primary outcome variables in the analyses. The data include measures of

attendance and absences: days present, meaning the number of enrolled days a student attended

school over the school year; days absent, meaning the number of enrolled days a student was

absent over the school year; percent present, meaning the percentage of enrolled days a student

was present over the school year; and membership days, meaning the total number of days the

student was officially enrolled in a CPS school. Membership days are the sum of days present

and days absent, but do not necessarily equal the total number of school days in the CPS school

year. Students can move in the middle of the school year and leave CPS, and it is also possible

that students might not accumulate membership days for a short period when they transfer from

one school to another within CPS.

         Our analyses of achievement outcomes use annual grade point average (GPA) and math

and reading test scores. The test score data come from two different sources because CPS

administered multiple tests for elementary school students over the study period. 11

         The C&C program manager at CPS maintained records of which students were

approached and offered the chance to participate in C&C and which of those students

participated in the program. We use this information to measure the C&C participation rates used



11 The first test for which we have reading and math test score data is the Illinois Standards Achievement Test
(ISAT), which was state-mandated during the 2011-12, 2012-13, and 2013-14 school years. The ISAT was
administered in math and reading among 3rd through 8th graders annually in the spring during each of these school
years, but was discontinued after the 2013-14 school year. The ISAT measures individual student achievement
relative to the Common Core State Standards. During the first three academic years of the study, ISAT scores were
used to determine Adequate Yearly Progress for schools as part of the district and state school accountability
systems. The second standardized test we analyze is the Measures of Academic Progress (MAP), published by the
Northwest Evaluation Association (NWEA). The MAP was administered in each of the four years of the study in
math and reading to students in grades 3 through 8, and additionally to students in grade 2 in the final two years of
the study. The MAP assessment is a computerized, adaptive test that changes which questions to ask students based
on an estimate of ability level as indicated by responses to previous questions. For all four study years MAP scores
were used as part of the growth component of teachers' evaluations, and for the 2014-15 school year the MAP
scores replaced ISAT scores in the state school accountability system.

                                                                                                                   19
to estimate the effects of participation (treatment on the treated) described below. Finally, we

conducted semi-structured interviews with students and their parents to understand the explicit

and implicit reasons for student absences. We attempted to contact a random sample of 76

students and a parent or guardian from the full C&C intervention group and interviewed 51 of

the 76 student/parent pairs.

Descriptive Statistics and Balance Tests

         Tables 1 and 2 present baseline descriptive statistics and randomization balance tests for

the students in the C&C schools. We focus for now (and in our initial impact analysis) on just

those grades selected to receive C&C, so that the control group consists of students in treatment

grades who were randomly assigned to the control condition.

         Table 1 shows that for cohort 1, in the year before random assignment (2010-11), control

and treatment students attended on average 150.2 and 151.0 out of a possible 170 days of

school. 12 Nearly 60 percent of students in the study sample were African-American and just

under 40 percent were Hispanic. On average, students failed 0.70 and 0.68 courses in control and

treatment, respectively, in the year prior to the study, and the average grade point average was

2.21 in the control group and 2.24 in the treatment group. About 10-11 percent of the students

had documented learning disabilities, and between 15-16 percent of the students were old for

grade. The p-value on the F-test that all variables in Table 1 are jointly the same on average for

the treatment and control group, which comes from regressing treatment assignment against

these variables together with school-by-grade fixed effects, is 0.775 without missing data




12 As a reminder, total days present and total days absent do not sum to the length of the school year because some
students were not enrolled as a CPS student for the entire school year, possibly because they moved out of the
district. For this reason, in the analyses below, we report effects on days present and days absent separately and
analyze the treatment effect on the sum of days present and days absent, which is called membership days.

                                                                                                                 20
indicators and 0.840 with missing indicators. This is consistent with the idea that random

assignment was indeed random.

        Table 2 presents data for cohort 2 for the year prior to random assignment (2012-13). In

the year before random assignment, on average control and treatment students attended 159.2

and 159.9 out of a possible 181 days of school. 13 Relative to the cohort 1 study sample, there

were fewer African-American (46 versus 57 percent) and more Hispanic students (48 versus 39

percent) in the cohort 2 study schools. The F-test statistic for the test of whether the mean values

for all variables in Table 2 are equal for treatment and control groups yields a p-value of 0.650

(0.145 with missing indicators).

        The information gathered from the interviews with students and their parents or guardians

provides some insight into the reasons for absences for students in both cohorts. Typical reasons

for absences included suspensions, illnesses, unreliable transportation, safety, and familial

factors (such as needing to stay home to watch younger siblings). Overall, most families reported

multiple factors and competing demands that influence school attention.

        Table 3 shows participation rates for students assigned to treatment and control in each

cohort. For cohort 1, during the first year of the program about 50 percent of those assigned to

the treatment group participated in C&C (this is approximately equal to the figure we use to scale

up our intent to treat estimates below to estimates of treatment on the treated). To get a sense for

why students do not participate, we note again that not all students assigned to the treatment

group were approached and offered treatment. There was a predetermined number of funded

spots in the program and we could not predict how many students would accept the offer to



13
  The CPS school year was extended from 170 to 181 days in 2012-13, the second year of the cohort 1 intervention
and the baseline year for cohort 2. In 2013-14 and 2014-15, years one and two of the cohort 2 intervention there
were 178 and 180 total days of school in CPS.

                                                                                                             21
participate, so we randomly assigned more students to treatment than could be served and

offered assigned students the chance to participate until we filled the program spots.

         All students who were randomly assigned were included in the analysis sample, and

students were analyzed based on their treatment assignment, not based on whether they were

approached and offered conditional on being assigned to treatment. Among those who were

actually approached and offered the chance to participate in C&C, 77 percent participated in

cohort 1 and 79 percent participated in cohort 2. We can see that the offer rates were somewhat

lower for cohort 2 than cohort 1, driven by the fact that some students left the treatment schools

between the time of the original cohort 1 random assignment and the cohort 2 random

assignment two years later. These students were not available to be offered treatment, but were

considered treatment students in the analysis if they were randomly assigned to treatment in

cohort 2, and were effectively never-takers in the cohort 2 analysis. Table 3 also shows that there

was essentially no treatment "crossover" (no controls formally received C&C). 14

         Table 4 presents a descriptive analysis of which students chose to participate from among

those offered the chance. The table shows results from linear probability regressions of an

indicator for participation on baseline variables and a full set of randomization block fixed

effects. The regressions only include students assigned to treatment. In cohort 1, students with

more baseline absences and lower baseline GPA were more likely to participate conditional on

being selected for treatment. This is most likely due to the fact that we rank-ordered

randomization blocks (or "triples") to approach students for the program, so those triples with




14 No students assigned to control were assigned a Check & Connect mentor or were offered a chance to formally
participate in the program. Since the mentors worked in the schools every day, it is possible that they interacted with
control students in a way that we are not able to measure. One nice feature of the experimental design is that because
randomization occurred both at the school and student level, we are able to experimentally test whether there were
spillover effects on control students in treatment schools.

                                                                                                                   22
more baseline absences were approached first during cohort 1. This affects who the compliers

were, since we analyze the data based on randomly assigned treatment status ­ and random

assignment occurred within all triples, even if the treatment students within the triple were not

offered the program. In cohort 2, when we randomly ordered the triples to approach for the

program, none of the baseline variables were significantly related to participation.

ANALYSIS PLAN

Estimating Program Impacts

        Our goal is to estimate the causal effect of participating in the C&C program on student

attendance and academic outcomes. We rely on the random assignment of the offer to participate

in the program to identify the causal effect. We present two types of estimates: intent to treat

(ITT) and treatment on the treated (TOT). The ITT estimate comes from estimating equation (1):

                               (1)   Yit = 0 + 1 Z1i + 2 X0i + 3 Bi + it

where   Yit   is an outcome for student i measured after random assignment in year    t  (1, 2)   of the

program, Z1i is an indicator for student-level random assignment to treatment, or in other words

and indicator for the student having been randomly assigned to the treatment condition within a

treatment grade,     Bi is a set of school effects for cohort 1 and a set of school and randomization

block fixed effects for cohort 2,  is a random error term, and 0 is a set of baseline controls

measured prior to random assignment that includes days present, days absent, GPA, course

failures, indicators for gender, race / ethnicity, age, old for grade, and presence of a learning

disability. Our estimate of 1 corresponds to the standard estimate for the effect of offering

students the intervention, or the "intent to treat" (ITT), which comes from comparing treatment

and control students within the treatment grades at the same school.



                                                                                                        23
       Since the offer to participate was not extended to all students who were randomly

assigned to treatment, and because some students offered the chance to participate declined, the

ITT is likely to understate the magnitude of the effect of participating in C&C. To estimate the

effect of having a C&C mentor, we use random assignment as an instrument for participation

(Angrist, Imbens and Rubin, 1996; Bloom, 1984). This recovers the effect of the treatment on the

treated (TOT) because no students assigned to the control group were assigned to a C&C mentor.

We estimate the TOT by applying two-stage least squares to equations (2) and (3):

                              (2)   Dit = 0 +  Z1i +  X0i +  Bi + it

                              (3)   Yit = 0 +  Dit +  X0i +  Bi + it

       By using random assignment to be offered the treatment condition (Z1i) as an instrument

for participation (Dit), the TOT estimate is identified by conditional random assignment. The

TOT does not compare participants to non-participants ­ that comparison would be biased

because participants are different on average than non-participants. Rather, the TOT compares

students randomly assigned to treatment, regardless of whether they were invited to participate

and regardless of whether they chose to participate, to control students (the ITT), and scales this

comparison by the participation rate among the treatment group to recover the effect of receiving

treatment on those who participated.

       We examine the possibility of within grade and treatment school spillover in section 7

(E), for cohort 1. The treatment grade and school spillover estimate come from equation (4),

excluding treatment assigned students:

                        (4)    Yit = 0 + 2 Z2i + 3 Z3i + 3 X0i + 4 Bi + it




                                                                                                   24
where the numeric subscripts on the Z's correspond to the three levels of random assignment

(student, grade, and school) so that Z2i and Z3i are, respectively, indicators for being in a grade

and school that was randomly assigned for treatment.

          Our estimate for 2 in equation (4) represents the difference in average outcomes between

control students in treatment versus control grades, and so captures any "spillover" effects of the

C&C intervention on other students within the grade. For example, if C&C mentors help to

reduce absences among chronically absent students, those students might be less likely to induce

their friends to skip school. Or as noted above, the C&C mentor might wind up inadvertently

working with control group students if they accompany treatment-group friends to their mentor

visits.   Bi   is a set of school randomization blocks fixed effects.

          Our estimate for 2 also tells us how "off" the standard ITT estimate is in the case of

spillovers, in the sense that if we used random assignment of grades within treatment schools to

treatment versus control, we could generate an unbiased estimate for the effects of offering

students C&C by comparing treatment students in treatment grades to control students in control

grades, which is 1 + 2. The first term in this case can be thought of as the bias that results from

using control students within treatment grades as a comparison group in the standard ITT

estimator. Of course, it is also logically possible that there could be spillovers of the C&C

mentor across grades, not just within grades. We can examine that possibility in our data by

comparing control students in control grades in treatment schools to students in control schools

(3), since the 23 cohort 1 schools were randomly selected from a group of 69 schools. We return

to this in our discussion of the empirical results below. We limit our spillover analysis to Cohort

1 because some of the Cohort 1 treatment schools were closed at the end of Cohort 1, and Cohort




                                                                                                      25
2 randomization occurred within a non-random subset of Cohort 1 treatment schools. It was

therefore impossible to construct comparable control-school comparison samples for Cohort 2.

       Given our randomized experimental design, perhaps the main threats to valid inference

with our study come from sample attrition and from the fact that we examine a number of

different outcomes ­ that is, multiple testing concerns. We discuss our tests for sample attrition

below. To address multiple hypothesis testing, we present family-wise error rates (FWER) in our

main results tables using the bootstrapping procedure described in (Heller et al., 2017). For a

given family of outcomes (defined in detail immediately below), we randomly permute the

treatment assignment variables Z1i within randomization "blocks," re-estimate the ITT effect in

the permuted data, record the distribution of p-values that results, and re-permute the data and

repeat this procedure 100,000 times. We then calculate our FWER-adjusted p-values by

examining where for instance the most significant p-value in our data (with the true treatment

assignment variable values) falls within the distribution of p-values for the most significant

"effect" within the family of outcomes in our permuted data. This accounts for the correlation

across outcomes in our data, and of outcomes across students within schools and grades.

RESULTS

   Overall Effects on School Attendance

       Table 5 presents our main results for our days absent outcome. Since most of our tables

have the same structure, we take a moment to describe this structure in some detail. Each "cell"

or panel within the table presents the results of a separate regression. Each row in the table

presents results separately by cohort, with results from cohort 1 in the first row, cohort 2 in the

second row and a sample that pools cohort 1 and 2 together (for improved statistical power) in

the third row. The first column presents the results using data just from students who were in



                                                                                                      26
grades 1-4, the second column presents the results for students in grades 5-7, and the third

column presents the results from all students in grades 1-7 pooled together. For each separate

regression we present the control group mean, the ITT effect and its standard error, the TOT

effect and its standard error, and the average outcome for those controls who would have

participated in C&C had they been offered treatment (the "control complier mean," or CCM,

from Katz, Kling and Liebman, 2001). Underneath each ITT estimate we present the FWER-

adjusted p-value, defining our "family" of tests as each hypothesis test that shows up in Table 5

(or 16 in total).

        Before turning to the estimated treatment effects, it is interesting to note a pattern in

absences among the control group. Control group absences declined from the baseline year to the

two program years. For cohort 1, absences among the control group declined from 16.1 in the

baseline year to an average of 14.1 per year over the two program years. For cohort 2, absences

among the control group declined from 14.0 in the baseline year to an average of 11.5 per year

over the two program years. This decline is likely a reversion to the mean since the study sample

was selected based on having absences within a high range in the baseline year. In the results

presented below, the treatment effects are measured relative to the control group and therefore

account for any mean reversion from baseline to subsequent years.

        Focusing first on days absent, the ITT estimate for cohort 1 pooled across all grades is a

0.63-day reduction in absences, and the estimated TOT effect is a reduction of 1.28 days. These

pair-wise comparisons are significant at the usual 5 percent cutoff but once we account for the

number of tests we have carried out, there is a FWER-adjusted p-value of 0.23.

        However, these average effects mask substantial heterogeneity by age of the child. For

children in grades 1-4, the ITT and TOT effects are both close to zero. In contrast, for students in



                                                                                                    27
grades 5-7 we see a TOT effect of 4.22 fewer absences; that is, C&C participants in these grades

get nearly a week more school than their control group counterparts each year. The results for

students in grades 5-7 are statistically significant even accounting for the number of tests, with a

FWER p-value <.01. We can also reject the null hypothesis that the effects are the same for

students in grades 1-4 versus grades 5-7, as shown in the rightmost column of the table. Another

way to see that these results are not a fluke, besides our FWER-adjusted p-values, is that the

findings replicate nearly identically in cohort 2, as shown in the second row.

       Tables 6 and 7 repeat this analysis for our alternative measures of school attendance,

namely days present (Table 6) and percent days present (Table 7). The results are qualitatively

similar although somewhat less precisely estimated for days present than for the other outcomes.

As mentioned above, days present and days absent do not sum to the total number of days in the

school year because some students either leave the CPS district or have days when they are not

officially enrolled at any CPS school while they are transitioning from one school to another.

Each day a student is officially enrolled in a CPS school he or she accumulates what is called a

membership day. A student's total membership days are equal to the sum of his days absent and

days present. To check to make sure the estimated effects on school absences are not a result of

reducing the number of days students are enrolled in school, we separately examine the effect of

participation in C&C on membership days and find no statistically significant effect for either

cohort 1 or cohort 2 or for both cohorts pooled together. When looking at the percent of member

days present (Table 7), we see a similar increase in percentage of days present.

       One natural question is why the results look so different for relatively younger children

(grades 1-4) versus older students (grades 5-7). One hypothesis is that what appears to be

treatment heterogeneity by age is actually the result of differences in other student



                                                                                                  28
characteristics. To address this possibility, in Appendix Table 7 we pool students in grades 1-4

and 5-7, and run a linear probability model that has as the dependent variable an indicator for

being in grades 5-7 with all of our baseline characteristics (other than age) as explanatory

variables. We then take the predicted probability estimated from this model and re-weight the

data using inverse probability weighting, so that the re-weighted average baseline characteristics

for grades 1-4 and 5-7 are the same on average. This procedure essentially up-weights young

students who look more like older students in terms of their baseline characteristics, and down-

weights older students who look too unlike younger students. The main findings of substantial

and significant heterogeneity in program effects by age persist.

Effects on the Distribution of Days Absent

       Thus far, we have presented results on the average number of days absent or present. The

pattern of effects throughout the absences distribution may be informative of the mechanism by

which C&C mentors help to reduce absenteeism. For example, C&C mentors may be most

effective at identifying and remedying situations in which students are at risk for extreme

absenteeism, or they may be effective at reducing absences a small amount for all students.

       Table 8 examines where in the attendance distribution these effects are concentrated, by

re-estimating our main TOT specification but now using as the dependent variable an indicator

for whether a student's number of absences exceeds different thresholds (specifically, 5, 10, 15

or 20 days in total). The C&C effects are (when expressed as a share of the control complier

mean) proportionately much larger among the higher-absence students (absent more than 10

days). We show this analysis for our two different age groups (grades 1-4 versus 5-7) and find

that, similar to our main results on average days absent, the effects at higher points in the

absence distribution are also driven by impacts on older students (those in grades 5-7). For



                                                                                                   29
example, among grade 5-7 students in cohort 1, the estimated reduction in likelihood of missing

10 or more days is -0.125, equal to 16.8 percent of the control complier mean of 0.743. For the

same students, the effects on missing 20 or more days is -.109, equal to 33.9 percent of the

control complier mean of 0.322.

Effects by Intervention Duration

       One motivation for designing the intervention to be for two years was the hypothesis that

the effectiveness of mentoring depends on the strength of the relationship between the student

and the mentor, and the idea that relationships take time to develop, especially for students who

are showing signs of disengagement. Thus far, we have presented results that pool the two years

within each cohort. In contrast, the results presented in Table 9 show the treatment effects on

days absent separately for the first and second year of the intervention. Table 9 shows TOT

estimates and breaks the results out by grade grouping, and by cohort (refer to Table 9a in the

Appendix for ITT estimates, and Appendix Table 9b for cumulative treatment effects over the

two years).

       For the 5th-7th grade students, we find that within both cohorts C&C reduced absences by

(roughly) 50 percent more in the second year of the program than in the first. Though the pattern

of results is suggestive that the effects are larger in the second year of the program than the first,

the differences in treatment effects between the first and second year of the program are not quite

statistically significant (this is somewhat sensitive to whether we allow the effects of the baseline

covariates to be different across cohorts or constrain them to be the same).

       A subtlety raised by these estimates comes from the fact that in our main exhibits so far,

we include the cohort 1 treatment students who were re-randomized into treatment and control

groups in cohort 2 as part of the overall cohort 2 treatment group. If there are growing impacts



                                                                                                    30
with time in the intervention, treating these students as part of the regular cohort 2 treatment

group could inflate the first and second year impacts. To address this possibility, we conduct our

analysis in Appendix Table 5b again, excluding these students from the cohort 2 analysis; the

results are qualitatively similar to our overall analyses. For completeness we also show the

results for students from cohort 1 who were randomly assigned to treatment versus control in

cohort 2. In principle we could learn something about how the effects for the third and fourth

years compare to the first and second years (as shown in Table 5), but in practice there are just

too few cohort 1 re-randomized students like this to make the comparison informative, in light of

the large standard errors around this sub-group estimate.

       Overall these estimates are consistent with, though obviously not definitive proof of, the

hypothesis that it may take some time for mentors and students to develop relationships, and that

the strength of this relationship may be an important mediator of the effectiveness of the

mentoring program. A related possibility is that it takes time for the C&C mentors to learn what

is causing each individual student to be missing school, and that as the mentors recognize how

they can most effectively help the student or intervene, the program's effect on absences grows.

These are important questions for future research.

Effects on Academic Outcomes

       We turn now to the question of whether the C&C mentoring program generated

improvements in students' academic outcomes. Among mentoring programs, C&C is notable in

its focus on attempting to engage students in school. In addition to the primary goal of increasing

student attendance, C&C mentors are tasked with improving communications between students

and teachers and helping students to overcome things that make it hard for them to succeed while

in school. The C&C mentors in our study varied in the strategies they used to help students.



                                                                                                    31
Some acted as tutors from time to time, while others drew on their backgrounds in social work

and acted as case managers, advocates, and counselors.

           One might hypothesize that the increase in attendance induced by the C&C program may

have generated improved academic outcomes. At the same time, given the emphasis on school

engagement beyond attendance and the ways C&C mentors were asked to track grades and

academic performance alongside attendance, the mentors may have had a direct effect on

academic outcomes over and above any effect that operated through improved attendance.

           Tables 10 and 11 present the effect on academic outcomes, including grade point average

(GPA), course failures, and math and reading standardized test scores. Table 10 presents the

results pooling all grades, and Table 11 shows the TOT results separated out by age group. 15

Regardless of whether the estimates are separated by age or not, we do not find significant

effects of C&C on students' GPA or course failures. Point estimates for these outcomes are close

to zero, never statistically significant, and based on the 95-percent confidence intervals we can

rule out increases in the range of 0.1 to 0.15 on a standard 4-point GPA scale (or, for course

failures, of a decrease any larger than about -0.13 relative to control mean of 0.47).

           We also report treatment effects on reading and math achievement test scores. These

results are shown in the rows labeled "Standardized MAP" and "Standardized Official Test." We

present results for two test-score dependent variables because CPS changed the test that was used

for accountability purposes during the period we study ­ the Illinois Standard Achievement Test

(ISAT) from 2011-12 through 2013-14, and the Measures of Academic Progress (MAP) in 2014-

15 ­ but administered the MAP test throughout the time period. The "Standardized MAP"

dependent variable uses the MAP score in each year, and the "Standardized Official Test"



15   Refer to Tables 11 and 12 in the Appendix for ITT.

                                                                                                    32
dependent variable uses the ISAT score in the years it was used for accountability and the MAP

score in the year it was used for accountability. As is common, test scores are missing for some

students in some years. To assess whether test score missingness is associated with treatment

assignment, we also estimate models with indicators for having a valid test score as the

dependent variable. These results are shown in the rows labeled "Valid MAP Data" and "Valid

Official Data."

       Taken at face value and setting aside for the moment the size of the standard errors, the

estimated effects on Standardized MAP and Standardized Official Test seem to indicate, if

anything, a slight decline in test scores as a result of C&C. But the table also shows that C&C

increases the likelihood that students have a valid test recorded in the CPS data, presumably

because they are now more likely to attend school on testing days.

       To see how this selection related to missing test scores influences our results, we

implement an imputation procedure for the missing data and estimate a median regression (see

e.g. Brown, 1984; Chandra, 2000; and Mulligan and Rubinstein, 2008 for the use of similar

procedures to account for sample selection bias). We assume that the students who would not

show up for testing in the control condition but who would if assigned to treatment have below-

median test scores. We therefore impute for every student with missing test scores the lowest

recorded value to the test we see in our data. Then we re-estimate a quantile regression that

examines the C&C effect on the median test score (the row called "standardized MAP,

imputed"), and compare that to the results of a quantile regression that uses only data for those

students with non-missing test scores. If we look for example at the "pooled cohorts" panel of

Table 10, the estimated effect of C&C assignment (TOT) on the median reading score of just

those with valid scores is a statistically significant 0.026 (standard error 0.016). If we impute



                                                                                                    33
below-median values for those with missing scores, the estimated effect on the median is now

much smaller and no longer close to statistically significant, equal to -0.007 (standard error

0.037). We see a similar attenuation of the estimated effect when we impute below-median

values for missing math scores. Based on the Lee (2009) bounds estimates, the estimated effects

range from 0.150 to -0.167 for standardized math MAP scores and 0.163 to -0.154 for

standardized reading MAP scores for the pooled cohorts and grades. 16 From this we conclude

that there is no reliable evidence in our data that C&C affected test scores, either for the better or

for the worse.

Spillover Effects

           To be able to examine possible spillover effects of C&C, we randomized school and

grade to treatment versus control conditions, and then within treatment grades randomly assigned

students. Because of the randomization of grade to treatment versus control, when we analyze

spillovers for grade sub-groups (students in grades 1-4 versus grades 5-7 separately), we use only

those treatment schools where the control grade was randomly assigned to be among 1-4 to test

spillovers for students in grades 1-4, and similarly for when we test for spillovers among grade

5-7 students we only use treatment schools where the control grade was randomly assigned to be

in the grade 5-7 range.

           Table 12 shows that there is balance in baseline characteristics for the control-group

students in treatment versus control grades within the treatment schools, as well as between

control students in the treatment versus control schools. While a few pairwise comparisons are

statistically significant, the F-test statistics for the joint hypothesis of no difference in the full set

of baseline characteristics are not close to statistically significant.



16
     The bound estimates are based on Lee (2009) bounds. No covariates were included to tighten the range.

                                                                                                             34
       Tables 13 and 14 show that there are no statistically significant spillovers, either overall

or separately for grades 1-4 or 5-7, for either school attendance and engagement measures, or on

our measures of academic achievement. There is a suggestive hint of a possible increase in

absences by 1.63 days for students within treatment grades assigned to the control condition (p <

.01), but this result is not statistically significant once we account for the number of hypothesis

tests carried out in Table 13 (FWER p-value = 0.116). No other estimates for spillover effects for

any other cohorts or grade levels or outcomes approach statistical significance, either.

CONCLUSION

       In this paper we report the results of one of the few large-scale RCTs of a policy effort to

improve student school attendance. The intervention, Check & Connect, seeks to supplement the

social capital parents can provide children to support them in school by assigning students to an

in-school mentor. The intervention relies on providing youth with a fair amount of one-on-one

time with an adult whose full-time job is to deliver the program; the cost per participant per year

equals approximately $1,700, or $3,400 total over two years.

       The program seems to be effective in improving student attendance, particularly for

middle-school-aged (i.e. grades 5-8) children. Theories of child development may help explain

these results. As children enter middle childhood and adolescence, they are more likely to seek

and obtain autonomy from their parents/guardians while simultaneously developing more

meaningful relationships with peers and non-familial adults (Bandura, 1964; Eccles, 1999;

Erikson, 1950). This suggests that Check & Connect may have a larger impact on older youth via

two potential avenues: older children have more agency around school attendance decisions and

are more open to building relationships with and seeking guidance from mentors.




                                                                                                  35
       While the program leads to significant improvements in its primary target outcome ­

attendance ­ we find no detectable impacts on academic outcomes. Moreover, given the costs of

the program, the size of the impacts on absences raises the question of whether this intervention

is the most cost-effective way to improve student attendance. One way to measure cost-

effectiveness is by the cost per day of attendance increased. Our calculations suggest C&C costs

approximately $400 per day of improved attendance. By way of comparison, another program

implemented in CPS during our study called the Chicago Attendance Project--a mail-based,

large-scale intervention that informed CPS guardians of how many absences their student had

accumulated that semester--only incrementally decreased absences, but did so at about $6-$11

per day (Rogers and Feller [2018], Robinson et al. [2018]).

       Another relevant comparison is youth mentoring programs in the U.S. that use volunteer

mentors rather than paid, full-time employees. While these programs generally show few

statistically significant impacts on academic and attendance outcomes (Bernstein et al., 2009;

Herrera, et al., 2007), the Big Brothers Big Sisters of America (BBBA) program has seen

marginal decreases in unexcused absences (Schwartz et al., 2011). Interestingly, BBBA costs are

similar to those of C&C ­ they average $1500 per student per year (Laura and John Arnold

Foundation, 2017). One-to-one mentoring programs tend to be more expensive than other types

of mentoring models, regardless of whether volunteer or paid mentors are used (Garringer,

McQuillin, & McDaniel, 2017). Future research could explore whether less-expensive mentoring

models, such as cross-age peer mentoring or group mentoring, could decrease costs while still

providing intensive mentoring services.

       One lesson from these results may be that lower-cost, less-intensive interventions may

provide the most cost-effective way to improve school attendance, particularly for marginal



                                                                                                 36
improvements. However, higher-cost interventions may be necessary to reduce absences by more

than small amounts. One possibility is to implement a multi-tiered system of supports, where

lower-cost attendance monitoring interventions are applied for all students, but higher-cost

interventions focused on building social capital are provided for chronically truant students. Our

results also suggest that helping students to overcome the causes of truancy may not be enough

to significantly improve learning. School-based academic interventions that improve the quality

of instruction or the learning environment in school more generally are surely, however,

complementary with interventions that increase school attendance. Further research should focus

on the most effective and cost-effective ways to improve learning and academic achievement for

students who are currently missing substantial amounts of school.




                                                                                                37
REFERENCES

Allen, B.M. & Fryer, Jr., R.G. (2011). The power and pitfalls of education incentives.

       The Hamilton Project. Retrieved July 17, 2020, from

       http://scholar.harvard.edu/files/fryer/files/092011_incentives_fryer_allen_paper2.pdf.

Allensworth, E.M. & Easton, J.Q. (2007). What matters for staying on-track and graduating in

       Chicago public high schools. Consortium on Chicago School Research at the University

       of Chicago.

Allensworth, E., Evans, S. (2016). Tackling absenteeism in Chicago. Phi Delta Kappan, 98, 16­

       21.

Anderson, A.R., Christenson, S.L., Sinclair, M.F., & Lehr, C.A. (2004). Check & Connect: The

       importance of relationships for promoting engagement with school. School Psychology,

       42, 95­113.

Angrist, J., Bettinger, E., Bloom, E., King, E., & Kremer, M. (2002). Vouchers for

       private schooling in Colombia: Evidence from a randomized natural experiment.

       American Economic Association, 92, 1535­1559. Retrieved July 17, 2020, from

       http://pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/pdfplus/10.1257/000282802762024629.

Angrist, J., Bettinger, E., & Kremer, M. (2006). Long-term educational consequences of

       secondary school vouchers: Evidence from administrative records in Colombia.

       American Economic Review, 96, 847­862.

Angrist, J.D., Imbens, G.W., & Rubin, D.B. (1996). Identification of causal effects using

       instrumental variables. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 81, 444­455.

Balfanz, R., & Byrnes, V. (2012). Chronic Absenteeism: Summarizing what we know from

       nationally available data. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Center for Social



                                                                                                38
       Organization of Schools. Retrieved July 17, 2020, from

       http://new.every1graduates.org/wp-

       content/uploads/2012/05/FINALChronicAbsenteeismReport_May16.pdf.

Bandura, A. (1964). The stormy decade: Fact or fiction? Psychology in the Schools, 1,

       224­231.

Barrera-Osorio, F., Bertrand, M., Linden, L.L., & Perez-Calle, F. (2008). Conditional

       cash transfers in education design features, peer and sibling effects: Evidence from a

       randomized experiment in Colombia (NBER Working Paper No. 13890). Cambridge,

       MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bayer, A., Grossman, J.B., & DuBois, D.L. (2015). Using volunteer mentors to improve the

       academic outcomes of underserved students: The role of relationships. Journal of

       Community Psychology, 43, 408­429.

Bernstein, L., Rappaport, C., Olsho, L., Hunt, D., & Levin, M. (2009). Impact evaluation of the

       U.S. Department of Education's Student Mentoring Program. Washington, DC: National

       Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance, Institute of Education

       Sciences, U.S. Department of Education.

Bettinger, E.P., & Evans, B.J. (2019). College guidance for all: A randomized experiment in pre-

       college advising. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 38, 579­599.

Bloom, B.S. (1984). The 2 sigma problem: The search for methods of group instruction as

       effective as one-to-one tutoring. Educational Researcher, 13, 4­16.

Bloom, B., Jones, L.I., & Freeman, G. (2013). Summary health statistics for U.S. children:

       National health interview survey, 2012. National Center for Health Statistics. Vital




                                                                                                39
       Health Stat, 10. Retrieved July 17, 2020, from

       http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr_10/sr10_258.pdf.

Brown, C. (1984). Black-white earnings ratios since the Civil Rights Act of 1964: The

       importance of labor market dropouts. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 95, 31­44.

Chandra, A. (2000). Labor-market dropouts and the racial wage gap: 1940-1990. American

       Economic Review, 90, 333­338.

Chang, H.N., & Romero, M. (2008). Present, engaged, and accounted for: The critical

       importance of addressing chronic absence in the early grades. National Center for

       Children in Poverty, Mailman School of Public Health at Columbia University, New

       York, NY. Retrieved July 17, 2020, from

       http://www.nccp.org/publications/pdf/text_837.pdf

Child Trends Databank (2015). Student absenteeism. Retrieved July 17, 2020, from

       http://www.childtrends.org/?indicators=student-absenteeism.

Christenson, Stout, & Pohl. (2012). Check & Connect: A comprehensive student engagement

       intervention: Implementing with Fidelity. Institute on Community Integration.

Coleman, J.S. (1988). Social capital in the creation of human capital. American Journal of

       Sociology, 95, S95­S120.

Common Core of Data (2010). Number of students and selected high school dropout and

       completion statistics for the 100 largest public elementary and secondary school districts

       in the United States and jurisdictions: School year 2009-10 [Table]. National Center for

       Education Statistics. Retrieved July 17, 2020, from https://nces.ed.gov/ccd/tables/2009-

       10_Dropout_and_completer_data_for_100_LSD_table.asp.




                                                                                               40
Cook, P.J, Crowley, D.M., Dodge, K., & Gearing, M.E. (2016). Primary school truancy: Risk

       factors and consequences for academic success. Duke University working paper.

Cutler, D.M., & Lleras-Muney, A. (2010). Understanding differences in health behaviors by

       education. Journal of Health Economics 29, 1­28.

Dryfoos, J.G. (1990). Adolescents at Risk: Prevalence and Prevention. New York, NY: Oxford

       University Press.

Eccles, J.S. (1999). The development of children ages 6 to 14. The future of children, 9, 30­44.

Ehrlich, S.B., Gwynne, J.A., Pareja, A.S., & Allensworth, E.M. (2014). Preschool attendance in

       Chicago Public Schools: Relationship with learning outcomes and reasons for absences.

       University of Chicago Consortium on Chicago School Research. Retrieved July 17, 2020,

       from http://www.attendanceworks.org/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/CCSR-

       Pre-K-Attendance-Full-Report-May-2014-revised.pdf.

Erickson, E.H. (1950). Childhood and society. New York: Norton.

Finn, J.D. (1989). Withdrawing from school. Review of Educational Research, 59, 117­142.

       Retrieved July 17, 2020, from

       https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/221e/ec4c94a3484f6a025d2477b65f00c481c541.pdf.

Gage, N.A., Sugai, G., Lunde, K., & DeLoreto, L. (2013). Truancy and zero tolerance in high

       school: Does policy align with practice? Education and Treatment of Children, 36, 117­

       138. Retrieved July 17, 2020, from http://ne.glrs.org/wp-

       content/uploads/2014/11/attendance-and-behavior.pdf.

Garringer, M., McQuillin, S., & McDaniel, H. (2017). Examining Youth Mentoring Services

       Across America: Findings from the 2016 National Mentoring Program Survey. Boston,




                                                                                               41
       MA: MENTOR. Retrieved July 17, 2020, from https://www.mentoring.org/new-site/wp-

       content/uploads/2017/07/Mentor-Survey-Report_FINAL_small.pdf.

Garrison, A.H. (2006). "I missed the bus": School grad transition, the Wilmington Truancy

       Center, and reasons youth don't go to school. Youth Violence and Juvenile Justice, 4,

       204­212. Retrieved July 17, 2020, from

       http://yvj.sagepub.com/content/4/2/204.full.pdf+html.

Goldin, C. & Katz, L.F. (2010). The race between education and technology. Belknap Press.

Grossman, J.B., Chan, C.S., Schwartz, S.E.O., & Rhodes, J.E. (2012). The test of time in school-

       based mentoring: The role of relationship duration and re-matching on academic

       outcomes. American Journal of Community Psychology, 49, 43­54. Retrieved from

       http://rhodeslab.org/files/ToTime2.pdf.

Hallfors, D., Vevea, J. L., Iritani, B., Cho, H., Khatapoush, S., & Saxe, L. (2002). Truancy, grade

       point average, and sexual activity: A meta-analysis of risk indicator for youth substance

       use. Journal of Social Health, 72, 205­211.

Healey, K., Nagaoka, J., & Michelman, V. (2014). The Educational attainment of Chicago Public

       Schools students: A focus on four-year college degrees. Retrieved July 17, 2020, from

       https://consortium.uchicago.edu/sites/default/files/publications/Fast%20Facts%20Brief.p

       df.

Heckman, J.J., & LaFontaine, P.A. (2007). The American high school graduation rate: trends

       and levels (NBER Working Paper No. 13670). Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of

       Economic Research.




                                                                                                42
Heller, S., Shah, A., Guryan, J., Ludwig, J., Mullainathan, S., & Pollack, H. (2017). Thinking,

       fast and slow? Some field experiments to reduce crime and dropout in Chicago. Quarterly

       Journal of Economics. 132, 1­54.

Heppen, J.B., Zeiser, K., O'Cummings, M., Holtzman, D., Christenson, S., & Pohl, A.

       (2017). Efficacy of the Check & Connect mentoring program for at-risk general

       education high school students. Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 11,

       56­85.

Herrera, C., DuBois, D.L., & Grossman, J.B. (2013). The role of risk: Mentoring experiences

       and outcomes for youth with varying risk profiles. New York, NY: A Public/Private

       Ventures project distributed by MDRC. Retrieved July 17, 2020, from

       http://www.mdrc.org/sites/default/files/Role%20of%20Risk_Final-web%20PDF.pdf.

Herrera, C., Grossman, J.B., Kauh, T.J., Feldman, A.F., McMaken, J., & Jucovy, L.Z. (2007).

       Making a difference in schools: The Big Brothers Big Sisters school-based mentoring

       impact study. Philadelphia: Public/Private Ventures. Retrieved July 17, 2020, from

       http://files.bigsister.org/file/Making-a-Difference-in-Schools.pdf.

Huizinga, D., and Jacob-Chien, C. (1998). The contemporaneous co-occurrence of serious and

       violent juvenile offending and other problem behavior. In Serious & Violent Juvenile

       Offenders: Risk Factors and Successful Interventions, by R. Loeber and D.P. Farrington.

       Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc., p. 57.

Hyman, J. (2019). Can light-touch college-going interventions make a difference? Evidence from

       a statewide experiment in Michigan. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 39,

       159­190.




                                                                                                  43
Jackson, D., Marx, G., & Richards, A. (2012, November 11). An empty-desk epidemic. Chicago

       Tribune. Retrieved July 17, 2020, from http://www.chicagotribune.com/ct-met-truancy-

       mainbar-20121111-story.html

Jackson, D., and Marx, G. (2013, February 19). Prison data, court files show link between school

       truancy and crime. Chicago Tribune. Retrieved from

       http://www.chicagotribune.com/investigations/ct-xpm-2013-02-19-ct-met-prison-

       truancy-20130219-story.html.

Karcher, M.J. (2008). The study of mentoring in the learning environment (SMILE): A

       randomized evaluation of the effectiveness of school-based mentoring. Prevention

       Science, 9, 99­113.

Katz, L.F., Kling, J.R., and Liebman, J.B. (2001). Moving to opportunity in Boston: Early results

       of a randomized mobility experiment. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 607­654.

Kearney, C.A. (2008). School absenteeism and school refusal behavior in youth: A contemporary

       review. Clinical Psychology Review, 28, 451­471.

Klima, T., Miller, M., & Nunlist, C. (2009) What works? Targeted truancy and dropout programs

       in middle and high school. Olympia; Washington State Institute for Public Policy,

       Document No. 09-06-2201. Retrieved July 17, 2020, from

       http://www.wsipp.wa.gov/ReportFile/1045/Wsipp_What-Works-Targeted-Truancy-and-

       Dropout-Programs-in-Middle-and-High-School_Full-Report.pdf.

Las Vegas Review-Journal (2009, May 16). School district workers uneasy because attendance

       officers might be `bumped.' Retrieved July 17, 2020, from

       https://www.reviewjournal.com/news/school-district-workers-uneasy-because-

       attendance-officers-might-be-bumped/.



                                                                                              44
Laura and John Arnold Foundation. (2017). Evidence Summary for Big Brothers Big Sisters.

       Social Programs that Work Review: November 2017. Retrieved July 17, 2020, from

       https://evidencebasedprograms.org/document/big-brothers-big-sisters-evidence-

       summary/.

Lehr, C.A., Sinclair, M.F., & Christenson, S.L. (2004). Addressing student engagement and

       truancy prevention during the elementary school years: A replication study of the Check

       & Connect model. Education for Students Placed at Risk, 9, 279­301.

Los Angeles Times (2003, September 20). School district reassigns its truant officers.

Maynard, B.R., Kjellstrand, E.K., Thompson, A.M. (2014). Effects of Check and Connect on

       attendance, behavior and academics: A randomized effectiveness trial. Research on

       Social Work Practice, 24, 296­309.

Meara, E.R, Richards, S., & Cutler, D.M. (2008). The gap gets bigger: Changes in mortality and

       life expectancy, by education, 1981­2000. Health Affairs, 27, 350­360

Mulligan, C.B., & Rubinstein, Y. (2008). Selection, investment, and women's relative wages

       over time. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123, 1061­1110.

Murnane, R.J. (2013). U.S. high school graduation rates: Patterns and explanations. (NBER

       Working Paper No. 18701). Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Oreopoulos, P., Brown, R.S., & Lavecchia, A.M. (2017). Pathways to education: An integrated

       approach to helping at-risk high school students. Journal of Political Economy, 125, 947­

       984.

Oreopoulos, P., & Ford, R. (2019). Keeping college options open: A field experiment to help all

       high school seniors through the college application process. Journal of Policy Analysis

       and Management, 38, 426­454.



                                                                                                 45
Riccio, J.A., Dechausey, N., Miller, C., Nunez, S., Verma, N., and Yang, E. (2013). Conditional

       cash transfers in New York City: The continuing story of the Opportunity-NYC Family

       Rewards demonstration. NYC: MDRC Corporation.

Rogers, T., & Feller, A. (2018). Reducing student absences at scale by targeting parents'

       misbeliefs. Nature Human Behaviour, 2, 335­342.

Robinson, C.D., Lee, M.G., Dearing, E., and Rogers, T. (2018). Reducing student absenteeism in

       the early grades by targeting parental beliefs. American Education Research Journal, 55,

       1163­1192.

Schoeneberger, J.A. (2011). Longitudinal attendance patterns: Developing high school dropouts.

       The Clearinghouse: A Journal of Educational Strategies, Issues and Ideas, 85, 7­14.

Schwartz, S.E.O., Rhodes, J.E., Chan, C.S. & Herrera, C. (2011). The impact of school-based

       mentoring on youths with different relational profiles. Developmental Psychology, 47,

       450­462. Retrieved July 17, 2020, from

       http://www.rhodeslab.org/files/RelationshipProfiles.pdf.

Sinclair, M.F., Christenson, M.L., & Thurlow, M.L. (2005). Promoting school completion of

       urban secondary youth with emotional or behavioral disabilities. Exceptional Children,

       71, 465­482.

Sinclair, M.F., Christenson, S.L., Evelo, D.L., & Hurley, C.M. (1998). Dropout prevention for

       youth with disabilities: Efficacy of a sustained school engagement procedure.

       Exceptional Children, 65, 7­21.

Tait, C. (2004). Strategies for adolescence: Turning it around for middle-school students.

       Clemson, SC: National Dropout Prevention Center.

U.S. Department of Education (1996). Manual to combat truancy.



                                                                                                46
WBEZ. (2014, June 04). What the heck happened to Chicago's truancy officers? Retrieved from

       https://www.wbez.org/stories/what-the-heck-happened-to-chicagos-truancy-

       officers/ff4ca74d-e067-43cd-b2b1-e71cc3e7bb68.




                                                                                         47
       Figure 1. Cohort 1 Random Assignment (Spring 2011).


                               69 participating K-8
                                   CPS schools


        School triple     School triple    School triple     ...


2 control (C)    1 treatment
   schools       (T) school


                  Grades 1-7


         2 C grades         5 T grades


        Student triple    Student triple           ...


2 C students     1 T student


                          T students offered
                       treatment in descending
                      order of baseline absences
                      until target C&C caseload
                             in school met




                                                                   48
               Figure 2. Cohort 2 Random Assignment (Summer 2013).


                                  23 cohort 1 treatment
                                       (T) schools

                                      9 cohort 2 T
                                        schools

                     Students grouped into 6 randomization blocks:

Cohort 1 T                     Cohort 1                             Students new    Prinicipal-
 students     Cohort 1 C                       1st and 2nd
               students         control                                to these     nominated
                               students          graders                             students
                                             (excluded from         schools after
                (10-35                                                cohort 1
               baseline      (<10 or > 35       cohort 1
                               baseline      randomization)        randomization
             absences in
              2012/2013      absences in
             school year)     2012/2013
                             school year)




                             For each randomization block:



                     Student triple   Student triple         ...


             2 C students     1 T student



                                     T students sorted
                                   randomly and offered
                                  treatment in that order
                                     until target C&C
                                  caseload in school met




                                                                                              49
                      Table 1. Cohort 1 student baseline characteristics.

                                                                    Control    Treatment
Students (n)                                                        1846       933
Days Present in 2010-11 SY                                          150.18     150.95
Days Absent in 2010-11 SY                                           16.13      16.28
Percent Male                                                        0.53       0.53
Age                                                                 8.74       8.72
Percent Old for Grade                                               0.16       0.15
Percent Black                                                       0.57       0.57
Percent Hispanic                                                    0.39       0.4
Percent Learning Disability                                         0.11       0.1
Number of Course Failures in 2010-11 SY                             0.7        0.68
GPA in 2010-11 SY                                                   2.21       2.24

P-value on F-test
Without missing data indicators                                                 p=.775
With missing data indicators                                                    p=.84
Note: The length of the CPS school year changed during the study. The number of days in the
school year, by year, was: 2010-11,170; 2011-12, 170; 2012-13, 181; 2013-14, 178; 2014-15,
180.In the study sample, days present and days absent do not sum to total days in the school
year because some students were not enrolled as CPS students or the full school year. P-value
on null hypothesis that average values are jointly the same for treatment and control group
comes from regressing treatment assignment indicator against the baseline covariates, with
imputed missing values and a missing indicator for observations that had missing values.
 * p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.




                                                                                            50
                      Table 2. Cohort 2 student baseline characteristics.

Baseline Characteristics                                                Control    Treatment
Students (n)                                                              1111          1039
Days Present in 2012-13 SY                                               159.23        159.94
Days Absent in 2012-13 SY                                                 14.01         13.86
Percent Male                                                               0.53          0.53
Age                                                                        8.53          8.39
Percent Old for Grade                                                      0.12           0.1
Percent Black                                                              0.46          0.47
Percent Hispanic                                                           0.49          0.47
Percent Learning Disability                                                0.05          0.06
Number of Course Failures in 2012-13 SY                                    0.41          0.44
GPA in 2012-13 SY                                                          2.29          2.35

P-value on F-test
Without missing data indicators                                                           p=.65
With missing data indicators                                                             p=.145
Note: The length of the CPS school year changed during the study. The number of days in the
school year, by year, was: 2010-11,170; 2011-12, 170; 2012-13, 181; 2013-14, 178; 2014-15,
180.In the study sample, days present and days absent do not sum to total days in the school
year because some students were not enrolled as CPS students or the full school year. P-value
on null hypothesis that average values are jointly the same for treatment and control group
comes from regressing treatment assignment indicator against the baseline covariates, with
imputed missing values and a missing indicator for observations that had missing values.
 * p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.




                                                                                             51
                   Table 3. Participation rates.

                  Assigned to         Assigned &              Control
                  Treatment           Approached
                             Cohort 1
Year 1                0.5                0.77                     0
Year 2               0.46                0.72                     0
Either Year          0.52                0.81                     0

N                      933                     601              1846
                              Cohort 2
Year 1                0.31                     0.79               0
Year 2                0.32                     0.8                0
Either Year           0.33                     0.84               0

N                      1039                       415              1111
Note: This table reports the participation rates for three groups,
students who were randomly assigned to treatment, students who were
both assigned to treatment and approached or offered treatment, and
students who were assigned to the control group. The set of students
included in each group is constant across years within each cohort.




                                                                          52
     Table 4. Regression of participation dummy variable against baseline characteristics.

Baseline Characteristics                                         Cohort 1           Cohort 2
Outcome                                                        Participation      Participation
                                                               (either year)      (either year)
Baseline Days Present                                                        0                   0
Baseline Excused Absences                                           0.023***              0.004 *
Baseline Unexcused Absences                                         0.024***                 0.001
Baseline GPA                                                       -0.090***                 0.003
Baseline Course Failures                                                -0.023               0.006
Dummy for Male                                                          -0.012               0.004
Age                                                                  0.021 **                 0.01
Old for Grade                                                        -0.082 *                -0.08
Dummy for Black                                                      0.236 **               -0.051
Dummy for Hispanic                                                   0.178 **               -0.044
Dummy for Learning Disability                                            0.069               0.036
Dummy for Missing Baseline Grade Data                               -0.244 **                0.136
Dummy for Missing Baseline Attendance Data                                   0               0.002
N                                                                          933               1039
R-squared                                                                0.633               0.664
Note: Both models include school fixed effects. The model for cohort 2 includes additional
randomization block fixed effects to account for differential probability of selection for
treatment based on whether the student participated in cohort 1 and which grade the student
was in during cohort 2.
 * p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.




                                                                                                  53
                                                            Table 5. Main outcome ­ Days absent.

                                                                                                                                                                  H0: Grades 1-4 =
                                Grades 1 - 4                                  Grades 5 ­ 7                                        All Grades
                                                                                                                                                                 Grades 5-7 p-value
                  CM        ITT         TOT        CCM       CM        ITT             TOT           CCM       CM        ITT            TOT            CCM       ITT       TOT
                                                                                      Cohort 1
Treatment         12.818    0.329       0.696      13.118    16.369     -2.290***      -4.224***     18.447    14.107    -0.633**        -1.275**      15.252    <0.001       <0.001
Standard Error              (0.3613)    (0.7635)                       (0.5897)        (1.0771)                          (0.3184)       (0.6374)
FWER p-value                0.5817                                     0.0052                                            0.2297
N                           3397        3397                           1938            1938                              5335           5335
                                                                                      Cohort 2
Treatment         10.352    -0.472      -2.066     12.979    14.454     -1.918**       -4.001**      16.577    11.465    -0.844**        -2.881***     14.469    0.086        0.367
Standard Error              (0.3357)    (1.4486)                       (0.7821)        (1.5791)                          (0.3277)       (1.1040)
FWER p-value                0.4286                                     0.1365                                            0.1204
N                           3076        3076                           1078            1078                              4154           4154
                                                                                    Pooled Cohorts
Treatment         11.807    -0.062      -0.177     12.779    15.771     -2.149***      -4.129***     17.649    13.109    -0.740***       -1.826***     14.797    <0.001       <0.001
Standard Error              (0.2458)    (0.6915)                       (0.4675)        (0.8809)                          (0.2284)       (0.5581)
FWER p-value                0.8214                                     0.0005                                            0.0281
N                           6473        6473                           3016            3016                              9489           9489
* p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<.01.
CM = Control Mean, ITT = Intent to Treat, CCM = Control Complier Mean, TOT = Treatment on Treated.
Family-wise error rate (FWER) is the probability that a given family of tests (defined for three grade groups, grades 1-4, 5-7 and pooled 1-7; and three cohort groups, cohort 1,
cohort 2, and pooled cohort 1 and 2 total; so 9 families of outcomes are shown in the table) includes at least one false positive result. The FWER p-value is based on 100,000
iterations of randomly re-assigning the treatment grade and treatment-condition-within-grade indicators in our sample.
The samples are for both cohorts, with each student having one observation for each year of treatment.
The regression covariates include: baseline days present, baseline excused absences, baseline unexcused absences, baseline GPA, baseline course failures, baseline age, baseline
old for grade, dummy for male, dummy for black, dummy for Hispanic, dummy for learning disability, and dummy for missing baseline data.
We include randomization block groups which are school-by-grade-by-group. In cohort 1, these blocks are only school-by-grade. For cohort 2, we added block groups based on a
student's original treatment assignment in cohort 1.
We cluster at the student level because students have multiple observations, one for each year of treatment.




                                                                                                                                                                         54
                                                           Table 6. Main outcome ­ Days present.

                       Grades 1 - 4                                  Grades 5 - 7                                  All Grades                                    H0: Grades 1-4 =
                                                                                                                                                                 Grades 5-7 p-value
                       CM         ITT         TOT        CCM         CM         ITT         TOT         CCM        CM           ITT        TOT        CCM        ITT          TOT
                                                                                       Cohort 1
Treatment              157.848        0.068    0.144     158.557     154.53     3.155***    5.819***    152.997    156.644      1.244**    2.506**    156.24       0.016       0.021
Standard Error                    (0.7594)    (1.5993)                          (1.0285)     (1.8567)                           (0.6111)   (1.2208)
FWER p-value                       0.9966                                        0.0389                                          0.27
N                                     3397      3397                                1938      1938                               5335       5335
                                                                                       Cohort 2
Treatment              165.084     -0.027      -0.116      165.7     161.013        1.792      3.74     161.202     163.98       0.511      1.743     163.58       0.207       0.339
Standard Error                    (0.7294)    (3.1512)                          (1.2572)     (2.5177)                           (0.6395)   (2.1523)
FWER p-value                          0.27                                       0.9966                                         0.8177
N                                     3076      3076                                1078      1078                               4154       4154
                                                                                    Pooled Cohorts
Treatment              160.815        0.114    0.323     161.251     156.554    2.643***    5.080***     156.35    159.416      0.973**    2.401**    159.115      0.008       0.023
Standard Error                    (0.5223)    (1.4689)                          (0.8013)     (1.4942)                           (0.4402)   (1.0735)
FWER p-value                       0.9833                                        0.0234                                         0.2073
N                                     6473      6473                                3016      3016                               9489       9489
* p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<.01.
CM = Control Mean, ITT = Intent to Treat, CCM = Control Complier Mean, TOT = Treatment on Treated.
Family-wise error rate (FWER) is the probability that a given family of tests (defined for three grade groups, grades 1-4, 5-7 and pooled 1-7, and three cohort groups, cohort 1,
cohort 2, and pooled cohort 1 and 2 total, so 9 families of outcomes are shown in the table) includes at least one false positive result. The FWER p-value is based on 100,000
iterations of randomly re-assigning the treatment grade and treatment-condition-within-grade indicators in our sample.
The samples are for both cohorts, with each student having one observation for each year of treatment.
The regression covariates include: baseline days present, baseline excused absences, baseline unexcused absences, baseline GPA, baseline course failures, baseline age, baseline
old for grade, dummy for male, dummy for black, dummy for Hispanic, dummy for learning disability, and dummy for missing baseline data.
We include randomization block groups which are school-by-grade-by-group. In cohort 1, these blocks are only school-by-grade. For cohort 2, we added block groups based on a
student's original treatment assignment in cohort 1.
We cluster at the student level because students have multiple observations, one for each year of treatment.




                                                                                                                                                                       55
                                                      Table 7. Main outcome ­ Percent days present.

                                   Grades 1 - 4                               Grades 5 ­ 7                                 All Grades                    H0: Grades 1-4 = Grades
                                                                                                                                                               5-7 p-value
                      CM           ITT       TOT       CCM       CM         ITT          TOT        CCM       CM        ITT         TOT        CCM           ITT           TOT
                                                                                     Cohort 1
   Treatment        92.391        -0.152    -0.322    92.214    90.238    1.443***     2.661***     89.122   91.609   0.438**     0.882**     90.968          0              0
Standard Error                 (0.2173)    (0.4588)                       (0.3675)     (0.6681)                       (0.1944)    (0.3887)
FWER p-value                      0.7069                                   0.0037                                      0.1441
       N                          3397       3397                           1938         1938                           5335        5335
                                                                                     Cohort 2
   Treatment        94.005        0.258      1.128    92.629    91.573    1.283***     2.677***     90.194   93.345   0.526***    1.795***    91.603        0.041          0.222
Standard Error                 (0.1979)    (0.8522)                       (0.4653)     (0.9389)                       (0.1923)    (0.6466)
FWER p-value                      0.4764                                   0.0764                                      0.0764
       N                          3076       3076                           1078         1078                           4154        4154
                                                                                   Pooled Cohorts
   Treatment        93.053        0.055      0.156    92.515    90.655    1.380***     2.652***     89.596   92.265   0.491***    1.210***    91.291          0              0
Standard Error                 (0.1466)    (0.4122)                       (0.2878)     (0.5405)                       (0.1376)    (0.3358)
FWER p-value                      0.743                                    0.0004                                      0.011
       N                          6473       6473                           3016         3016                           9489        9489
* p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<.01.
CM = Control Mean, ITT = Intent to Treat, CCM = Control Complier Mean, TOT = Treatment on Treated.
Family-wise error rate (FWER) is the probability that a given family of tests (defined for three grade groups, grades 1-4, 5-7 and pooled 1-7, and three cohort groups, cohort 1,
cohort 2, and pooled cohort 1 and 2 total, so 9 families of outcomes are shown in the table) includes at least one false positive result. The FWER p-value is based on 100,000
iterations of randomly re-assigning the treatment grade and treatment-condition-within-grade indicators in our sample.
The samples are for both cohorts, with each student having one observation for each year of treatment.
The regression covariates include: baseline days present, baseline excused absences, baseline unexcused absences, baseline GPA, baseline course failures, baseline age, baseline
old for grade, dummy for male, dummy for black, dummy for Hispanic, dummy for learning disability, and dummy for missing baseline data.
We include randomization block groups which are school-by-grade-by-group. In cohort 1, these blocks are only school-by-grade. For cohort 2, we added block groups based on a
student's original treatment assignment in cohort 1.
We cluster at the student level because students have multiple observations, one for each year of treatment.




                                                                                                                                                                    56
                                    Table 8. Days absent greater than 5, 10, 15, 20 by age (pooled years).
                                               Grades 1 - 4                                    Grades 5 - 7                                H0: Grades 1-4 =
                                                                                                                                           Grades 5-7 p-value
                                               Control        Treatment    Control             Control    Treatment     Control            Treatment
                                               Mean           Students     Complier Mean       Mean       Students      Complier Mean      Students
                                                                          Cohort 1
Absent >5dys                                   0.846          -0.018       0.872               0.895      -0.05         0.932              0.477
                                                              (0.0303)                                    (0.0317)
Absent >10dys                                  0.579          0.001         0.629              0.677       -0.125***    0.743              0.043
                                                              (0.0406)                                    (0.0467)
Absent >15dys                                  0.326          0.053         0.338              0.433       -0.131***    0.49               0.002
                                                              (0.0383)                                    (0.0468)
Absent >20dys                                  0.179          0.045         0.184              0.273       -0.109***    0.322              0.004
                                                              (0.0321)                                    (0.0419)
                                                                               Cohort 2
Absent >5dys                                   0.692                0.011        0.746               0.864  -0.136*** 0.958                  0.113
                                                                    (0.0773)                               (0.0514)
Absent >10dys                                       0.422           -0.11        0.523               0.58  -0.089         0.647              0.839
                                                                    (0.0781)                               (0.0665)
Absent >15dys                                       0.232           -0.096       0.328               0.352 -0.091         0.393              0.956
                                                                    (0.0654)                               (0.0641)
Absent >20dys                                       0.128           -0.076       0.213               0.216  -0.129**      0.28               0.457
                                                                    (0.0508)                               (0.0509)
                                                                            Pooled Cohorts
Absent >5dys                                        0.783           -0.004       0.818               0.885  -0.076*** 0.933                  0.087
                                                                    (0.0322)                               (0.0270)
Absent >10dys                                       0.515           -0.03        0.569               0.646  -0.116*** 0.709                  0.105
                                                                    (0.0368)                               (0.0380)
Absent >15dys                                       0.288           0.01         0.314               0.408  -0.121*** 0.456                  0.009
                                                                    (0.0334)                               (0.0377)
Absent >20dys                                       0.158           0.008        0.183               0.255  -0.118*** 0.305                  0.003
                                                                    (0.0270)                               (0.0327)
Note: Treatment students and treatment grade columns show treatment on the treated estimates. Each row shows results from a separate regression, with a fixed
effect for grade 5-7 status and separate treatment-grade and within-treatment-grade-treatment-assignment indicators for grades 1-4 and 5-7. Standard errors
clustered at the student-level. For intent to treat estimates, see Appendix Table 8a.
* p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<.01.
The samples are for both cohorts, with each student having one observation for each year of treatment.


                                                                                                                                                          57
The regression covariates include: baseline days present, baseline excused absences, baseline unexcused absences, baseline GPA, baseline course failures, baseline age,
baseline old for grade, dummy for male, dummy for black, dummy for Hispanic, dummy for learning disability, and dummy for missing baseline data.
We include randomization block groups which are school-by-grade-by-group. In cohort 1, these blocks are only school-by-grade. For cohort 2, we added block groups
based on a student's original treatment assignment in cohort 1.
We cluster at the student level because students have multiple observations, one for each year of treatment.




                                                                                                                                                                    58
                                                     Table 9. Year effects (outcome ­ days absent).

                                   Grades 1 - 4                                        Grades 5 - 7
                                   Control        Treatment     Control Complier       Control           Treatment   Control Complier
                                   Mean           Students      Mean                   Mean              Students    Mean
                                                                 Cohort 1
Year 1                             12.299         0.871                12.753          14.335            -3.660***   16.942
                                                  (0.8336)                                               (0.9820)
Year 2                             13.383         0.524                 13.493         18.553            -4.997***   20.25
                                                  (0.9919)                                               (1.5325)


H0:Y1=Y2; p-value                                 0.435                                                  0.202
                                                                 Cohort 2
Year 1                             10.609         -2.029              12.942           13.294            -2.837*     15.044
                                                  (1.7392)                                               (1.6818)
Year 2                             10.08          -1.977                12.889         15.674            -5.190**    18.137
                                                  (1.6726)                                               (2.0186)


H0:Y1=Y2; p-value                                 0.506                                                  0.875
                                                              Pooled Cohorts
Year 1                             11.61          -0.034              12.546           14.012            -3.368***   16.201
                                                  (0.7804)                                               (0.8467)
Year 2                             12.02          -0.265                12.962         17.648            -5.041***   19.286
                                                  (0.8660)                                               (1.2210)


H0:Y1=Y2; p-value                                 0.891                                                  0.283
Note: Treatment students and treatment grade columns show treatment on the treated estimates. Each row is a separate regression. For
intent to treat estimates, see Appendix Table 9a. For cumulative effects for individuals who were in the treatment group in cohort 1 and
re-randomized in cohort 2, see Appendix Table 9b.
* p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<.01.
The samples are for both cohorts, with each student having one observation for each year of treatment.


                                                                                                                                           59
The regression covariates include: baseline days present, baseline excused absences, baseline unexcused absences, baseline GPA, baseline
course failures, baseline age, baseline old for grade, dummy for male, dummy for black, dummy for Hispanic, dummy for learning disability,
and dummy for missing baseline data.
We include randomization block groups which are school-by-grade-by-group. In cohort 1, these blocks are only school-by-grade. For cohort
2, we added block groups based on a student's original treatment assignment in cohort 1.
We cluster at the student level because students have multiple observations, one for each year of treatment.




                                                                                                                                             60
                                     Table 10. Academic impacts (pooled years).

                                                  Cohort 1
                              Control Mean                Treatment Students      Control Complier Mean
GPA                           2.295                       -0.04                   2.225
                                                          (0.0530)
Course Failures               0.534                       0.002                   0.601
                                                          (0.0719)
Math Scores
Standardized MAP*             0                            -0.152**               0.052
                                                          (0.0770)
Standardized Official Test*   0                           -0.039                  -0.019
                                                          (0.0686)
Valid MAP Data                0.929                         0.039**               0.921
                                                          (0.0191)
Valid Official Data           0.957                       0.003                   0.976
                                                          (0.0141)
Standardized MAP (imputed)    -1.344                      -0.047                  -1.357
                                                          (0.0581)
Reading Scores
Standardized MAP*             0                           -0.025                  -0.007
                                                          (0.0752)
Standardized Official Test*   0                           -0.066                  -0.024
                                                          (0.0638)
Valid MAP Data                0.928                        0.038**                0.927
                                                          (0.0193)
Valid Official Data           0.958                       0.009                   0.971
                                                          (0.0137)
Standardized MAP (imputed)    -1.318                      -0.005                  -1.333
                                                          (0.0569)
                                                  Cohort 2
                              Control Mean                Treatment Students      Control Complier Mean
GPA                           2.67                        -0.01                   2.454

                                                                                                          61
                                                        (0.0862)
Course Failures               0.357                     -0.037               0.437
                                                        (0.1135)
Math Scores
Standardized MAP*             0                         0                    -0.055
                                                        (0.1114)
Standardized Official Test*   0                         -0.021               -0.062
                                                        (0.1008)
Valid MAP Data                0.948                     0.005                0.956
                                                        (0.0230)
Valid Official Data           0.952                     0.013                0.961
                                                        (0.0213)
Standardized MAP (imputed)    -0.225                    -0.004               -0.208
                                                        (0.0428)
Reading Scores
Standardized MAP*             0                         -0.084               0.01
                                                        (0.1120)
Standardized Official Test*   0                         -0.064               -0.067
                                                        (0.0988)
Valid MAP Data                0.939                     0.012                0.942
                                                        (0.0250)
Valid Official Data           0.94                      0.029                0.936
                                                        (0.0232)
Standardized MAP (imputed)    -0.242                     -0.076*             -0.167
                                                        (0.0426)
                                             Pooled Cohorts
                              Control Mean              Treatment Students   Control Complier Mean
GPA                           2.435                     -0.026               2.319
                                                        (0.0454)
Course Failures               0.468                     -0.014               0.532
                                                        (0.0608)
Math Scores


                                                                                                     62
Standardized MAP*                               0                                 -0.085                         0.01
                                                                                  (0.0655)
Standardized Official Test*                     0                                 -0.033                         -0.037
                                                                                  (0.0570)
Valid MAP Data                                  0.939                             0.024                          0.937
                                                                                  (0.0150)
Valid Official Data                             0.955                             0.007                          0.969
                                                                                  (0.0119)
Standardized MAP (imputed)                      -0.921                            -0.026                         -0.876
                                                                                  (0.0377)
Reading Scores
Standardized MAP*                               0                                       -0.047                          -0.009
                                                                                        (0.0653)
Standardized Official Test*                        0                                    -0.066                          -0.044
                                                                                        (0.0546)
Valid MAP Data                                     0.934                                 0.026*                         0.932
                                                                                        (0.0158)
Valid Official Data                                0.951                                0.016                           0.957
                                                                                        (0.0122)
Standardized MAP (imputed)                         -0.911                               -0.007                          -0.87
                                                                                        (0.0370)
* The official test used for accountability purposes switched after year 1 of cohort 2, but the MAP was given all four years that cover both cohorts.
Note: Treatment students and treatment grade columns show treatment on the treated estimates. For intent to treat estimates, see Appendix Table 10.
* p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<.01.
The samples are for both cohorts, with each student having one observation for each year of treatment.
Standardized MAP and Standardized Official Test refer to test scores standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation one. Valid MAP Data and Valid
Official Data are binary variables that indicate whether valid test score data is available for the student. Standardized MAP (imputed) is a variable that
includes imputed values when valid test scores are not available. The imputation procedure is described in the text.
The regression covariates include: baseline days present, baseline excused absences, baseline unexcused absences, baseline GPA, baseline course failures,
baseline age, baseline old for grade, dummy for male, dummy for black, dummy for Hispanic, dummy for learning disability, and dummy for missing
baseline data.
We include randomization block groups which are school-by-grade-by-group. In cohort 1, these blocks are only school-by-grade. For cohort 2, we added
block groups based on a student's original treatment assignment in cohort 1.
We cluster at the student level because students have multiple observations, one for each year of treatment.



                                                                                                                                                             63
              Table 11. Academic impacts, by age group (pooled years).

                                                               Cohort 1
                                                          Grades 1 ­ 4                         Grades 5 - 7               H0: Grades 1-4 =
                                                                                                                         Grades 5-7 p-value
                                               Control   Treatment        Control   Control   Treatment        Control   Treatment Students
                                                Mean      Students       Complier    Mean      Students       Complier
                                                                           Mean                                 Mean
GPA                                             2.413     -0.027           2.35     2.087      -0.096           2.077          0.498
                                                         (0.0721)                             (0.0712)
Course Failures                                 0.427      0.04            0.443    0.722      -0.025          0.808           0.655
                                                         (0.0891)                             (0.1157)
Math Scores
Standardized MAP*                                 0       -0.069           0.019      0       -0.261**         0.088           0.204
                                                         (0.0985)                             (0.1145)
Standardized Official Test*                       0        0.005           0.027      0        -0.069          -0.063          0.582
                                                         (0.1022)                             (0.0892)
Valid MAP Data                                  0.939      0.023           0.946    0.911       0.054*         0.893           0.429
                                                         (0.0237)                             (0.0312)
Valid Official Data                             0.959     -0.007           0.986    0.956       0.005          0.973           0.682
                                                         (0.0214)                             (0.0187)
Standardized MAP (imputed)                      -1.337       0             -1.359   -1.358     -0.114          -1.357
                                                         (0.0739)                             (0.1008)
Reading Scores
Standardized MAP*                                 0       -0.018           -0.005     0        -0.031          -0.015           0.93
                                                         (0.1011)                             (0.1029)
Standardized Official Test*                       0       -0.045           0.064      0        -0.071          -0.107          0.841
                                                         (0.0940)                             (0.0832)
Valid MAP Data                                  0.934      0.019           0.947    0.916       0.056*         0.908           0.338
                                                         (0.0246)                             (0.0304)
Valid Official Data                              0.96     -0.012           0.988    0.956        0.02          0.963           0.245
                                                         (0.0215)                             (0.0175)
Standardized MAP (imputed)                      -1.23        0             -1.243   -1.473      0.052          -1.535
                                                         (0.0681)                             (0.1025)
                                                                Cohort 2
                                                                                                                         H0: Grades 1-4 =
                                                          Grades 1 ­ 4                         Grades 5 - 7
                                                                                                                         Grades 5-7 p-value



                                                                                                                                          64
                              Control   Treatment        Control   Control   Treatment        Control   Treatment Students
                               Mean      Students       Complier    Mean      Students       Complier
                                                          Mean                                 Mean
GPA                           2.791       0.045           2.477    2.344      -0.047           2.376           0.56
                                        (0.1227)                             (0.0996)
Course Failures               0.216       0.129          0.199     0.739      -0.312*         0.817           0.043
                                        (0.1298)                             (0.1748)
Math Scores
Standardized MAP*               0         0.144          -0.122      0        -0.102          -0.059          0.248
                                        (0.1593)                             (0.1410)
Standardized Official Test*     0         0.036          -0.085      0        -0.021          -0.107          0.772
                                        (0.1401)                             (0.1366)
Valid MAP Data                0.949       -0.02          0.974     0.947       0.037          0.933           0.197
                                        (0.0346)                             (0.0267)
Valid Official Data           0.667      -0.015          0.885     0.943       0.050*         0.927            0.11
                                        (0.0299)                             (0.0274)
Standardized MAP (imputed)    -0.237     0.111**         -0.279    -0.192    -0.199**         -0.079
                                        (0.0490)                             (0.0855)
Reading Scores
Standardized MAP*               0        -0.049        -0.003        0         -0.07          -0.035          0.923
                                        (0.1654)                             (0.1388)
Standardized Official Test*     0          0.01        -0.091        0        -0.114          -0.08           0.517
                                        (0.1418)                             (0.1272)
Valid MAP Data                0.937      -0.001         0.942      0.943       0.034           0.94           0.455
                                        (0.0382)                             (0.0274)
Valid Official Data           0.653       0.011         0.844      0.945       0.046*         0.935           0.412
                                        (0.0334)                             (0.0268)
Standardized MAP (imputed)    -0.249     -0.002        -0.261      -0.223     -0.111          -0.102
                                        (0.0477)                             (0.0901)
                                            Pooled Cohorts
                                                                                                         H0: Grades 1-4 =
                                         Grades 1 ­ 4                         Grades 5 - 7
                                                                                                        Grades 5-7 p-value
                              Control   Treatment        Control   Control   Treatment        Control   Treatment Students
                               Mean      Students       Complier    Mean      Students       Complier
                                                          Mean                                 Mean
GPA                           2.567      -0.001           2.407    2.166      -0.082           2.211          0.348
                                        (0.0634)                             (0.0588)
Course Failures               0.341       0.072          0.346     0.727       -0.12          0.786           0.116
                                        (0.0733)                             (0.0979)

                                                                                                                         65
Math Scores
Standardized MAP*                                              0           0.025          -0.036           0        -0.194**          0.027                0.084
                                                                         (0.0888)                                   (0.0907)
Standardized Official Test*                                    0           0.021          -0.033           0         -0.059           -0.071               0.474
                                                                         (0.0840)                                   (0.0745)
Valid MAP Data                                               0.944         0.006          0.955          0.928       0.046**          0.915                0.169
                                                                         (0.0208)                                   (0.0204)
Valid Official Data                                          0.794         -0.01          0.927          0.952        0.02            0.958                0.214
                                                                         (0.0179)                                   (0.0156)
Standardized MAP (imputed)                                   -0.886        0.075*         -0.937        -0.994       -0.112           -0.849
                                                                         (0.0450)                                   (0.0712)
Reading Scores
Standardized MAP*                                              0            -0.025            -0.013          0       -0.034          -0.045                 0.945
                                                                           (0.0915)                                  (0.0847)
Standardized Official Test*                                      0          -0.026            -0.009          0       -0.077          -0.108                 0.638
                                                                           (0.0810)                                  (0.0702)
Valid MAP Data                                                 0.936         0.012            0.939         0.929     0.045**          0.925                 0.269
                                                                           (0.0224)                                  (0.0203)
Valid Official Data                                            0.786        -0.002            0.909         0.953      0.029*          0.954                 0.207
                                                                           (0.0191)                                  (0.0147)
Standardized MAP (imputed)                                    -0.827         0.001            -0.835       -1.083     -0.079          -0.862
                                                                           (0.0422)                                  (0.0743)
* The official test used for accountability purposes switched after year 1 of cohort 2, but the MAP was given all four years that cover both cohorts.
Note: treatment students and treatment grade columns show treatment on the treated estimates. For intent to treat estimates, see Appendix Table 11.
* p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<.01.
CM = Control Mean, ITT = Intent to Treat, CCM = Control Complier Mean, TOT = Treatment on Treated.
The samples are for both cohorts, with each student having one observation for each year of treatment.
Standardized MAP and Standardized Official Test refer to test scores standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation one. Valid MAP Data and Valid Official
Data are binary variables that indicate whether valid test score data is available for the student. Standardized MAP (imputed) is a variable that includes imputed values
when valid test scores are not available. The imputation procedure is described in the text.
The regression covariates include: baseline days present, baseline excused absences, baseline unexcused absences, baseline GPA, baseline course failures, baseline
age, baseline old for grade, dummy for male, dummy for black, dummy for Hispanic, dummy for learning disability, and dummy for missing baseline data.
We include randomization block groups which are school-by-grade-by-group. In cohort 1, these blocks are only school-by-grade. For cohort 2, we added block groups
based on a student's original treatment assignment in cohort 1.
We cluster at the student level because students have multiple observations, one for each year of treatment.




                                                                                                                                                                       66
 Table 12. Cohort 1 balance check between schools and grades, excluding treatment students.

                                           Control      Treatment Grade            Control     Treatment School
                                           Grade            (excluding             School         (excluding
                                                       treatment students)                     treatment grade)
              Students (n)                  1112               1846                 6614             1112
         Baseline Present data             150.36            150.18                150.37           150.36
         Baseline Absent data                16.1            16.13                  15.69             16.1          *
             Percent Male                    0.53             0.53                   0.53             0.53
                 Age                         9.48             8.74           **      8.97             9.48
         Percent Old for Grade               0.22             0.16           **      0.18             0.22
             Percent Black                   0.6              0.57                   0.58             0.6
           Percent Hispanic                  0.37             0.39                   0.39             0.37
      Percent Learning Disability            0.12             0.11                   0.11             0.12
Number of Course Failures in 2010-11         0.65              0.7                   0.62             0.65
               SY
       GPA in 2010-11 SY                     2.23             2.21                   2.24             2.23


           P-value on F-test
    Without missing data indicators                          p=.515                p=.209
     With missing data indicators                            p=.48                 p=.213
Note: The length of the CPS school year changed during the study. The number of days in the school year, by year,
was: 2010-11,170; 2011-12, 170; 2012-13, 181; 2013-14, 178; 2014-15, 180.In the study sample, days present and days
absent do not sum to total days in the school year because some students were not enrolled as CPS students or the full
school year. P-value on null hypothesis that average values are jointly the same for treatment and control group comes
from regressing treatment grade and school assignment indicator against the baseline covariates, with imputed missing
values and a missing indicator for observations that had missing values. All exclude treatment assigned students.
Standard error is clustered at the grade-school level.
* p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.




                                                                                                                    67
                              Table 13. Spillover effects cohort 1 - Main outcomes (excluding treatment students).

                                                   Grades 1 - 4                               Grades 5 ­ 7                                All Grades
                                       Control      Treatment      Treatment      Control      Treatment      Treatment      Control      Treatment     Treatment
                                        Mean          Grade         Schools        Mean          Grade         Schools        Mean          Grade        Schools
Days Absent
                                        12.532        -0.154         0.465        14.864        1.626***        0.105        13.513         0.321          0.298
Standard Error
                                                     (0.4602)      (0.4311)                     (0.5699)      (0.4102)                     (0.3557)      (0.2929)
FWER p-value
                                                      0.9959        0.8859                       0.1155        0.9959                       0.9203        0.8925
Days Present
                                       158.584        0.202          -0.62        155.672        -1.798*        1.216*       157.305        -0.713         0.071
Standard Error
                                                     (0.7748)      (0.6798)                     (0.9850)      (0.7017)                     (0.6276)      (0.5059)
FWER p-value
                                                      0.9959        0.9203                       0.5366        0.5664                       0.8725        0.9959
Percent Present
                                        92.598        0.098          -0.271        91.11       -1.026***         0.07         91.98         -0.233        -0.146
Standard Error
                                                     (0.2750)      (0.2589)                     (0.3720)      (0.2775)                     (0.2219)      (0.1829)
FWER p-value
                                                      0.9955        0.8925                       0.1361        0.9959                       0.8925        0.9279


N
                                         9703                                      5014                                       18448


* p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<.01.
Family-wise error rate (FWER) is the probability that a given family of tests (defined for three grade groups, grades 1-4, 5-7 and pooled 1-7, and three cohort
groups, cohort 1, cohort 2, and pooled cohort 1 and 2 total, so 9 families of outcomes are shown in the table) includes at least one false positive result. The FWER
p-value is based on 100,000 iterations of randomly re-assigning the treatment grade and treatment-condition-within-grade indicators in our sample.
The samples are for both cohorts, with each student having one observation for each year of treatment.
The regression covariates include: baseline days present, baseline excused absences, baseline unexcused absences, baseline GPA, baseline course failures,
baseline age, baseline old for grade, dummy for male, dummy for black, dummy for Hispanic, dummy for learning disability, and dummy for missing baseline
data.
We include randomization school-level block groups. Standard errors clustered at the grade-school.
For segmented grade analysis, grades 1-4 and 5-7, we limited the sample to triple school blocks which include treatment schools within the same grade group.




                                                                                                                                                                       68
           Table 14. Spillover effects - Academic outcomes (exclude treatment students).

                          Grades 1 - 4                       Grades 5 - 7                       All Grades
                  CM       Treatment     Treatment   CM      Treatment   Treatment     CM      Treatment     Treatment
                             Grade        School               Grade      School                 Grade        School
GPA               2.361      0.027         0.013     2.02       0.06       0.121       2.214     0.036         0.033
                           (0.0559)      (0.0466)            (0.0913)       (0.0847)           (0.0503)      (0.0462)
                            1.0000        1.0000              1.0000        0.9971              1.0000        1.0000
Course            0.442     -0.034         0.017     0.839    -0.103        -0.074     0.607    -0.046        -0.016
Failures
                           (0.0618)      (0.0575)            (0.1358)       (0.1342)           (0.0713)      (0.0698)
                            1.0000        1.0000              1.0000        1.0000              1.0000        1.0000
Math Scores
Standardized      0.006     -0.094        -0.009     0.039     0.086        -0.116      0        -0.03        -0.055
MAP*
                           (0.0620)      (0.0546)            (0.0838)       (0.0738)           (0.0549)      (0.0505)
                            0.9947        1.0000              1.0000        0.9919              1.0000        0.9999
Standardized      0.008     -0.057        -0.058     0.04     -0.013        -0.099      0       -0.049        -0.076
Official Test*
                           (0.0817)      (0.0645)            (0.0922)       (0.0788)           (0.0594)      (0.0529)
                            1.0000        1.0000              1.0000        0.9994              1.0000        0.9971
Valid MAP         0.904     -0.001         0.031*    0.904    -0.007         0.012     0.902     0.002        0.024**
Data
                           (0.0180)      (0.0170)            (0.0204)       (0.0156)           (0.0119)      (0.0110)
                            1.0000        0.9661              1.0000        1.0000              1.0000        0.8365
Valid Official    0.942      0.021         0.007     0.938      0            0.016     0.939     0.008         0.014
Data
                           (0.0145)      (0.0115)            (0.0165)       (0.0123)           (0.0101)      (0.0087)
                            0.9961        1.0000              1.0000        0.9994              1.0000        0.9883
Standardized      -1.47     -0.026         0.111       -       0.158         0.093       -      -0.021         0.123
MAP                                                  2.233                             1.755
(imputed)
                           (0.1842)      (0.1734)            (0.1566)       (0.1007)           (0.1376)      (0.1273)


Reading
Scores
Standardized      0.02      -0.031        -0.015     0.007     0.087        -0.026      0        0.007        -0.018
MAP*
                           (0.0655)      (0.0588)            (0.0854)       (0.0688)           (0.0518)      (0.0484)
                            1.0000        1.0000              1.0000        1.0000              1.0000        1.0000
Standardized      0.018     -0.019         0.012     0.001     0.034        -0.027      0       -0.005        -0.006
Official Test*
                           (0.0672)      (0.0591)            (0.0856)       (0.0703)           (0.0518)      (0.0467)
                            1.0000        1.0000              1.0000        1.0000              1.0000        1.0000
Valid MAP         0.911      0.04         -0.021     0.907    -0.003         0.013     0.907     0.024        -0.004
Data
                           (0.0343)      (0.0344)            (0.0180)       (0.0153)           (0.0214)      (0.0212)
                            0.9998        1.0000              1.0000        1.0000              0.9999        1.0000


                                                                                                              69
Valid Official     0.946           0.016        0.009     0.941      -0.004        0.016      0.941      0.005        0.015*
Data
                                (0.0141)      (0.0105)              (0.0168)     (0.0124)               (0.0099)     (0.0084)
                                0.9998         1.0000                1.0000       0.9992                1.0000       0.9642
Standardized       -1.41           0.276       -0.008       -        0.033         0.248        -        0.076        0.143
MAP                                                       1.855                               1.577
(imputed)
                                (0.2202)      (0.1931)              (0.2329)     (0.1672)               (0.1646)     (0.1645)


N                  5751                                    5014                              13890


* The official test used for accountability purposes switched after year 1 of cohort 2, but the MAP was given all four years
that cover both cohorts.
We include randomization school-level block groups. Standard errors clustered at the grade-school.
Family-wise error rate (FWER) p-value is provided below the standard error. FWER is the probability that a given family
of tests (defined for three grade groups, grades 1-4, 5-7 and pooled 1-7, so 30 families of outcomes (excluding imputed
values) are shown in the table) includes at least one false positive result. The FWER p-value is based on 100,000
iterations of randomly re-assigning the treatment school and treatment-grade-within-school indicators in our sample.

For segmented grade analysis, grades 1-4 and 5-7, we limited the sample to triple school blocks which include treatment
schools within the same grade group.
The regression covariates include: baseline days present, baseline excused absences, baseline unexcused absences, baseline
GPA, baseline course failures, baseline age, baseline old for grade, dummy for male, dummy for black, dummy for Hispanic,
dummy for learning disability, and dummy for missing baseline data.
CM = Control Mean
* p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<.01 .




                                                                                                                      70
Appendix Table 2a. Cohort 1 students who stayed in study schools
           and were randomized again in cohort 2.

                  Baseline Characteristics   Control     Treatment
          Students (n)                        231              345
          Days Present in 2012-13 SY         166.05           166.31
          Baseline Absent data                13.61            13.79
          Percent Male                        0.57             0.53
          Age                                 9.93             9.91
          Percent Old for Grade               0.16             0.16
          Percent Black                       0.51             0.51
          Percent Hispanic                    0.46             0.44
          Percent Learning Disability         0.08              0.1
          Missing GPA data in year 1213       0.01              0
          Number of Course Failures in
          2012-13 SY                          0.55             0.56
          GPA in 2012-13 SY                   2.39              2.4

          P-value on F-test
          Without missing data indicators                     p=.921
          With missing data indicators                        p=.093
          * p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.

             Appendix Table 2b. Cohort 2 new entrants.

   Baseline Characteristics                           Control         Treatment
   Students (n)                                         880             694
   Days Present in SY12-13                             157.44          156.78
   Days Absent in SY12-13                              14.11            13.89
   Percent Male                                         0.52            0.53
   Age                                                  8.16            7.63
   Percent Old for Grade                                0.11            0.07
   Percent Black                                        0.45            0.44
   Percent Hispanic                                     0.5             0.48 *
   Percent Learning Disability                          0.05            0.03
   Number of Course Failures in 2012-13 SY              0.37            0.38
   GPA in 2012-13 SY                                    2.27            2.32
   P-value on F-test                                                   p=.176
   Notes: * p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.




                                                                                  71
                Appendix Table 3. Participation rates.

                      Year 1              Year 2               Either Year
             Treatment     Control   Treatment   Control   Treatment    Control
Cohort 1        0.5            0       0.46         0         0.52        0
Cohort 2        0.31           0       0.32         0         0.33        0
           Cohort 1 participants who were also randomized in Cohort 2
Cohort 1        0.52           0       0.52         0         0.54        0
Cohort 2        0.61           0       0.58         0         0.61        0




                                                                                  72
                    Appendix Table 5a. Main impacts with triple fixed effects (pooled years).

                    Control Mean       Intent to Treat   Treatment on the Treated       Control         Unadjusted         FWER
                                                                                     Complier Mean       p-value
                                                             Cohort 1
  Days Absent           14.107            -0.512*                 -1.022*                14.999            0.0895          0.3963
                                          (0.3015)               (0.6004)
  Days Present         156.644             1.123*                  2.241*                156.505           0.0680          0.3492
                                          (0.6150)               (1.2236)
Percent Present         91.609             0.376**                0.750**                91.099            0.0449          0.2794
                                          (0.1872)               (0.3727)
  Membership
    Days               170.751             0.611                   1.219                 171.504           0.2673          0.6224
                                          (0.5504)               (1.0972)
       N                 5335
                                                             Cohort 2
  Days Absent           11.465           -0.768***               -2.632***               14.221            0.0051          0.0817
                                          (0.2742)               (0.9388)
  Days Present          163.98             0.222                   0.763                 164.56            0.7176          0.9262
                                          (0.6150)               (2.1047)
Percent Present         93.345            0.458***                1.569***               91.828            0.0059          0.0830
                                          (0.1662)               (0.5675)
  Membership
    Days               175.445             -0.546                  -1.87                 178.781           0.3462          0.6578
                                          (0.5790)               (1.9920)
       N                 4154
                                                          Pooled Cohorts
  Days Absent           13.109           -0.666***               -1.635***               14.606            0.0014          0.0337
                                          (0.2078)               (0.5087)
  Days Present         159.416             0.805*                  1.975*                159.541           0.0667          0.3492
                                          (0.4388)               (1.0734)
Percent Present         92.265            0.443***                1.087***               91.414            0.0006          0.0184
                                          (0.1282)               (0.3136)
  Membership
    Days               172.525             0.139                   0.34                  174.147           0.7285          0.9262
                                          (0.3993)               (0.9797)
       N                 9489
* p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<.01.

The samples are for both cohorts, with each student having one observation for each year of treatment.
The regression covariates include: baseline days present, baseline excused absences, baseline unexcused absences, baseline GPA,
baseline course failures, baseline age, baseline old for grade, dummy for male, dummy for black, dummy for Hispanic, dummy for
learning disability, and dummy for missing baseline data.
We include randomization school-level block groups. Standard errors clustered at the grade-school.




                                                                                                                          73
Appendix Table 5b. Main outcome ­ Days absent (excluding students who were in cohort 1 treatment and re-randomized in cohort
                                                           2).

                                                                                                                                                              H0: Grades 1-4 =
                               Grades 1 - 4                                 Grades 5 ­ 7                                      All Grades
                                                                                                                                                             Grades 5-7 p-value
                  CM        ITT        TOT        CCM       CM       ITT            TOT            CCM       CM       ITT            TOT            CCM      ITT       TOT
                                                                                    Cohort 2
Treatment         10.371    -0.387     -2.045     13.398    14.514    -2.078**       -5.020**      17.314    11.441    -0.758**       -3.130**      14.849   0.063        0.266
Standard Error              (0.3432)   (1.7888)                      (0.8530)       (1.9918)                          (0.3388)       (1.3812)
N                          2866        2866                          891            891                               3757           3757
* p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<.01.
CM = Control Mean, ITT = Intent to Treat, CCM = Control Complier Mean, TOT = Treatment on Treated.
The samples are for cohort 2, excluding students who were in cohort 1 treatment and re-randomized in cohort 2 to avoid conflating 2 and 4 year effects. Each student has one
observation for each year of treatment.
The regression covariates include: baseline days present, baseline excused absences, baseline unexcused absences, baseline GPA, baseline course failures, baseline age, baseline
old for grade, dummy for male, dummy for black, dummy for Hispanic, dummy for learning disability, and dummy for missing baseline data.
We include randomization block groups which are school-by-grade-by-group. In cohort 1, these blocks are only school-by-grade. For cohort 2, we added block groups based on a
student's original treatment assignment in cohort 1.
We cluster at the student level because students have multiple observations, one for each year of treatment.




                                                                                                                                                                     74
      Appendix Table 5c. 4-Year effect for treatment students in Cohort 1, re-randomized in Cohort 2 (outcome ­ days absent).
                                   Grades 1 - 4                             Grades 5 ­ 7                                All Grades
                     CM            ITT       TOT      CCM       CM         ITT        TOT        CCM       CM         ITT        TOT        CCM
                                                                     Cohort 2
   Treatment         9.86         -1.313    -1.562    11.651   13.905     -2.29       -2.79     15.795     11.9      -1.724     -2.035     13.399
Standard Error                 (0.9244)    (1.0429)                      (2.5801)    (2.9588)                       (1.2807)   (1.4658)
       N                           210        210                          187         187                            397         397
* p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<.01.
CM = Control Mean, ITT = Intent to Treat, CCM = Control Complier Mean, TOT = Treatment on Treated.
The samples are for both cohorts, with each student having one observation for each year of treatment.
The regression covariates include: baseline days present, baseline excused absences, baseline unexcused absences, baseline GPA, baseline course
failures, baseline age, baseline old for grade, dummy for male, dummy for black, dummy for Hispanic, dummy for learning disability, and dummy
for missing baseline data.
We include randomization block groups which are school-by-grade-by-group. In cohort 1, these blocks are only school-by-grade. For cohort 2, we
added block groups based on a student's original treatment assignment in cohort 1.
We cluster at the student level because students have multiple observations, one for each year of treatment.




                                                                                                                                                    75
                                Appendix Table 6. Main impacts by age (pooled years with triple fixed effects).

                                            Grades 1 - 4              Grades 5 ­ 7             H0:             Grades 1 - 4                Grades 5 - 7            H0: Grades
                                        Control    Intent to      Control    Intent to      Grades 1-      Control    Treatment        Control    Treatment       1-4 = Grades
                                         Mean        Treat         Mean        Treat           4=         Complier      on the        Complier      on the         5-7 p-value
                                                                                            Grades 5-       Mean       Treated          Mean       Treated
                                                                                            7 p-value
                                                                                    Cohort 1
            Days Absent                  12.818       0.44        16.369      -2.209***         0          12.888          0.926        18.271      -4.047***            0
                                                    (0.3354)                   (0.5803)                                  (0.7081)                    (1.0609)
            Days Present                157.848       -0.04       154.53       3.069***        0.03        158.785        -0.084       153.193       5.623***         0.086
                                                    (0.7619)                   (1.0460)                                  (1.6032)                    (1.8979)
           Percent Present               92.391       -0.21       90.238       1.406***       0.003        92.335         -0.442        89.208       2.576***         0.014
                                                    (0.2043)                   (0.3677)                                  (0.4309)                    (0.6708)
         Membership Days                170.667        0.4       170.899         0.86         0.412        171.673         0.842       171.464         1.575          0.573
                                                    (0.7159)                   (0.8656)                                  (1.5056)                    (1.5800)
                 N                        3397                     1938                                     3397                        1938
                                                                                   Cohort 2
            Days Absent                  10.352      -0.470 *     14.454      -1.473 **       0            12.964         -2.052 *      15.668       -3.092 **           0
                                                    (0.2737)                  (0.6470)                                   (1.1939)                    (1.3572)
            Days Present                165.084       -0.116     161.013        0.704       0.03           166.092         -0.508      163.464         1.478          0.086
                                                    (0.7179)                  (1.1347)                                   (3.1333)                    (2.3738)
           Percent Present               94.005       0.249       91.573       0.966 **     0.003          92.672          1.085        90.844        2.028 **        0.014
                                                    (0.1694)                  (0.3767)                                   (0.7372)                    (0.7922)
         Membership Days                175.437       -0.587     175.467       -0.769       0.412          179.056          -2.56      179.132        -1.615          0.573
                                                    (0.6932)                  (1.0171)                                   (3.0359)                    (2.1421)
                 N                        3076                     1078                                     3076                        1078
                                                                                Pooled Cohorts
            Days Absent                  11.807       -0.03       15.771      -1.978***        0           12.686         -0.083        17.304      -3.784***            0
                                                    (0.2174)                   (0.4414)                                  (0.6125)                    (0.8410)
            Days Present                160.815       0.01       156.554       2.301***      0.03          161.546         0.028       157.028       4.402***         0.086
                                                    (0.5232)                   (0.7958)                                  (1.4744)                    (1.5059)
           Percent Present               93.053      0.035        90.655       1.268***     0.003          92.571           0.1         89.822       2.426***         0.014
                                                    (0.1332)                   (0.2761)                                  (0.3752)                    (0.5256)
         Membership Days                172.623       -0.02      172.325        0.323       0.412          174.232        -0.055       174.332         0.618          0.573
                                                    (0.4966)                   (0.6649)                                  (1.3996)                    (1.2693)
                 N                        6473                      3016                                   6473                        3016
* p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<.01.
The samples are for both cohorts, with each student having one observation for each year of treatment.
The regression covariates include: baseline days present, baseline excused absences, baseline unexcused absences, baseline GPA, baseline course failures, baseline age, baseline

                                                                                                                                                                    76
old for grade, dummy for male, dummy for black, dummy for Hispanic, dummy for learning disability, and dummy for missing baseline data.
We include randomization school-level block groups. Standard errors clustered at the grade-school.
For segmented grade analysis, grades 1-4 and 5-7, we limited the sample to triple school blocks which include treatment schools within the same grade group.




                                                                                                                                                               77
                  Appendix Table 7. Days absent by age, weighted by probability of being in older grades (pooled years).

                                                           Grades 1 - 4                                      Grades 5 - 7                     H0: Grades 1-4 = Grades 5-
                                                                                                                                                      7 p-value
                                            CM         ITT         TOT          CCM          CM           ITT           TOT          CCM          ITT            TOT
                                                                                 Cohort 1
              Treatment                   12.738      0.515        1.102        12.854    15.809       -2.122***      -4.142***     19.221         0.001           0.001
                                                    (0.3977)     (0.8492)                              (0.6642)       (1.2698)
                                                                                 Cohort 2
              Treatment                    10.52     -0.419       -1.697        13.326    14.408       -1.667**       -3.492**      15.747         0.13            0.391
                                                    (0.3484)     (1.3958)                              (0.7571)       (1.5581)
                                                                             Pooled Cohorts
              Treatment                   11.883       0.02        0.056       12.784    15.142        -1.972***      -4.048***     17.014           0             0.001
                                                    (0.2603)     (0.7144)                              (0.4890)       (0.9811)
* p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<.01.
CM = Control Mean, ITT = Intent to Treat, CCM = Control Complier Mean, TOT = Treatment on Treated.
Note: To conduct weighting, we pool together students in grades 1-4 and 5-7, and run a linear probability model that has as the dependent variable an indicator for
being in grades 5-7 with all of our baseline characteristics (other than age) as explanatory variables. We then take the predicted probability that results from this model
and re-weight the data using inverse probability weighting, so that the re-weighted average baseline characteristics for grades 1-4 and 5-7 are the same on average.
This procedure up-weights young students who look more like older students in terms of their baseline characteristics, and down-weights older students who look too
unlike younger students.
The samples are for both cohorts, with each student having one observation for each year of treatment.
The regression covariates include: baseline days present, baseline excused absences, baseline unexcused absences, baseline GPA, baseline course failures, baseline
age, baseline old for grade, dummy for male, dummy for black, dummy for Hispanic, dummy for learning disability, and dummy for missing baseline data.
We include randomization school-level block groups. Standard errors clustered at the grade-school.
For segmented grade analysis, grades 1-4 and 5-7, we limited the sample to triple school blocks which include treatment schools within the same grade group.




                                                                                                                                                                           78
Appendix Table 8a. Days absent greater than 5, 10, 15, 20 by age (pooled years, ITT estimates).

                                                                                 Grades 1 ­ 4                            Grades 5 - 7             H0: Grades 1-4 = Grades 5-
                                                                                                                                                           7 p-value
                                                                    Control Mean      Treatment Students       Control           Treatment            Treatment Students
                                                                                                                Mean              Students
                                                                                   Cohort 1
                          Absent >5dys                                  0.846               -0.009              0.895               -0.027                   0.418
                                                                                           (0.0144)                                (0.0173)
                         Absent >10dys                                  0.579                  0                0.677             -0.068***                  0.034
                                                                                           (0.0193)                                (0.0255)
                         Absent >15dys                                  0.326                0.025              0.433             -0.071***                  0.002
                                                                                           (0.0181)                                (0.0257)
                         Absent >20dys                                  0.179                0.021              0.273              -0.059**                  0.004
                                                                                           (0.0152)                                (0.0230)
                                                                                   Cohort 2
                          Absent >5dys                                  0.692                0.003              0.864             -0.065**                   0.028
                                                                                           (0.0179)                               (0.0252)
                         Absent >10dys                                  0.422               -0.025               0.58              -0.043                    0.636
                                                                                           (0.0181)                               (0.0326)
                         Absent >15dys                                  0.232               -0.022              0.352              -0.043                    0.536
                                                                                           (0.0151)                               (0.0318)
                         Absent >20dys                                  0.128               -0.017              0.216             -0.062**                   0.106
                                                                                           (0.0117)                               (0.0253)
                                                                                Pooled Cohorts
                          Absent >5dys                                  0.783               -0.002              0.885             -0.040***                  0.036
                                                                                           (0.0114)                                (0.0142)
                         Absent >10dys                                  0.515               -0.011              0.646             -0.060***                  0.037
                                                                                           (0.0131)                                (0.0200)
                         Absent >15dys                                  0.288                0.004              0.408             -0.063***                  0.004
                                                                                           (0.0119)                                (0.0200)
                         Absent >20dys                                  0.158                0.003              0.255             -0.061***                  0.001
                                                                                           (0.0096)                                (0.0174)
 Note: treatment students columns show intent to treat estimates.
 * p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<.01.
 The samples are for both cohorts, with each student having one observation for each year of treatment.
 The regression covariates include: baseline days present, baseline excused absences, baseline unexcused absences, baseline GPA, baseline course failures, baseline age,
 baseline old for grade, dummy for male, dummy for black, dummy for Hispanic, dummy for learning disability, and dummy for missing baseline data.

                                                                                                                                                                     79
We include randomization school-level block groups. Standard errors clustered at the grade-school.
For segmented grade analysis, grades 1-4 and 5-7, we limited the sample to triple school blocks which include treatment schools within the same grade group.




                                                                                                                                                               80
       Appendix Table 8b. Days absent greater than 5, 10, 15, 20 (pooled years).
             Attendance Indicators                  Control         Treatment Students        Control
                                                     Mean                                  Complier Mean
                                                Cohort 1
                 Absent >5dys                        0.864                 -0.03                0.895
                                                                         (0.0223)
                Absent >10dys                          0.615              -0.051                0.676
                                                                         (0.0310)
                Absent >15dys                          0.365              -0.023                0.401
                                                                         (0.0299)
                Absent >20dys                          0.213              -0.019                0.242
                                                                         (0.0257)
                                                Cohort 2
                 Absent >5dys                        0.739                -0.046                0.83
                                                                         (0.0502)
                Absent >10dys                          0.465              -0.104*               0.577
                                                                         (0.0539)
                Absent >15dys                          0.264             -0.102**               0.363
                                                                         (0.0472)
                Absent >20dys                          0.152             -0.103***              0.245
                                                                         (0.0374)
                                             Pooled Cohorts
                 Absent >5dys                         0.817               -0.034                0.865
                                                                         (0.0222)
                Absent >10dys                          0.558             -0.068**               0.628
                                                                         (0.0270)
                Absent >15dys                          0.327              -0.047*               0.376
                                                                         (0.0254)
                Absent >20dys                           0.19             -0.046**               0.236
                                                                         (0.0212)
Note: treatment students and treatment grade columns show treatment on the treated estimates. Each row is a
                            separate regression. * p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<.01.
   The samples are for both cohorts, with each student having one observation for each year of treatment.
  The regression covariates include: baseline days present, baseline excused absences, baseline unexcused
  absences, baseline GPA, baseline course failures, baseline age, baseline old for grade, dummy for male,
dummy for black, dummy for Hispanic, dummy for learning disability, and dummy for missing baseline data.
    We include randomization school-level block groups. Standard errors clustered at the grade-school.
   For segmented grade analysis, grades 1-4 and 5-7, we limited the sample to triple school blocks which
                          include treatment schools within the same grade group.




                                                                                                              81
  Appendix Table 8c. Days absent greater than 5, 10, 15, 20 (pooled years, ITT estimates).

                    Attendance Indicators                          Control Mean         Treatment
                                                                                         Students
                                              Cohort 1
                         Absent >5dys                                  0.864              -0.015
                                                                                         (0.0111)
                        Absent >10dys                                  0.615              -0.025
                                                                                         (0.0154)
                        Absent >15dys                                  0.365              -0.011
                                                                                         (0.0149)
                        Absent >20dys                                  0.213              -0.009
                                                                                         (0.0128)
                                              Cohort 2
                         Absent >5dys                                  0.739              -0.014
                                                                                         (0.0149)
                        Absent >10dys                                  0.465              -0.031*
                                                                                         (0.0159)
                        Absent >15dys                                  0.264             -0.030**
                                                                                         (0.0140)
                        Absent >20dys                                  0.152             -0.030***
                                                                                         (0.0111)
                                            Pooled Cohorts
                         Absent >5dys                                  0.817              -0.014
                                                                                         (0.0091)
                        Absent >10dys                                  0.558             -0.027**
                                                                                         (0.0110)
                        Absent >15dys                                  0.327              -0.019*
                                                                                         (0.0104)
                        Absent >20dys                                   0.19             -0.019**
                                                                                         (0.0087)
Note: treatment students column shows intent to treat estimates.
               * p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<.01.
The samples are for both cohorts, with each student having one observation for each year of treatment.
    The regression covariates include: baseline days present, baseline excused absences, baseline
  unexcused absences, baseline GPA, baseline course failures, baseline age, baseline old for grade,
dummy for male, dummy for black, dummy for Hispanic, dummy for learning disability, and dummy
                                      for missing baseline data.
 We include randomization school-level block groups. Standard errors clustered at the grade-school.
For segmented grade analysis, grades 1-4 and 5-7, we limited the sample to triple school blocks which
                       include treatment schools within the same grade group.




                                                                                                         82
                                                       Appendix Table 9a. Year effects.

                                                                           Outcome = Days Present
                                               Grades 1 ­ 4                                                         Grades 5 - 7
                    Control Mean   Intent to Treat     Treatment on         Control        Control Mean   Intent to       Treatment on      Control
                                                        the Treated      Complier Mean                      Treat          the Treated   Complier Mean
                                                                        Cohort 1
Year 1                152.497          0.196                  0.418          152.553         151.689      2.473**            4.493**        150.87
                                      (0.9480)           (1.2085)                                         -2.0037           (2.1312)
Year 2                163.661          -0.073             -0.154              164.98         157.582      3.989***          7.477***        155.117
                                      (0.9794)           (1.4384)                                         -2.0335           (2.6376)
H0:Y1=Y2; p-value                      0.828                  0.825                                        0.365             0.327
                                                                        Cohort 2
Year 1                163.698          -0.161             -0.735             164.843          161.98       -0.324            -0.703         164.414
                                      (0.9437)           (1.5411)                                         -4.2141           (3.1567)
Year 2                166.558          0.165                  0.687           166.38         159.995      4.080**           8.134***        158.048
                                      (0.9719)           (1.6709)                                         -3.9476           (3.0928)
H0:Y1=Y2; p-value                      0.795                  0.79                                         0.028             0.024
                                                                      Pooled Cohorts
Year 1                157.062          0.073                  0.211          157.328         154.881       1.439             2.772          156.071
                                      (0.6689)           (0.9506)                                         -1.9017           (1.7629)
Year 2                164.856           0.17                  0.473          165.306         158.341      4.055***          7.762***         156.4
                                      (0.6803)           (1.1059)                                         -1.8607           (2.0383)
H0:Y1=Y2; p-value                      0.912                  0.915                                        0.042             0.037
                                                                      Outcome = Percent of Days Present
                                               Grades 1 ­ 4                                                         Grades 5 - 7
                    Control Mean   Intent to Treat     Treatment on         Control        Control Mean   Intent to       Treatment on      Control
                                                        the Treated      Complier Mean                      Treat          the Treated   Complier Mean
                                                                        Cohort 1
     Year 1            92.425          -0.157             -0.335              92.128          91.314      1.076***          1.954***         90.17


                                                                                                                                                      83
                                      (0.2410)        (0.3564)                                           (0.5104)        (0.6325)
     Year 2            92.355          -0.151          -0.318             92.318          89.081         1.896***        3.553***            87.859
                                      (0.2821)        (0.5186)                                           (0.5866)        (0.9516)
H0:Y1=Y2; p-value                      0.985           0.977                                              0.088           0.069
                                                                     Cohort 2
     Year 1            93.798          0.241           1.105              92.632          92.261          0.802           1.743*             91.204
                                      (0.2418)        (0.5095)                                           (1.0759)        (1.0400)
     Year 2            94.225          0.272           1.137               92.64          90.849         1.801***        3.591***            89.204
                                      (0.2342)        (0.6145)                                           (0.9502)        (1.1550)
H0:Y1=Y2; p-value                      0.908           0.978                                              0.101           0.121
                                                                  Pooled Cohorts
     Year 1            92.984          0.047           0.136              92.454          91.608         0.961***        1.850***            90.617
                                      (0.1688)        (0.2892)                                           (0.4799)        (0.5370)
     Year 2            93.127          0.056           0.155               92.6           89.637         1.884***        3.606***            88.411
                                      (0.1839)        (0.4021)                                           (0.5030)        (0.7460)
H0:Y1=Y2; p-value                      0.964           0.972                                              0.015           0.014
                                                                 Outcome = Days Absent, ITT Estimates
                                     Grades 1-4                                                          Grades 5-7
                    Control Mean   Intent to Treat   Treatment on         Control      Intent to Treat                Treatment on Treated
                                                       Treated              Mean
                                                                     Cohort 1
     Year 1            12.299          0.408            0.871              14.335        -2.015***                         -3.660***
                                     (0.3933)          (0.8336)                           (0.5469)                          (0.9820)
     Year 2            13.383           0.25            0.524              18.553        -2.666***                         -4.997***
                                     (0.4770)          (0.9919)                           (0.8360)                          (1.5325)

H0:Y1=Y2; p-value                      0.444            0.435                              0.175                             0.202
                                                                     Cohort 2
     Year 1            10.609          -0.443           -2.029             13.294          -1.305                           -2.837*
                                     (0.3902)          (1.7392)                           (0.8244)                          (1.6818)


                                                                                                                                                      84
      Year 2               10.08              -0.473               -1.977              15.674         -2.604**                           -5.190**
                                             (0.4117)              (1.6726)                           (1.0731)                           (2.0186)

H0:Y1=Y2; p-value                              0.558                0.506                               0.996                              0.875
                                                                              Pooled Cohorts
      Year 1               11.61              -0.012               -0.034              14.012         -1.749***                          -3.368***
                                             (0.2744)              (0.7804)                           (0.4533)                           (0.8467)
      Year 2               12.02              -0.095               -0.265              17.648         -2.634***                          -5.041***
                                             (0.3165)              (0.8660)                           (0.6586)                           (1.2210)

H0:Y1=Y2; p-value                             0.888                 0.891                               0.304                              0.283
Note: treatment students columns show intent to treat estimates.
* p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<.01.
The samples are for both cohorts, with each student having one observation for each year of treatment.
The regression covariates include: baseline days present, baseline excused absences, baseline unexcused absences, baseline GPA, baseline course failures, baseline
age, baseline old for grade, dummy for male, dummy for black, dummy for Hispanic, dummy for learning disability, and dummy for missing baseline data.
We include randomization school-level block groups. Standard errors clustered at the grade-school.
For segmented grade analysis, grades 1-4 and 5-7, we limited the sample to triple school blocks which include treatment schools within the same grade group.




                                                                                                                                                                     85
                      Appendix Table 9b. Year effects (outcome ­ cumulative days absent across two years).

                                                                      Grades 1 - 4                                     Grades 5 - 7
                                                                      Control   Treatment          Control             Control     Treatment        Control
                                                                      Mean      Students           Complier Mean       Mean        Students         Complier Mean
                                                                             Cohort 1
Years 1 and 2                                                         25.067    1.713              12.168              32.264      -7.910***        22.049
                                                                                  (-1.5169)                                        (-2.1713)
                                                                               Cohort 2
Years 1 and 2                                                         20.273      -4.782*          15.918              28.454         -7.880**      20.525
                                                                                  (-2.8656)                                        (-3.1601)
                                                                          Pooled Cohorts
Year 1                                                                23.106     -0.378            13.105              31.067      -7.888***        21.391
                                                                                  (-1.3790)                                        (-1.7864)
Note: treatment students and treatment grade columns show treatment on the treated estimates. Each row is a separate regression.
* p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<.01.
The samples are for both cohorts, with each student having one observation for each year of treatment.
The regression covariates include: baseline days present, baseline excused absences, baseline unexcused absences, baseline GPA, baseline course failures, baseline
age, baseline old for grade, dummy for male, dummy for black, dummy for Hispanic, dummy for learning disability, and dummy for missing baseline data.
We include randomization school-level block groups. Standard errors clustered at the grade-school.
For segmented grade analysis, grades 1-4 and 5-7, we limited the sample to triple school blocks which include treatment schools within the same grade group.




                                                                                                                                                               86
                              Appendix Table 10. Academic impacts (pooled years, ITT estimates).

                                                             Cohort 1
                                                  Control Mean                     Treatment Students      FWER Adjusted P-Value
GPA                                       2.295                         -0.02                           0.9987
                                                                        (0.0266)
Course Failures                           0.534                         0.001                           1
                                                                        (0.0362)
Math Scores
Standardized MAP*                         0                              -0.073**                       0.5466
                                                                        (0.0372)
Standardized Official Test*               0                             -0.021                          0.9994
                                                                        (0.0360)
Valid MAP Data                            0.929                           0.019**                       0.5053
                                                                        (0.0096)
Valid Official Data                       0.957                         0.001                           1
                                                                        (0.0073)
Reading Scores
Standardized MAP*                         0                             -0.012                          0.9999
                                                                        (0.0366)
Standardized Official Test*               0                             -0.034                          0.9881
                                                                        (0.0334)
Valid MAP Data                            0.928                          0.019**                        0.5466
                                                                        (0.0097)
Valid Official Data                       0.958                         0.004                           0.9993
                                                                        (0.0071)
                                                             Cohort 2
                                                  Control Mean                     Treatment Students               1
GPA                                       2.67                          -0.003
                                                                        (0.0259)                        0.9999
Course Failures                           0.357                         -0.011
                                                                        (0.0341)
Math Scores                                                                                             1
Standardized MAP*                         0                             0
                                                                        (0.0355)                        1
Standardized Official Test*               0                             -0.008
                                                                        (0.0373)                        1
Valid MAP Data                            0.948                         0.002
                                                                        (0.0073)                        0.9993

                                                                                                                                   87
Valid Official Data                                     0.952                                   0.005
                                                                                                (0.0078)
Reading Scores                                                                                                                            0.9987
Standardized MAP*                                       0                                       -0.027
                                                                                                (0.0360)                                  0.9993
Standardized Official Test*                             0                                       -0.023
                                                                                                (0.0368)                                  0.9994
Valid MAP Data                                          0.939                                   0.004
                                                                                                (0.0079)                                  0.9548
Valid Official Data                                     0.94                                    0.011
                                                                                                (0.0085)
                                                                              Pooled Cohorts

                                                         Control Mean                           Treatment Students
GPA                                                                     2.435                                   -0.01                                     1
                                                                                                              (0.0188)
Course Failures                                                         0.468                                  -0.006
                                                                                                              (0.0251)                                  0.9478
Math Scores
Standardized MAP*                                                         0                                     -0.033                                  0.9994
                                                                                                               (0.0257)
Standardized Official Test*                                               0                                     -0.015                                  0.8192
                                                                                                               (0.0258)
Valid MAP Data                                                          0.939                                    0.009                                  0.9994
                                                                                                               (0.0058)
Valid Official Data                                                     0.955                                    0.003
                                                                                                               (0.0053)                                 0.9992
Reading Scores
Standardized MAP*                                                         0                                     -0.018                                  0.9628
                                                                                                               (0.0258)
Standardized Official Test*                                               0                                      -0.03                                  0.7628
                                                                                                               (0.0248)
Valid MAP Data                                                          0.934                                    0.010*                                 0.9396
                                                                                                               (0.0062)
Valid Official Data                                                     0.951                                    0.007                                  0.9987
                                                                                                               (0.0055)

* The official test used for accountability purposes switched after year 1 of cohort 2, but the MAP was given all four years that cover both cohorts.
Note: treatment students columns show intent to treat estimates.
Family-wise error rate (FWER) is the probability that a given family of tests (defined for pooled 1-7, and three cohort groups, cohort 1, cohort 2, and pooled


                                                                                                                                                                 88
cohort 1 and 2 total, so 30 families (excluding imputed values) of outcomes are shown in the table) includes at least one false positive result. The FWER p-
value is based on 100,000 iterations of randomly re-assigning the treatment-condition-within-grade indicators in our sample.
* p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<.01.
The samples are for both cohorts, with each student having one observation for each year of treatment.
The regression covariates include: baseline days present, baseline excused absences, baseline unexcused absences, baseline GPA, baseline course failures, baseline
age, baseline old for grade, dummy for male, dummy for black, dummy for Hispanic, dummy for learning disability, and dummy for missing baseline data.
We include randomization school-level block groups. Standard errors clustered at the grade-school.
For segmented grade analysis, grades 1-4 and 5-7, we limited the sample to triple school blocks which include treatment schools within the same grade group.




                                                                                                                                                                     89
                        Appendix Table 11. Academic impacts, by age group (pooled years, ITT estimates).
                                                                 Cohort 1
                                      Grades 1 - 4                                         Grades 5 - 7                  H0: Grades 1-4 = Grades
                                                                                                                               5-7 p-value
                           Control Mean         Treatment Students          Control Mean                  Control Mean     Treatment Students
        GPA                   2.413                   -0.013                   2.087                         -0.052               0.45
                                                     (0.0346)                                               (0.0393)
  Course Failures             0.427                    0.019                   0.722                         -0.014              0.668
                                                     (0.0427)                                               (0.0639)
    Math Scores
Standardized MAP*               0                     -0.032                     0                          -0.137**             0.163
                                                     (0.0457)                                               (0.0605)
Standardized Official
       Test*                    0                      0.003                     0                           -0.038              0.565
                                                     (0.0509)                                               (0.0497)
  Valid MAP Data              0.939                    0.011                   0.911                          0.029*             0.382
                                                     (0.0114)                                               (0.0170)
 Valid Official Data          0.959                   -0.003                   0.956                          0.003              0.686
                                                     (0.0104)                                               (0.0102)
  Reading Scores
Standardized MAP*               0                     -0.008                     0                           -0.016              0.912
                                                     (0.0470)                                               (0.0554)
Standardized Official
       Test*                    0                     -0.022                     0                           -0.039              0.802
                                                     (0.0467)                                               (0.0463)
  Valid MAP Data              0.934                    0.009                   0.916                          0.030*             0.301
                                                     (0.0119)                                               (0.0166)
 Valid Official Data           0.96                   -0.006                   0.956                          0.011              0.238
                                                     (0.0105)                                               (0.0096)
                                                                 Cohort 2
                                      Grades 1 - 4                                         Grades 5 - 7                  H0: Grades 1-4 = Grades
                                                                                                                               5-7 p-value
                           Control Mean         Treatment Students          Control Mean                  Control Mean     Treatment Students
        GPA                   2.791                   0.011                    2.344                         -0.022               0.56
                                                     (0.0289)                                               (0.0494)
  Course Failures             0.216                    0.03                    0.739                         -0.150*             0.049
                                                     (0.0304)                                               (0.0869)
    Math Scores
Standardized MAP*               0                     0.036                      0                           -0.049              0.291


                                                                                                                                                   90
                                                  (0.0405)                                              (0.0699)
Standardized Official
       Test*                 0                      0.011                      0                          -0.01              0.794
                                                  (0.0436)                                              (0.0676)
  Valid MAP Data           0.949                   -0.005                     0.947                       0.018              0.154
                                                  (0.0087)                                              (0.0132)
 Valid Official Data       0.667                   -0.003                     0.943                       0.024*             0.069
                                                  (0.0069)                                              (0.0135)
  Reading Scores
Standardized MAP*            0                     -0.012                      0                         -0.034              0.789
                                                  (0.0420)                                              (0.0692)
Standardized Official
       Test*                 0                     0.003                       0                         -0.055              0.455
                                                  (0.0444)                                              (0.0632)
  Valid MAP Data           0.937                      0                       0.943                       0.016              0.318
                                                  (0.0097)                                              (0.0136)
 Valid Official Data       0.653                   0.002                      0.945                       0.022*             0.199
                                                  (0.0077)                                              (0.0133)
                                                             Pooled Cohorts
                                   Grades 1 - 4                                        Grades 5 - 7                  H0: Grades 1-4 = Grades
                                                                                                                           5-7 p-value
                        Control Mean         Treatment Students         Control Mean                  Control Mean     Treatment Students
        GPA                2.567                     0                        2.166                      -0.043              0.268
                                                  (0.0229)                                              (0.0312)
  Course Failures          0.341                   0.026                      0.727                      -0.063              0.127
                                                  (0.0264)                                              (0.0520)
    Math Scores
Standardized MAP*            0                     0.008                       0                        -0.097**             0.055
                                                  (0.0302)                                              (0.0465)
Standardized Official        0                     0.008                       0                         -0.031              0.448
       Test*
                                                  (0.0332)                                              (0.0398)
  Valid MAP Data           0.944                   0.002                      0.928                      0.023**             0.092
                                                  (0.0070)                                              (0.0105)
 Valid Official Data       0.794                   -0.003                     0.952                       0.01               0.184
                                                  (0.0058)                                              (0.0083)

                                                                                                                                               91
    Reading Scores
  Standardized MAP*                    0                      -0.009                       0                        -0.017                      0.871
                                                             (0.0312)                                              (0.0438)
 Standardized Official                 0                       -0.01                       0                         -0.04                      0.544
        Test*
                                                             (0.0322)                                              (0.0375)
    Valid MAP Data                   0.936                     0.004                    0.929                       0.023**                     0.141
                                                             (0.0075)                                              (0.0105)
   Valid Official Data               0.786                    -0.001                    0.953                       0.015*                       0.12
                                                                (0.0062)                                               (0.0078)
* The official test used for accountability purposes switched after year 1 of cohort 2, but the MAP was given all four years that cover both cohorts.
* p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<.01.
The samples are for both cohorts, with each student having one observation for each year of treatment.
The regression covariates include: baseline days present, baseline excused absences, baseline unexcused absences, baseline GPA, baseline course failures,
baseline age, baseline old for grade, dummy for male, dummy for black, dummy for Hispanic, dummy for learning disability, and dummy for missing baseline
data.
We include randomization school-level block groups. Standard errors clustered at the grade-school.
For segmented grade analysis, grades 1-4 and 5-7, we limited the sample to triple school blocks which include treatment schools within the same grade group.




                                                                                                                                                               92
                Appendix Table 12. Cohort 1 balance check between schools and grades, excluding treatment students.

                                                                Grades 1-4
                                                   Control     Treatment Grade (excluding        Control   Treatment School (excluding
                                                   Grade           treatment students)           School          treatment grade)
Students (n)                                        617                   910                     3532                 617
Baseline Present data                              150.34                148.77              *    149.89             150.34
Baseline Absent data                                16.02                 16.4                     15.7              16.02
Percent Male                                        0.52                  0.52                     0.52               0.52
Age                                                 7.97                  7.25              **     7.51               7.97                *
Percent Old for Grade                               0.16                  0.08              **     0.12               0.16
Percent Black                                           0.6               0.55                     0.57                0.6
Percent Hispanic                                    0.37                     0.4                   0.4                0.37                **
Percent Learning Disability                             0.1               0.09                     0.09                0.1
Number of Course Failures in 2010-11 SY             0.48                  0.51                     0.52               0.48
GPA in 2010-11 SY                                   2.45                  2.43                     2.38               2.45


P-value on F-test
Without missing data indicators                                          p=.248                  p=.073
With missing data indicators                                              p=.27                  p=.079
                                                                 Grades 5-7
                                                  Control     Treatment Grade (excluding         Control   Treatment School (excluding
                                                  Grade       treatment students)                School    treatment grade)
Students (n)                                      495         402                                1689      495
Baseline Present data                             150.39      152.78                        **   151.5     150.39
Baseline Absent data                              16.2        15.63                              15.58     16.2                           **
Percent Male                                      0.54        0.58                               0.54      0.54
Age                                               11.36       11.13                              11.28     11.36
Percent Old for Grade                             0.29        0.25                               0.26      0.29
Percent Black                                     0.6         0.55                               0.59      0.6
Percent Hispanic                                  0.37        0.4                                0.36      0.37


                                                                                                                                         93
Percent Learning Disability                                 0.16        0.13                                      0.15         0.16
Number of Course Failures in 2010-11 SY                     0.84        1.15                                      0.74         0.84
GPA in 2010-11 SY                                           2           1.93                                      2.11         2


P-value on F-test
Without missing data indicators                                         p=.049                                    p=.6951
With missing data indicators                                            p=.065                                    p=.369
Note: The length of the CPS school year changed during the study. The number of days in the school year, by year, was: 2010-11,170; 2011-12, 170; 2012-13,
181; 2013-14, 178; 2014-15, 180.In the study sample, days present and days absent do not sum to total days in the school year because some students were not
enrolled as CPS students or the full school year. P-value on null hypothesis that average values are jointly the same for treatment and control group comes from
regressing treatment grade and school assignment indicator against the baseline covariates, with imputed missing values and a missing indicator for observations
that had missing values. All exclude treatment assigned students. Standard error is clustered at the grade-school level.
Limited sample to triple school blocks which include treatment schools with control grades within the same grade group
* p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.




                                                                                                                                                            94
                     Appendix Table 13. Spillover effects Cohort 1 - Main outcomes (excluding treatment students).

                                                     Grades 1 - 4                 Grades 5                                              All Grades
                                                                                     -7
                                         Control     Treatment      Treatment     Control     Treatment      Treatment     Control     Treatment      Treatment
                                          Mean         Grade         Schools       Mean         Grade         Schools       Mean         Grade         Schools
Days Absent                              12.532       -0.154          0.465        14.864      1.626**         0.105       13.513        0.321          0.298

Standard Error                                        (0.3850)       (0.3255)                  (0.6795)       (0.4875)                  (0.3214)       (0.2710)

FWER p-value                                           0.9939        0.8027                     0.3084        0.9963                     0.9165        0.8865

Days Present                             158.584        0.202         -0.62       155.672       -1.798         1.216       157.305       -0.713         0.071

Standard Error                                        (0.8188)       (0.6873)                  (1.1075)       (0.8661)                  (0.6082)       (0.5182)

FWER p-value                                           0.9963        0.9296                     0.7155        0.8027                     0.8727        0.9963

Percent Present                           92.598        0.098         -0.271       91.11       -1.026**         0.07        91.98        -0.233         -0.146

Standard Error                                        (0.2277)       (0.1918)                  (0.4387)       (0.3155)                  (0.2006)       (0.1690)

FWER p-value                                           0.9928        0.8027                      0.33         0.9963                     0.8727        0.9296



N                                          9703                                     5014                                    18448



* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01.

Family-wise error rate (FWER) is the probability that a given family of tests (defined for three grade groups, grades 1-4, 5-7 and pooled 1-7, and three cohort
groups, cohort 1, cohort 2, and pooled cohort 1 and 2 total, so 9 families of outcomes are shown in the table) includes at least one false positive result. The
FWER p-value is based on 100,000 iterations of randomly re-assigning the treatment grade and treatment-condition-within-grade indicators in our sample.
The samples are for both cohorts, with each student having one observation for each year of treatment.

The regression covariates include: baseline days present, baseline excused absences, baseline unexcused absences, baseline gpa, baseline course failures, dummy
for male, dummy for black, dummy for Hispanic, dummy for learning disability, and dummy for missing baseline data.



                                                                                                                                                            95
We include randomization school-level block groups. Cluster at the student level because students have multiple observations, one for each year of treatment.

For segmented grade analysis, grades 1-4 and 5-7, we limited the sample to triple school blocks which include treatment schools within the same grade group.




                                                                                                                                                            96
                          Appendix Table 14. Spillover effects - Academic outcomes (exclude treatment students).

                                                   Grades 1 - 4                         Grades 5 - 7                          All Grades
                                         Control   Treatment      Treatment   Control   Treatment      Treatment   Control   Treatment     Treatment
                                          Mean       Grade         School      Mean       Grade         School      Mean       Grade        School
GPA                                       2.361      0.027          0.013      2.02        0.06         0.121***    2.214      0.036         0.033
                                                    (0.0365)      (0.0303)              (0.0455)       (0.0348)              (0.0259)      (0.0222)
                                                     1.0000        1.0000                1.0000         0.7859                1.0000        0.9999
Course Failures                          0.442       -0.034        0.017      0.839      -0.103         -0.074     0.607      -0.046        -0.016
                                                    (0.0436)      (0.0376)              (0.0710)       (0.0587)              (0.0367)      (0.0324)
                                                     1.0000        1.0000                0.9999         1.0000                1.0000        1.0000
Math Scores
Standardized MAP*                        0.006       -0.094*       -0.009     0.039       0.086        -0.116**      0         -0.03        -0.055*
                                                    (0.0499)      (0.0421)              (0.0614)       (0.0477)              (0.0358)      (0.0308)
                                                     0.9994        1.0000                1.0000         0.9859                1.0000        0.9996
Standardized Official Test*              0.008       -0.057        -0.058      0.04      -0.013        -0.099**      0        -0.049       -0.076***
                                                    (0.0492)      (0.0389)              (0.0540)       (0.0409)              (0.0322)      (0.0272)
                                                     1.0000        0.9999                1.0000         0.9859                0.9999        0.9552
Valid MAP Data                           0.904       -0.001        0.031**    0.904      -0.007          0.012     0.902       0.002       0.024***
                                                    (0.0142)      (0.0125)              (0.0194)       (0.0150)              (0.0104)      (0.0092)
                                                     1.0000        0.9841                1.0000         1.0000                1.0000        0.9712
Valid Official Data                      0.942        0.021*       0.007      0.938        0             0.016*    0.939       0.008        0.014**
                                                    (0.0114)      (0.0096)              (0.0120)       (0.0093)              (0.0071)      (0.0064)
                                                     0.9994        1.0000                1.0000         0.9998                1.0000        0.9939
Standardized MAP (imputed)                -1.47      -0.026        0.111*     -2.233     0.158**        0.093**    -1.755     -0.021       0.123***
                                                    (0.0726)      (0.0657)              (0.0673)       (0.0420)              (0.0524)      (0.0467)


Reading Scores
Standardized MAP*                         0.02       -0.031        -0.015     0.007       0.087         -0.026       0         0.007        -0.018
                                                    (0.0507)      (0.0426)              (0.0586)       (0.0450)              (0.0347)      (0.0298)



                                                                                                                                                97
                                                            1.0000         1.0000                    0.9999        1.0000                    1.0000         1.0000
Standardized Official Test*                   0.018         -0.019         0.012        0.001        0.034          -0.027         0          -0.005        -0.006
                                                           (0.0474)       (0.0376)                  (0.0532)       (0.0392)                  (0.0315)      (0.0261)
                                                            1.0000         1.0000                    1.0000        1.0000                    1.0000         1.0000
Valid MAP Data                                0.911         0.040**        -0.021       0.907        -0.003         0.013        0.907       0.024**        -0.004
                                                           (0.0158)       (0.0142)                  (0.0190)       (0.0150)                  (0.0111)      (0.0100)
                                                            0.9824         0.9999                    1.0000        1.0000                    0.9965         1.0000
Valid Official Data                           0.946          0.016         0.009        0.941        -0.004         0.016*       0.941        0.005         0.015**
                                                           (0.0112)       (0.0093)                  (0.0119)       (0.0092)                  (0.0070)      (0.0063)
                                                            1.0000         1.0000                    1.0000        0.9997                    1.0000         0.9847
Standardized MAP (imputed)                    -1.41        0.276***        -0.008       -1.855       0.033         0.248***      -1.577       0.076         0.143**
                                                           (0.0788)       (0.0646)                  (0.0931)       (0.0688)                  (0.0606)      (0.0567)


N                                                            5751                        5014                       13890


* The official test used for accountability purposes switched after year 1 of cohort 2, but the MAP was given all four years that cover both cohorts.
We include randomization school-level block groups. Cluster at the student level because students have multiple observations, one for each year of treatment.
For segmented grade analysis, grades 1-4 and 5-7, we limited the sample to triple school blocks which include treatment schools within the same grade group.
Family-wise error rate (FWER) p-score is provided below the standard error. FWER is the probability that a given family of tests (defined for three grade groups,
grades 1-4, 5-7 and pooled 1-7, so 30 families of outcomes (excluding imputed values) are shown in the table) includes at least one false positive result. The
FWER p-value is based on 100,000 iterations of randomly re-assigning the treatment school and treatment-grade-within-school indicators in our sample.
* p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<.01 .




                                                                                                                                                                 98
