                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 EARLY FERTILITY DECLINE IN THE UNITED STATES:
         TESTS OF ALTERNATIVE HYPOTHESES USING NEW COMPLETE-COUNT
                CENSUS MICRODATA AND ENHANCED COUNTY-LEVEL

                                       Michael R. Haines
                                        J. David Hacker
                                      Matthew S. Jaremski

                                      Working Paper 27668
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27668


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020




The authors gratefully acknowledge support from the Minnesota Population Center
(P2CHD041023), funded through a grant from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development (NICHD). We also wish to thank Ran Abramitzky, Leah
Boustan, and Myera Rashid, who published their census crosswalks online for public use. This
project was also supported by a research grant from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development (R01-HD082120-01Q3). Michael Haines
wishes to thank Colgate University for providing research funds from the Banfi Vintners Chair in
Economics. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Michael R. Haines, J. David Hacker, and Matthew S. Jaremski. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Early Fertility Decline in the United States: Tests of Alternative Hypotheses using New Complete-Count
Census Microdata and Enhanced County-Level Data
Michael R. Haines, J. David Hacker, and Matthew S. Jaremski
NBER Working Paper No. 27668
August 2020
JEL No. J13,N21,N31

                                           ABSTRACT

The U.S. fertility transition in the nineteenth century is unusual. Not only did it start from a very
high fertility level and very early in the nation's development, but it also took place long before
the nation's mortality transition, industrialization, and urbanization. This paper assembles new
county-level, household-level, and individual-level data, including new complete-count IPUMS
microdata databases of the 1830-1880 censuses, to evaluate different theories for the nineteenth-
century American fertility transition. We construct cross-sectional models of net fertility for
currently-married white couples in census years 1830-1880 and test the results with subset of
couples linked between the 1850-1860 and 1860-1870 censuses. We find evidence of marital
fertility control consistent with hypotheses as early as 1830. The results indicate support for
several different but complementary theories of the early U.S. fertility decline, including the land
availability, conventional structuralist, ideational, child demand/quality-quantity trade-off, and
life-cycle savings theories.

Michael R. Haines                                 Matthew S. Jaremski
Department of Economics, 217 Persson Hall         Utah State University
Colgate University                                Department of Economics and Finance
13 Oak Drive                                      3565 Old Main Hill
Hamilton, NY 13346                                Logan, UT 84322
and NBER                                          and NBER
MHAINES@MAIL.COLGATE.EDU                          matthew.jaremski@usu.edu

J. David Hacker
University of Minnesota
Department of History
1110 Heller Hall
271 19th Ave S
Minneapolis, MN 55455
hacke010@umn.edu
Early Fertility Decline in the United States: Tests of Alternative Hypotheses using New Complete-
Count Census Microdata and Enhanced County-Level Data


       The fertility transition in the nineteenth-century United States is unusual in a number of
respects. The decline comes very early in the nation's development. Between 1800 and 1880, the
white population's crude birth rate fell from about 55 to 35 and its total fertility rate fell from
about 7.0 to 4.2. In contrast, fertility decline in most western and northern European countries did
not commence until circa 1880 (Coale and Watkins 1992). Only France had a comparably early
onset of the transition. The U. S. fertility transition also began long before the sustained decline in
mortality, which commenced in the 1870s (Haines 1989; Haines 2000). Finally, the transition
occurred when the nation was still predominantly agrarian and rural, although the decline in birth
rates happened in both rural and urban places. Even in 1880, only about 28 percent of the U. S.
population lived in urban areas (defined by the Census as places with over 2,500 people) and 52
percent of the labor force derived its primary support from non-agricultural activity (Haines and
Steckel, 2000, Table 8.1; Carter, et al. 2006, Series Ba829-830).
       This article sheds new light on the nineteenth-century fertility transition in the United
States by examining correlates of net marital fertility across the period 1830-1880. We rely on
several new data sources, including complete-count IPUMS datasets of the 1830, 1840, 1850,
1860, 1870, and 1880 censuses, which document the recent fertility of more than 12 million
currently-married white women (Ruggles et al. 2020), and new and enhanced county-level data,
which provide important contextual information. These data allow us examine a number of
competing, but possibly complementary, explanations for the fertility decline, including the land
availability, child demand, life-cycle transition, local labor market/child default, and ideational
hypotheses, as well as the conventional structuralist explanation associated with classic
demographic transition theory. Ultimately, although the results provide some support for all the
tested hypothesis, we find that structural factors emphasized by traditional demographic
transition theory (urbanization, occupational structure, education), ideational factors (nativity and
church denominations), and child demand theories had a greater substantive impact on married

                                                   1
women's fertility than the land availability and life-cycle savings theories emphasized in much of
the published literature.
       Despite the large number of cases available in the complete-count datasets, the data used
in this study--like the vast majority of historical data--have limitations. Good instrumental
variables are unavailable, omitted variable bias is likely present, and cross-sectional regression
coefficients may be biased by endogeneity. Given these limitations, we do not attempt to estimate
causal relationships. The datasets assembled here, nonetheless, represent a substantial
improvement in quantity, quality, and coverage relative to data used by earlier researchers. The
individual-level data allow us to model marital fertility, eliminating the ambiguity in many previous
studies as to whether the mechanism linking independent variables to fertility was via changes in
the timing and incidence of marriage (a Malthusian adjustment) or via changes in childbearing by
married couples (a neo-Malthusian adjustment). We employ state-level fixed effects to control for
unobserved spatial heterogeneity and control for a wide variety of economic, demographic, and
cultural factors to minimize potential biases. We also test our results with a subset of couples
linked between the 1850, 1860, and 1870 censuses using preliminary census "crosswalks" recently
published by Abramitzky, Boustan and Rashid (2020) that identify the same individuals in multiple
censuses. Although these links are preliminary, based only on males, and subject to potential
errors, the results largely confirm the findings from the cross-sectional analysis, increasing
confidence in the results.


BACKGROUND AND PRIOR STUDIES
       A national birth registration system was not started in the United States until 1915 and not
completed until 1933 (Haines 1989). Broad patterns of the nineteenth-century fertility transition,
however, are evident in the ratio of the number of children to the number of women of
childbearing age reported by decennial censuses. As shown in figure 1, the nation's child-woman
ratio (CWR) declined 33 percent between 1800 and 1880. CWRs in urban areas were much lower
than CWRs in rural areas in all census years, but urban and rural places experienced similar

                                                  2
declines from early in the century. New England was the region with the lowest CWRs in each
census year and experienced a decline of more than 50 percent over the 80-year period. CWRs
were lower in eastern census regions and higher in western regions, and, to a lesser extent, lower
in northern census regions than in southern census regions. 1
         The child-woman ratios shown in figure 1 suggest that fertility rates in the United States at
the start of the nineteenth century were high relative to fertility rates in other English-speaking
countries. Ansley Coale and Melvin Zelnik estimated that white women surviving their childbearing
years in 1800 gave birth to an average of 7.0 children, about 1.6 more children than estimated by
historical demographers for women in England and Wales. By 1880, total fertility in the United
States had fallen to 4.2, about 0.5 fewer children than in England and Wales (Coale and Zelnik
1963; Woods 2000). Thus, despite a delayed onset of the industrial revolution in the United States
relative to England and Wales, the U. S. experienced an earlier onset of the fertility transition.
         Explicitly or implicitly, most contemporary observers associated high fertility in the early
United States with early and near universal marriage, which was in turn seen as a product of the
nation's inexpensive land, abundant resources, and high standard of living. Benjamin Franklin was
the first to point out the association of land availability, early marriage, and high fertility:
         Land being thus plenty in America, and so cheap as that a labouring Man, that understands
         Husbandry, can in a short Time save Money enough to purchase a Piece of new Land
         sufficient for a Plantation, whereon he may subsist a Family; such are not afraid to marry;
         for if they even look far enough forward to consider how their Children when grown up are
         to be provided for, they see that more Land is to be had a Rates equally easy, all
         Circumstances considered...Hence Marriages in America are more general, and more

1   Child-woman ratios plotted in the chart were calculated from the complete-count 1800-1870
complete-count IPUMS census datasets and the 1880 ten-percent IPUMS sample (Ruggles et al.
2020). We adjusted the CWR to account for missing records in a few states in early census years
using published results. We also adjusted for differences in reported age groups of children and
women using the single year age distribution of the white population in the 1850 complete-count
dataset.
                                                    3
         generally early, than in Europe (quoted in McCusker and Menard 1985, p. 212).

         With the Louisiana Purchase in 1803, the defeat of Indian confederations in the War of
1812, and the opening of the trans-Appalachian west, land availability may have been near an all-
time high in the early nineteenth century. Thereafter, increasing population densities, declining
land availability, and rising farm prices--especially in more densely-populated areas near the
Atlantic coast and navigable waterways--resulted in a trend toward later marriage, higher
proportions who never married, and lower fertility. Imbalanced sex ratios (men outnumbered
women in western frontier regions, while women outnumbered men in eastern regions) also
contributed to regional differentials in nuptiality and fertility (Haines and Hacker 2011). In a
statistical analysis of the 1790-1840 censuses, George Tucker, Professor of Moral Philosophy at the
University of Virginia, confirmed a long-term decline in the ratio of children to women in every
state between 1800 and 1840 and an inverse relationship between state child-woman ratios and
population densities (Tucker 1855, pp. 104-106).
         To the extent that the fertility decline was caused by changes in the timing and incidence of
marriage, the "early" U.S. fertility decline was not the result of exceptional or innovative
behaviors; American marriage patterns were simply converging toward European norms, which in
turn caused fertility to decline (Smith 1987). Hacker (2003) has argued that the decline in child-
woman ratios prior to 1860 was primarily the result of declining nuptiality. 2 Likewise, state and
regional differentials in child-woman ratios observed by Tucker and analyzed by subsequent
researchers likely reflected differentials in the timing and incidence of marriage (Hacker 2008). 3
Beginning in early the nineteenth century, however, observers suggested that regional


2 Increased   mortality in the late antebellum period also contributed to declining child-woman
ratios (Hacker 2003; 2010).
3   In a separate county-level analysis, we found evidence that adjustments in nuptiality played a
major role in the decline in child-woman ratios and cross-sectional differentials in child-woman
ratios, especially in the early stages of the decline. [BLINDED CITATION].
                                                   4
differentials in the "productivity" of marriages resulted from differentials in the practice of
conscious family limitation strategies. In an earlier essay, Tucker (1827) mentioned a secret "long
practised by many in the east" that allowed couples to control fertility without abstinence. Private
secrets were made public in the early 1830s, when Charles Knowlton and Robert Dale Owen
separately published books describing methods of contraception (Knowlton recommended
douching with spermicides while Owen recommended the practice of coitus interuptus). Although
Knowlton was arrested and found guilty of publishing an obscene work and sentenced to three
months hard labor, public demand created a rapidly growing market for contraceptive advice and
goods by the mid nineteenth century (Brodie 1994).
       Unfortunately, early studies based on county-level child-woman ratios could not
distinguish between the effects of nuptiality and marital fertility control. Yasuba (1962), Forster,
Tucker, and Bridge (1972), Easterlin (1976), and Sundstrom and David (1988) suggested a variety
of explanations for the unique American fertility transition, some of which required the conscious
practice of birth control by married couples and some of which likely operated through
adjustments in nuptiality. Because the nation was overwhelmingly rural and dominated by the
agricultural sector of the economy, most explanations focused on the changing costs and benefits
of farm children. A leading candidate has been the land availability hypothesis, which grew out of
the observed and consistent negative correlation between child-woman ratios and population
density. Originally proposed by Yasuba using state-level data, the conclusion was strengthened
through the examination of agricultural land availability by county by Forster, Tucker, and Bridge.
       The land availability hypothesis has three potential mechanisms. The first mechanism is a
simple Malthusian check on marriage, which in turn affected fertility. Family formation in
nineteenth-century American was "neolocal," with young couples setting up a new household
upon marriage rather than living as dependents in a parent's or sibling's household (Smith 1993).
Increasing population densities lowered land availability, increased the price of viable farms, and
caused young couples to delay marriage in order to acquire the necessary resources to purchase a
viable farm and set up a new household (Yasuba 1962, 159; Haines 1996; Hacker 2008).

                                                   5
       A second mechanism is old age insurance through the intergenerational bequest process.
As farmers are almost completely dependent on their farm for income, they have little or no
income to support themselves when they stop working due to old age or injury. Therefore, parents
might decide to transfer real property (that is, actual or potential farm sites) to children in order to
keep the children working the farm or another nearby farm and supporting them when they retire.
Essentially having children was a form of old age support in the rural, agrarian environment. At the
same time, parents might have adjusted fertility in an altruistic motive of wanting to provide
adequate farmsteads for their children. Greater availability of land in an area would keep the price
of land low and make it easier for a parent to obtain additional nearby farms for their surviving
children, who could continue working the farm. Future-minded couples with a targeted bequest in
mind could adjust their fertility in response to growing land scarcity and higher prices (Easterlin,
Alter, and Condran 1978).
       The third mechanism by which land availability affects fertility is through labor availability.
Farm work is hard and requires tremendous numbers of labor hours. On the frontier where labor
is scarce, farmers might have additional children in order to have more help in the fields (Craig
1993). Microdata from the 1860 Northern Farms Sample (Bateman and Foust 1974; Easterlin 1976;
Easterlin, Alter, and Condran 1978) show that the gradient of fertility from the longest settled
areas to the frontier was positive but not monotonic. Children were less valuable on the frontier
where adult labor was needed to clear land, but once an area had been settled, children were
needed to work the farm. Thus, on the immediate frontier, households were small (often just a
single male) but just inside the frontier they were large (Leet 1976).
       Another explanation of the decline in fertility is the rise in other alternatives for children,
notably non-agricultural employment in growing urban centers. Put forward in the form of an
inter-generational bargaining model by Sundstrom and David (1988), this hypothesis embodies the
notion that parents were seeking to reduce the risk of child default (i.e., children moving far
enough away so as to be unable to provide old age care for the parents). The authors argued that
a more favorable ratio of non-agricultural to agricultural wages in a region led to a higher risk that

                                                   6
children would leave the area and not take care of their parents. Parents thus would have to adapt
by paying a larger "bribe" in terms of property, both real and financial. Given that farmers had
scarce resources and could not easily grow the total value of the inheritance, a larger share would
likely have been created by reducing the number of recipients (i.e., smaller families). Although
Sundstrom and David pose this as an alternative to the land availability hypothesis, it seems a
complement rather than a substitute for the traditional theory.
       In addition to stressing the importance of land availability, research on the U.S. fertility
decline has emphasized traditional structural variables from classic demographic transition theory
(e.g., urbanization, industrialization, education, women's work outside the home, etc.), especially
in the period after the Civil War (1861-65), when urbanization, industrialization and school
attendance accelerated (Guest 1981; Guest and Tolnay 1983; Wanamaker 2012). Notestein's
classic 1953 article concisely summarizes many potential causes:
       The new ideal of the small family arose typically in the urban industrial society. It is
       impossible to be precise about the various causal factors, but apparently many were
       important. Urban life stripped the family of many functions in production, consumption,
       recreation, and education. In factory employment the individual stood on his own
       accomplishments. The new mobility of young people and the anonymity of city life reduced
       the pressure toward traditional behavior exerted by the family and community. In a period
       of rapidly developing technology, new skills were needed, and new opportunities for
       individual advancement arose. Education and a rational point of view became increasingly
       important. As a consequence the cost of child-rearing grew and the possibilities for
       economic contributions by children declined. Falling death-rates at once increased the size
       of the family to be supported and lowered the inducements to have many births. Women,
       moreover, found new independence from household obligations and new economic roles
       less compatible with childbearing.

       More recent economic theory has emphasized changing demand for children in the context
of rising family incomes and the cost of children relative to other goods (Easterlin and Crimmins
1985). Most evidence suggests that fertility and income were positively correlated prior to the
fertility transition. Economic changes related to industrialization and urbanization, however, led to
an increase in the demand for child "quality"--which required greater parental investments in
                                                  7
education and associated declines in child labor--at the expense of child "quantity," helping to
explain why fertility declined during a period or rising incomes and why fertility was inversely
correlated with income from at least the latter half of the nineteenth century (Becker 1981; Jones
and Tertilt 2008; Becker et al. 2010; Dribe, Oris, and Pozzi 2014).
        There has also been interest in the ideational view of fertility transition (e.g., Lesthaeghe
1980, 1983; Smith 1987). This view--which grew out of the finding that European nations at
different levels of socio-economic development (e.g. levels of urbanization, share of non-
agricultural employment in the labor force, and levels of literacy) commenced their irreversible
fertility transitions within a short period of time in relation to one another (Knodel and van de
Walle 1979)--argues that the growing influence and diffusion of secular values has changed
people's willingness to control and plan family size. Smith (1987) proposed that greater adherence
to religious denominations that encouraged greater individualism in the nineteenth century
(Unitarian, Universalist, Congregational and some Presbyterians) resulted in earlier and more rapid
fertility declines, which has received confirmation in more recent county-level analyses (Haines
and Hacker 2011). In addition, Hacker (1999, 2016) and Hacker and Roberts (2017, 2019) have
documented a positive correlation between couples' choices of biblical versus secular names for
their children and marital fertility, and large differentials in fertility between the native-born and
foreign born populations, all else being equal, suggesting that religion and culture played
significant roles in the U. S. fertility transition.
        Another perspective looks at the life-cycle savings hypothesis (Carter, Ransom, and Sutch
2004). Building on the original work of Modigliani (e.g., 1966), the hypothesis argues that
individuals have to provide for their old age whether that be through children, real assets, or
financial assets. When there are limited financial options and in a largely rural, agrarian setting,
such as the United States in the early nineteenth century, couples will choose children and, if
possible, real assets such as land, structures, and livestock. As the financial network broadens and
deepens, however, financial saving becomes more feasible and attractive, reducing the incentives
for having children as insurance for old age. Knodel (1974, pp. 232-36), for example, found fertility

                                                       8
in nineteenth-century Germany's administrative districts was inversely correlated with the number
of bank accounts per capita. Financial savings also are largely independent of the risk of child
default and increases in land prices. For instance, as land becomes more expensive, the best land
is taken up, and local non-agricultural labor markets develop in towns and cities, child default
becomes a greater risk and other alternatives must be sought.4
           Three studies have discussed the effects of banks on fertility differentials in the United
States. Steckel (1992) included banking data in a panel study of 638 rural families linked between
the 1850 and 1860 censuses. The results suggested that the development of the nation's financial
system--as proxied by the number of banks per capita in couples' states of residence--was the
most important factor associated with differentials in couples' net marital fertility between the
two censuses. The number of banks were capita has higher in states in the Northeast, where
marital fertility rates were lower, and lower in states in the South and near the western frontier,
where marital fertility rates were highest. The results supported the hypothesis that banks
provided couples the option of accumulating financial assets as means of providing for their old-
age support rather than investing in children. The results also indirectly supported the hypothesis
that the development of banking was an important factor in the fertility transition. In 1811, there
were only 1.45 banks per 100,000 white residents; by 1840, the rate had more than quadrupled.
The second study, by Carter, Ransom and Sutch (2004), looked at counties in the entire U.S. in
1840 and found support for the idea that life-cycle determinants were beginning to dominate over
the traditional reliance on large numbers of children for old-age security. By out-migrating to the
frontier, children were "defaulting" on their obligation to support their parents in old age and
driving prospective parents to increase savings and investments in banks, financial markets and
insurance. The authors, however, included no measures of banks or financial markets in their
regressions to test the hypothesis directly. A third study by Basso and Cuberes (2013) found a



4 It   is important to note that bank default was also a risk during the period, suggesting that a
combination of investments might be optimal for families.
                                                      9
robust and consistent inverse relationship between the white child-woman ratio and the presence
of one or more banks for a limited set of 270 mostly Northeastern counties in 1840.


DATA AND RESULTS
         We rely on new, complete-count IPUMS microdata for census years 1830-1870 and the 10-
percent density 1880 IPUMS sample (Ruggles et al. 2020) to test alternative hypotheses. These
data document the recent marital fertility of approximately 12 million currently-married white
couples. Each dataset includes individual- and household-level variables (e.g., occupation, literacy,
nativity, wealth, urban/rural location, etc.) that can be included in empirical models of fertility. 5
We linked these data with contextual information collected for each of the nation's counties in
each census year, which allows us to construct more comprehensive tests of leading theories. The
number of counties with valid data increased from 946 in 1830 to 2,454 in 1880, providing a rich
contextual database. We supplemented existing public-use county-level datasets (ICPSR 2010 and
2014) with new measures of each county's agriculture and manufacturing (1840­1880), the
availability of water and/or railroad connections (1840-1860), and data on churches (1850-1870).
Most importantly for our examination of the banking/life-cycle savings hypothesis, we added
county-level data on the number of banks and the size of their deposits in each census year using
data from Warren Weber's antebellum bank census database (2005, 2008) and from the
Merchants and Bankers' Directory.
         We limited our analytical dataset to currently-married white women age 15-49 with
spouses present in the household. The white population comprised approximately 85 percent of
the total population of the United States in the nineteenth century. Unfortunately, minimal data
are available for the nation's black population until the 1870 census, preventing the imputation of
currently-married black couples and their number of children in most census years. Other studies



5   At the time of our analysis, the 1880 complete-count IPUMS dataset lacked the variables literacy
and schooling, forcing us to rely on the 10 percent sample.
                                                   10
have shown little indication of fertility decline in the black population until after circa 1880, when
the total fertility rate for the black population was 7.26 (Tolnay 1981), suggesting that marital
fertility decline in the period 1830-1880 was for the most part limited to the white population.
        For each census year, we constructed cross-sectional models of fertility, using the number
of couples' coresident own children age 0-4 at the time of the census as the dependent variable.
By relying on a measure of marital fertility, we can be reasonably certain that identified covariates
operated via couples' conscious control of their fertility. In contrast, covariates associated with
general measures of fertility, such as county-level child-woman ratios, may have operated via the
Malthusian mechanism of nuptiality. Because it is a count of living children, the dependent
variable is a measure of couples' recent "net" marital fertility (the number of live births in the
previous five years less the number of those children who died before the census). To a small
extent, differentials in net marital fertility will reflect differentials in child mortality. We do not
expect child mortality to be significant source of bias for several reasons, however. First,
nineteenth-century life tables (Hacker 2010) indicate that a large majority (approximately 80
percent) of white children born in the five years prior to the 1830-1880 censuses survived to be
counted by the census. Large differentials in child mortality will therefore result in small
differentials in net fertility. Second, biases resulting from differentials in child mortality will be
controlled to some extent by our use of state fixed effects and inclusion of urban/rural residence
and size of city variables in our models, which have been found to be among the most important
correlates of child mortality (Preston and Haines 1991). Recent studies of early twentieth century
Sweden and the United States (Scalone and Dribe 2017; Hacker 2020), when child mortality
differentials were large, indicate that results of net marital fertility models closely mirror those of
marital fertility models. Finally, we observe that the fertility transition clearly resulted in a decline
in the number of surviving children, not just the number of children born. To the extent that
couples adjusted their child bearing in response to the number of their surviving children rather
than their number of live births, net marital fertility may be a preferable measure (Dribe et al.



                                                    11
2016). Nonetheless, we consider the possible influence of differentials in child mortality in our
discussion.
       Our datasets include a large number of suspected correlates of marital fertility, which
allows us to construct comprehensive tests of the hypotheses discussed above. Where available,
we include each mother's age group and labor force participation; father's occupation group and
age differential from spouse; and couple's real and personal estate wealth, slave ownership,
literacy, nativity, and residence type (urban/rural and size of city). Because husbands and wives'
place of birth and literacy were strongly inter-correlated, we coded nativity and literacy as couple-
level variables. If one spouse was native born and one foreign born, we coded the couple as being
foreign born. We considered a couple as being literate only if both the husband and wife could
read and write. At the county level, we used average school attendance, farm values per acre,
proportion of farm acreage improved, proportion of church seating capacities in liberal/pietistic
churches, presence of rail or canal transportation, and the number of banks. 6
       We relied on a standard OLS regression because of its ease of interpretation. Although the
dependent variable is a count with no negative values and includes many observations of zero
children, suggesting the need of Poisson regression or other count-based regression approach to
ensure unbiased standard errors, we have complete microdata with hundreds of thousands of
observations in each census year. We compared results using both OLS and Poisson approaches
and found the vast majority of variables were statistically significant at the 0.001 level in all
models. We employed state-level fixed effects in all models to control for unobserved
heterogeneities among couples residing in different states.
       Because the availability of variables varies across censuses, we present two empirical
models in each year: a parsimonious model, which includes only the variables present in all census
years shown in the table, and a full model, which uses all the variables available in a given year.



6 Because   the farm values per acre were skewed by a few counties with very high values, we
logged the variables to reduce the influence of outliers.
                                                   12
The parsimonious specifications allow us to determine whether the factors are important before
controlling for other variables and gives a better view of how their effects changed over time. The
augmented specifications effectively controls for many other factors that could have been driving
fertility and should present a more effective lower bound on the coefficients, but at some cost to
comparability across time.
       For all census years other than 1880, when marital status and relationship to household
head were first recorded in the census, we identified currently-married couples and their number
of children using logical rules and variables constructed by the IPUMS project. Unfortunately, the
way each census was conducted did not allow us to use consistent imputation procedures for all
six censuses, forcing us to conduct our analysis in two parts. We first present the results for the
1830 and 1840 censuses, which were conducted at the household level, and then the results for
the 1850-1880 censuses, which were conducted at the individual level (Ruggles and Magnuson
2020). For the 1830 and 1840 analysis, we restricted the dataset to what we call "imputed nuclear
households" containing only one woman of childbearing age and one potential spouse. To
evaluate how this restriction may have influenced the results, we include the 1850 census in both
sets of analyses.


Cross-Sectional Analysis, 1830-1850
       Prior to 1850, censuses were conducted on a household level. In 1840, census enumerators
recorded information for all individuals in enumerated households on a single line of a two-sided
schedule with 80 summary columns (e.g., the number of white males age 0-4 in the household, the
number of white females age 15-19 in the household, the number of household members engaged
in agriculture, etc.). No information was collected on the family relationships or marital statuses of
individuals in the household. As a result, it is difficult--and in many cases impossible--to
determine whether households contained one or more married couples or to determine the
number of own children each couple had in the household.
       Our approach to using the 1830 and 1840 complete-count datasets was to limit the

                                                  13
analytical dataset to households that contained one (and only one) white female age 15-49 and
one (and only one) white male age 15-59 in either the same age group as the woman or in the next
older age group (e.g., a household with one white female age 30-39 and one white male age 40-
49). 7 If a household contained more than one woman or more than one man of childbearing ages
or if the two age groups were not compatible with a probable married couple (e.g., a household
with one white female age 30-39 and one white male age 20-29), we dropped the household from
the analysis. We also dropped all households with one or more females age 50 and above and one
or more males age 60 and above to avoid ambiguity with other variables measured at the
household level (e.g., number of illiterate individuals). With these selection criteria, however, we
can be reasonably confident that selected households contained a married couple and that all co-
resident children less than age 5 in the household were children of the couple. Hereafter we refer
to these households as "imputed nuclear households," whether or not they contained any
children. 8
         To determine the potential impact of these restrictions and the accuracy of our
imputations of married couples, we collapsed the individual-level 1850 IPUMS dataset to a one-
record household summary and used the same logical rules to impute nuclear households used
with the 1830 and 1840 datasets. We also replicated, as closely as possible, the household-level
variables available in 1830 and 1840. The exercise indicated that our approach results in a
significant loss in the number of married couples. With access to all individual-level data, we could
identify 2,590,117 currently-married women age 15-49 with spouses present in the 1850 census.
When we collapsed the dataset to a household-level summary and used the same logical rules as



7   The censuses counted the number of individuals of each sex in five-year age groups through age
group 15-19, and then 10-year groups beginning with 20-29. In our 1850-1880 analysis below,
husbands of women age 15-49 were on average 4.5 years older than their wives.
8   IPUMS household-level datasets are also available for census years 1800-1830. Censuses prior to
1830, however, did not include enough age categories to make similar inferences.
                                                  14
in 1830 and 1840, the analytical dataset was reduced to 1,124,656 couples, a loss of 57 percent.
The rate of loss was much higher among older couples, who were more likely to have own children
of childbearing age residing in their households. We also lose a small percentage of households
containing multigenerational family members and other types of complex family households as
well as a small number of households with husbands in a younger age group than their wives. Our
1830-1850 analysis, therefore, includes a greater proportion of all younger couples as well as
lower proportions of all older couples and couples living in complex family arrangements than our
1850-1880 analysis. On the other hand, our restrictions and rules resulted in a high level of
accuracy among the couples selected and in our measurement of marital fertility. Just 1.1% of our
imputed nuclear households in 1850 did not contain a currently-married couple identified by the
IPUMS project.
       Table 1 presents the results for the parsimonious models using only variables available in
1830, 1840, and 1850, while Table 2 shows the full model results using all available variables. To
increase comparability of each variable's substantive impact across time, we divided coefficients in
each census year by the mean number of children age 0-4 in the household (shown at the bottom
of the table) and multiplied by 100. For categorical and dummy variables, such as transportation
and the number of banks, the results indicate the percentage difference in children age 0-4
relative to the reference category. For other independent variables, the results indicate the
percentage change in the number of children to a one-unit change in the variable. Results, of
course, will depend on the choice of reference category and the scale used to measure real
variables, which we have chosen to allow the precision of the results to show.
       We included the age group of the childbearing woman in all models. Relative to the
reference group of women age 20-29, imputed nuclear households containing a female age 30-39
had a modestly greater number of children age 0-4 in all three census years (probably because
proportionately more women in the age 20-29 reference group had not been married for the full
five-year observation period prior to the census), while those age 40-49 had significantly fewer
children (probably the result of lower fecundity at older ages and possibly the increasing practice

                                                 15
of marital fertility control with age). Relative to 1830, the results in 1840 and 1850 indicate that
women's childbearing was more concentrated in their 20s and less prevalent at older ages, a
pattern consistent with the increasing practice of what demographers refer to as "parity-
dependent fertility control"--the successful attempts by couples to curtail childbearing after
reaching a target number of children. This pattern is more evident in the results from the period
1850-1880 discussed below.
           We distinguished couples living in urban areas from couples living in rural areas and further
categorized urban couples by the population size of their city of residence. The results indicate
that couples living in urban areas had fewer children age 0-4 than couples living in rural areas in all
three censuses. With only a few exceptions, we find the size of the urban area in which couples
resided was negatively correlated with their number of children. This result was likely due in part
to higher infant and child mortality in urban areas. Although available data do not allow the
measurement of child mortality differentials by size of place in 1830 or 1840, mortality
differentials were large in the late nineteenth century when they can first be measured. Children
in urban places suffered dramatically higher rates of mortality than children in rural areas, likely
because greater crowding and poorer sanitation in cities facilitated the spread of infectious
disease (Preston and Haines 1991; Dribe et al. 2020). The large differentials in net marital fertility
in 1830 among couples in rural and urban areas, however, strongly suggests that differential child
mortality cannot explain the entire difference.9



9 All   else being equal, child mortality rates in urban areas in the late nineteenth century were
between 5-25 percent higher than rates in rural areas, depending on the size of the city (Dribe et
al. 2020). If we assume similar differentials in child mortality between rural and urban areas in
1830 and further assume that 80 percent of children born in rural areas in the five years prior to
1830 survived to be counted by the census, couples in urban areas would have 1-6 percent fewer
surviving children age 0-4 in 1830 than couples in rural areas given equal numbers of children
born.
                                                    16
         The presence of one or more banks in a county was negatively correlated with net marital
fertility in all three census years. 10 The dummy variable approach provides a view of both the
extensive margin (i.e., the entry of any banks) versus the intensive margin (i.e., the entry of an
additional bank). Just getting a bank at all leads to a large negative decline in fertility whether that
is the entry of one bank or multiple banks. However, while the coefficients generally show a
monotonic decline in the number of children age 0-4 as the number of banks increased, the
marginal effect of each extra bank decreases as compared to the county's first bank in most years.
These results support of the life-cycle saving hypothesis.11
         The full models, shown in Table 2, contain a few new insights. Households in 1840 and
1850 with men in professional and commercial occupations had 14-23 percent fewer children
under the age of five than the reference group of households with men in agricultural occupations.
These results likely reflect differences in the perceived costs and benefits of children. Farm couples



10   We tested and obtained similar results when we included either the logarithm of bank capital
(1830-1860 only, using data from Weber 2008) or the logarithm of the number of banks instead of
the bank dummies (not shown).
11 Although   we have no reason to believe that fertility decline caused banking to increase, omitted
variables in the models potentially associated with bank entry and fertility decline (e.g.,
industrialization, transportation, and other measures of structural development) may bias the
results. Banks were unlikely to start in an extremely rural community without significant economic
activity (Atack, Jaremski, and Rousseau 2015). The decision to start a bank, however, was not
entirely economic. During the period before the Civil War, banks had to receive a unique charter
from their state legislature. As discussed by Hammond (1957) and Bodenhorn (2003), these
charters were often related to political interests rather than economic ones. The use of state fixed
effects and inclusion of urbanization, therefore, adds some confidence to the results, as does the
lack of any large changes in the augmented specifications, which includes additional measures of
economic development.
                                                   17
had greater need for child labor, while professional and commercial couples increasingly invested
more in their children's education and benefited less from their labor (Guest 1981; Dribe et al.
2014; Maloney et al. 2014). Providing further support for this theory, school attendance in 1850
was negatively correlated with couples' net marital fertility. Households with men in navigational
and manufacturing occupations or with no occupation listed had 2-11 percent fewer children than
households with an agricultural occupation listed. The fertility of couples in mining households,
which was only modestly lower in 1840 than the fertility couples in agricultural households, was
modestly higher in 1850, consistent with studies that have stressed the high-fertility of mining
families (e.g., Haines 1977). Mining occupations were rare in the United States, however,
accounting for less than one percent of men's occupations in 1840 and 1850. Overall, these
relatively large occupational differences in net marital fertility, consistent with hypothesis about
the costs and benefits of childbearing, provides evidence of a significant level of marital fertility
control among American couples circa 1835-1840.
       The couple-level results show no significant association between households in which one
or both members of the couple were foreign born and the number of children 0-4. The result is
puzzling, given the finding that the foreign born often had higher birth rates than the native-born
population (Spengler, 1930), but the early stages of the mass migrations from Europe in the 1840s
undoubtedly had some disruptive effects. Irish migration to the United States in response to the
Great Famine (1845-49), in particular, was no doubt associated with lower numbers of surviving
children age 0-4 among Irish-born women enumerated by the 1850 census. A couple's literacy was
negatively correlated with their fertility, all else being equal. The result, which is typical of results
for many other populations across time and place, may reflect an orientation toward greater
investments in education and child quality among literate parents, greater exposure to secular
culture, or greater access to printed birth control information. The availability of water or railroad
transportation was negatively correlated with fertility in 1840 and 1850. Banks remained
negatively correlated with couples' marital fertility in the full models, and the magnitude of the
coefficients remain approximately the same, despite the inclusion of additional variables

                                                    18
associated with economic development, including transportation, school attendance rates, and
couples' real estate wealth.
       Of special interest to economic theories of fertility decline, including life-cycle savings
theory, the 1830 and 1840 censuses included information on slave ownership and the 1850 census
included information on real estate wealth. Slaves were a form of personal property and could
furnish support in old age. They also performed tasks on farms and plantations (and elsewhere)
that children might have been doing in free states. The results indicate that slave ownership was
negatively associated with couples' marital fertility. The coefficient was larger for couples with
large slave holdings (more than 20 slaves). These results provide support for Carter, Ransom and
Sutch's hypothesis (2004) that slaves--who could provide both farm labor and old-age support for
aging couples--represented a substitute for investments in child quantity for slaveholding couples.
We coded couples' real estate wealth in 1850 into three groups to allow for the possibility on a
non-linear relationship with fertility. In all models, including the models for the 1850-1880
regressions below, approximately half of all couples reported no wealth. We chose the minimum
dollar value for the high wealth group to yield the upper 10 percent of all couples. Interestingly,
we find an inverted U-shape relationship between real estate wealth in 1850 and fertility. Couples
with no real estate wealth and couples with high real estate wealth had fewer children than the
reference group of couples with a moderate level of real estate wealth. We discuss this
relationship in more length below with the 1860 and 1870 results, which allow us to include
personal estate wealth and the value of local farms per acre for a more comprehensive
investigation of the land availability/target bequest hypothesis.


Cross-Sectional Analysis, 1850-1880
       Beginning in 1850, the census recorded each free person's first name, last name, age, sex,
race, occupation, literacy (if over age 20), school attendance, and place of birth. Enumerators were
instructed to record household members in a specific order, beginning with the household head,
followed by the spouse (if present), followed by co-resident children in descending order of age,

                                                  19
and then other individuals. Dwellings and families were numbered in order of visitation. The
IPUMS project took advantage of these enumeration procedures and the available data to
construct new variables on family interrelationships, including the relationship of each individual
to the household head, the household location of each individuals' mother, father, and spouse,
and the total number of each individuals' own children in the household and the number under
age five. We relied on the IPUMS variables SPLOC (the location of each individuals' spouse in the
household), AGE, SEX, and RACE to limit the analytical dataset to currently-married white women
age 15-49 with spouses present. We used the IPUMS variable NCHLT5 (number of own children
less than age 5 in the household) as the dependent variable.
       Tables 3 and 4 shows the results for the parsimonious and full models for the couple-level
analysis of the 1850-1880 censuses. Results for the parsimonious models confirm the trend away
from higher childbearing rates at older ages discussed above in the 1830-1850 analysis. Relative to
women in the age 20-24 reference group, women in all age groups above age 30 experienced
lower fertility in each subsequent census from 1850 to 1880. In 1850, for example, women age 40-
44 had 29 percent fewer children age 0-4 in the household than women age 20-24, all else being
equal. Thirty years later, in 1880, woman age 40-44 had 53 person fewer children. The trend is
consistent with the increasing practice of parity-dependent control and an associated decline in
the mean age at childbearing (Hacker 2003).
       Husbands' occupation group was a significant correlate of net marital fertility in all census
years, again suggesting that couples perceived different costs and benefits to childbearing
depending on the type of labor the husband performed. Similar to the 1840 results, women
married to farmers had significantly more children age 0-4 in the household at the time of each
census, while women married to men with professional, managerial, clerical and sales occupations
had fewer children. The results indicate that occupational differentials widened slightly between
1850 and 1880, suggesting that farm couples lagged non-farm couples in the fertility transition. In
1850, for example, professional couples had 16 percent fewer children than farmers; in 1880, they
had 23 percent fewer. Literacy was negatively correlated with fertility at the couple level.

                                                 20
Differentials between literate and non-literate couples remained consistent between 1850 and
1880, with literate couples having 10-11 percent fewer children than illiterate couples, all else
being equal. School attendance was negatively correlated with couples' net marital fertility in all
census years. Some of this result may reflect couples' adaptation to compulsory school attendance
laws, which were first enacted in Massachusetts in 1852 and which increased costs and decreased
the benefits of childbearing. Compulsory attendance laws were rare before 1870, however, and
were typically passed in states that had already obtained high attendance rates (Goldin 1999). To
give some since of the substantive impact of schooling on fertility, we calculated the difference in
net marital fertility between couples living in a county with one standard deviation unit more
children age 5-17 attending school to a couple living in a county with one standard deviation fewer
children in school. The results indicate that couples living in areas with more schooling had 6.0
percent fewer children in 1850, 1.5 percent fewer in 1860, 3.8 percent fewer in 1870, and 3.1
percent fewer in 1880.
       We coded nativity as a couple-level variable with couples either native born (born in the
United States) or born in Germany, Ireland, Great Britain, or other foreign countries. If one partner
was native born and the other foreign born, we took the foreign-born birthplace. If both partners
were foreign born but born in different countries, we took the birthplace of the wife. In 1850, the
dummy variables for couples' nativity had a relatively modest impact on marital fertility. Couples
born in Ireland, for example, had 3 percent more children under age five than native-born couples,
all else being equal. In the next three censuses, however, couples' nativities had a greater impact
on their childbearing rates than all other variables in the model. In 1860, couples born in Germany
had 21 percent more children than native-born white couples, while those born in Ireland at 23
percent more children. Couples born in Great Britain, Canada and other foreign countries also had
more children than native-born couples, although the difference was more modest (9-16 percent).
By 1880, nativity differentials had widened further, with couples born in Germany having 35
percent more children than native-born couples, couples born in Ireland having 29 percent more
children, while those born in Great Britain and Canada had 14-26 percent more. Recent work by

                                                 21
Hacker and Roberts (2019) confirms that nativity continued to be one of the most substantively
important correlates of marital fertility well into the twentieth century, with second generation
couples (native born of foreign-born parents) typically having marital fertility rates approximately
halfway between those of native-born whites of native parentage and foreign-born populations.
Nativity differences--all else being equal--are strong evidence of the importance of culture and
ideational factors in determining fertility behaviors. Foreign-born populations clearly lagged
behind in the transition to smaller families that accelerated among native-born couples after 1850,
although changes in immigrant selection factors over time may have also played a role in widening
fertility differentials.
        The 1850-1880 results again confirm that urban places and banks were negatively
correlated with marital fertility. Once again, however, lower marital fertility rates among couples
in the urban areas (approximately 6-13 percent lower than among rural couples across the models
and various size of place dummy variables) likely reflects some differences in infant and child
mortality rates, which were undoubtedly higher in urban areas. In most models, there was a
consistent gradient in marital fertility among couples living in counties with zero, one, two, three,
or four or more banks. The relationships in each census year were remarkably consistent.
Increasingly more couples were living in counties with banks or in counties with multiple banks
over time, increasing the overall impact of banks. In 1850, 46.8 percent of couples lived in a county
without a bank. In 1880, the percentage had fallen to 32.1 percent.
        The full models add several variables of interest to fertility decline hypotheses while
reducing the potential bias from of omitted variables. Residence in a county with a high proportion
of Congregational, Unitarian, Universalist and Presbyterian churches was negatively correlated
with marital fertility, supporting hypotheses that members of liberal/individualistic churches were
more willing to practice marital fertility control, all else being equal, than members of more
conservative churches. As expected, variables typically associated with traditional demographic
theory--urbanization, industrialization, education, literacy--were negatively correlated with
couples' marital fertility. Couples living in counties with high proportions of the labor force in

                                                  22
manufacturing had 5-35 percent lower net marital fertility rates, providing some support for local
labor market/child default hypotheses.12 Beginning with the 1860 census, when it was first
measured, married women's participation in the paid labor force was negatively correlated with
their fertility, although participation rates were very low (less than 2 percent of married white
women in 1870 and 1880 had occupations in paid labor force). The availability of transportation,
which was also negatively correlated with couples' net marital fertility in 1840, was negatively
correlated in 1850 and 1860, suggesting that residence in a county more connected to the national
economy and the movement of goods, people and information was associated with reduced
childbearing.
       The availability of real estate wealth data in 1850 and real estate and personal estate
wealth data in 1860 and 1870 provides a rare opportunity to examine the impact of occupation
and wealth simultaneously during the demographic transition (Guinnane 2011). When combined
with local farm prices and banking availability, wealth data allow a more comprehensive test of the
land availability/target-bequest, banking/life-cycle savings, and child demand/quality-quantity
hypotheses than previously possible.
       We find inconsistent support for the land availability hypothesis. All else being equal, the
theory suggests that couples with low wealth living in counties with high farm prices and high



12 Unfortunately,   we lack county-level data on the relative wage of laborers and farm hands. In an
analysis of child-woman ratios (not shown), we found a negative and statistically significant
relationship between the ratio of laborer to farm hand wages in 1850, measured at the state level,
and county child-woman ratios. The relationship was positive (the opposite of the expected sign),
however, and statistically significant in 1860, providing inconsistent support for Sundstrom and
David's hypothesis that a more favorable ratio of non-agricultural to agricultural wages led to
greater "default" by farm children to provide old age care of their parents, and a resulting
adaptation to this default by parents to limit fertility and provide larger "bribes" to keep children
on the farm.
                                                  23
proportions of farm acreage improved would anticipate the greatest difficulty providing nearby
farms for their surviving children and would adapt by reducing their fertility relative to couples
with high levels of wealth living in counties with low farm prices and low proportions of farm
acreage improved. As expected, farm prices and farm acreage improved was negatively correlated
with marital fertility in all census years, consistent with the theory. Relative to couples living in
counties with farm prices per acre one standard deviation below the mean, couples in counties
with farm prices one standard deviation above the mean had 1.0-3.1 percent fewer children,
depending on the year. Couples living in counties with a proportion of farm acreage improved one
standard deviation above the mean had 2.9-3.9 percent fewer children than couples in counties
with farm acreage improved one standard deviation below the mean. 13 Couples' real estate and
personal estate wealth, however, had an inverted u-shaped correlation with fertility. As expected,
couples with moderate levels of wealth had higher fertility than couples with no real estate or
personal estate wealth, all else being equal. Couples with higher levels of real and personal estate
wealth, however, had lower fertility than couples with moderate wealth, despite their ability to
provide viable farmsteads nearby for more children. Wealthier couples, of course, may have
sought to provide their children with better and more expensive farm bequests reflective of their
higher standard of living. Even with higher targeted bequests levels, however, there is little or no
reason to expect a negative relationship between wealth and fertility based solely on the land
availability thesis. Instead, the results are more consistent with the household economics
literature on the quantity-quality tradeoff, which predicts a negative relationship between
wealth/income and fertility after income exceeds a threshold where parents' investments in child
quality depresses the number of children demanded (Becker 1981; Wahl 1992; Winegarden and
Wheeler 1992; Jones and Tertilt 2008). Our occupational results, which show lower fertility rates




13 We   have tried other measures of improved acres similar to the approach of Easterlin (1976) with
similar results.
                                                   24
among women married to men in higher paying occupation groups, are also consistent with child
demand theories. 14
       Results remain consistent with the life-cycle savings hypothesis, which contends that
individuals must provide for their old age support by investing in children, real assets, financial
assets or slaves. The presence and number of banks were negatively correlated with net marital
fertility in each census year. Relative to couples living in counties without banks, couples residing
in counties with one or more banks had 2.1-6.3 percent fewer children, all else being equal.
Although the cross-sectional approach does not allow us to make causal estimates, the use of
state-level fixed effects and large number of variables in the model--especially in census years
1860 and 1870, which included measures of occupation, literacy, personal and real estate wealth,
urbanization, transportation, school attendance, farm values, farm acreage improved, and level of
manufacturing--increases confidence in findings. Given the agrarian setting and limited financial
options in the early nineteenth century, couples invested in children and real estate. In southern
census regions prior to 1870, couples also invested in slaves. The expansion of banking and
financial networks in the nineteenth-century United States made financial savings more feasible
and attractive, reducing the need for couples to rely on children as a source of old-age support.
This was especially true of wealthier couples, whose greater real and personal estate wealth



14 Other   researchers (e.g., Jones and Tertilt 2008), have relied on occupational income scores
derived from each occupation's average income in 1950 to examine the relationship between
fertility and income across time. Although occupational income scores are readily available in the
IPUMS datasets, we decided to rely on occupational groups for two reasons. First, we focus on the
mid nineteenth century, a century before the association between occupations and their average
incomes were established. Given the large structural changes in the economy in that century,
there is good reason to suspect large changes in the relative earnings of occupations over time.
Second, nearly half of all women in our dataset were married to men with just one occupation,
"farmer," who undoubtedly had a large variance in incomes.
                                                   25
reduced the need to invest in child quantity, and for urban couples. But it was also true of the
declining proportion of couples engaged in farming.
       Overall, however, the substantive results indicate that banks had a modest impact on
marital fertility relative to variables typically associated with traditional demographic transition
theory (occupation, urbanization, literacy and schooling) and variables associated with ideational
hypotheses (nativity and church denominations). Therefore, while we were able to confirm
Steckel's earlier finding (1992) that regional differences in the development of the nation's
financial system were an important factor in marital fertility levels, the availability of local banks
was not the most important factor by a significant margin. Some of this difference, of course, may
reflect differences in the analytical samples and approach; Steckel focused solely on rural couples,
who had limited occupational and residential diversity, while our results are based on couples
living in rural and urban areas with much greater occupational diversity. Steckel's study was also
based on a panel dataset of 638 couples linked across census years while our results are based on
cross-sectional analysis. Although results from a panel dataset--to the extent one can be
constructed with representative links and a limited number of false positives--are clearly
preferable, we do not believe our conclusions are significantly biased by the cross-sectional
approach. In the next section, we construct a panel of couples linked between the 1850-1860 and
1860-1870 complete-count censuses using preliminary links recently published by Abramitzky,
Boutan and Rashid (2020). Although there are a few modest differences, we find similar results to
the cross-sectional analysis, increasing confidence in the results.


Robustness Check Using Preliminary Longitudinal Census Links, 1850-1860 and 1860-1870
       In the last few years, following pioneering research by Joseph Ferrie (1996), economic
historians have levered the growth of computational power, new nominal linking algorithms, and
restricted-use complete-count census datasets to automatically link individuals across U. S.
censuses. The resulting longitudinal datasets have the potential to provide new insights on
migration, economic mobility, intergenerational change and many other topics (Goeken et al.

                                                   26
2011; Feigenbaum 2016; Ruggles, Fitch and Roberts 2018; Abramitzky et al. 2019; Sylvester and
Hacker 2020). Unfortunately, most linked datasets are not representative of the general
population. Women are typically excluded, as are individuals with common names and
inconsistently recorded data. In addition, the potential for Type I errors (incorrectly linking
different individuals) and Type II errors (failing to link an individual who appeared in both
censuses) to bias results may be significant, depending on the methods used to link individuals and
the type of analysis being conducted (Bailey, Cole and Massey 2019).
       In early 2020, Abramitzky, Boustan and Rashid published preliminary "crosswalks"
identifying males linked between 28 matched pairs of U. S. censuses, including crosswalks for the
1850-1860 and 1860-1870 complete-count IPUMS datasets. Links were made by computer using
individuals' first and last names (available only in the restricted-use versions of the IPUMS
datasets), sex, race, and birthplace and four variations of the "Abramitzky-Boustan-Eriksson" (ABE)
linking procedures, which are based on an Expectation Maximization algorithm that combines age
and name distances into a score of the probability that any two records are a true match
(Abramitzky et al. 2019).
       We relied on the preliminary crosswalks to identify men in our couple-level datasets who
were linked between the 1850 and 1860 censuses and men linked between the 1860 and 1870
censuses to create a two panel datasets of married couples. Because women were not linked
directly, we restricted the analytical dataset to couples that included a woman whose estimated
year of birth (census year minus age at census) was within +/- 2 years in each census. We also took
the additional precaution of excluding all women married to men linked to different men with
different algorithms. Although we constructed fertility models with each of the four variations on
the four ABE linking algorithms, model results varied little. Here we present only the results using
the ABE "exact standard" algorithm, which resulted in an analytical dataset of 266,251 couples
linked between the 1850 and 1860 censuses and 323,423 couples linked between the 1860 and
1870 censuses. If we ignore the potential for immigration and census under-enumeration to
reduce the potentially linkable population in both censuses, these totals represent a linkage rate

                                                  27
of less than 10 percent of the white couples in the 1860 and 1870 complete-count censuses. We
made no attempt to create a weighted sample to correct for group differences in the proportion of
individuals linked, but note that the linked dataset includes modestly higher proportions of farm,
literate, rural, and high-wealth couples; lower proportions of foreign-born, low-wealth, large-city,
Middle Atlantic, and Southern couples; and higher proportions of New England and West North
Central region couples compared to the couples in the cross-sectional datasets.
       We relied on the same dependent variable (number of own children less than age five) and
independent variables in the 1850-1880 cross-sectional models above, but with a few important
differences. We measured all independent variables in the first census and the dependent variable
in the second census. In addition, we constructed an alternative specification for each panel by
including the lagged dependent variable--the number of children age 0-4 in the previous census--
as an independent variable (e.g., for the 1850-1860 panel, independent variables were measured
in 1850, the lagged dependent variable was measured in 1850, and the dependent variable was
measured in 1860). The alternative specifications are therefore conditional change models of
fertility, which have greater potential to reduce biases caused by omitted variables and
endogeneity (Finkel 1995).
       The results are shown in Table 5. In general, longitudinal results are consistent with the
cross-sectional models. The signs on the coefficients are consistent in almost all cases with the
coefficients in the cross-sectional models. The size of the coefficients were typically smaller,
however, especially in the conditional change models with the lagged dependent variable included
on the right hand side of the equation. Relative to the reference group of women married to
farmers, for example, women married to men in professional, managerial and sales occupations
had 15-22 percent fewer children in the cross-sectional models, depending on the census year. In
the panel datasets, these women had 7-11 percent fewer children. The coefficients associated
with urban places of various size were in most cases less than half of their respective sizes in the
cross-sectional models. The presence of one or more banks remained negatively associated with
marital fertility in the panel datasets, but again the coefficients were noticeably smaller. In the

                                                  28
conditional change models, the presence of one or more banks was associated with 0.4-1.5
percent fewer children age 0-4 in the census, less than half of the 2.1-5.3 percent fewer children
indicated by the 1860 and 1870 cross-sectional results.
       For a few variables, the panel results indicated a more substantive impact or a different
direction of correlation. School attendance, for example, had a more substantive impact on
couples' fertility in the panel dataset than in the cross-sectional models. Interestingly, the u-shape
relationship we observed between real and personal estate wealth in the cross-sectional models is
not evident in the panel dataset. Instead, there was a consistent negative correlation between
wealth and fertility. Relative to the reference group of couples with moderate levels of real and
personal estate wealth, couples with no wealth had more children, all else being equal. These
results are consistent with the child demand/quality-quantity tradeoff hypothesis and studies
reporting a consistent negative relationship between fertility and occupational income (Long and
Tertilt 2008). Unfortunately, it is unclear whether the longitudinal results are a less biased
indicator of the true relationship between wealth and fertility or a more biased indicator; men
with higher levels of wealth were less mobile and linked between censuses in greater proportions
than men with no wealth, which may affect the results.
       One interpretation for the smaller coefficients in the panel datasets, especially in the
models including the lagged dependent variable on the right side of the equation, is that the
coefficients based on panel data are less subject to endogeneity and omitted variable bias than
coefficients based on cross-sectional results. It may also be the case, however, that false positives
in the linked datasets bias coefficients downwards. Given the current preliminary status of the
crosswalks, we see this exercise as a check of the robustness of our cross-sectional results rather
than a preferable approach. In-progress research linking married couples across complete-count
IPUMS datasets at the Minnesota Population Center (Helgertz et al. 2019)--which should result in
a larger number of cases with very low levels of false positives--and continued research creating
and evaluating panel datasets by other researchers will allow future studies to confirm, modify or
reject the conclusions drawn here.

                                                  29
CONCLUSION
        Historians have long been puzzled by the U. S. fertility decline, which began before
significant urbanization, industrialization, and mortality decline. Unfortunately, poor data have
hampered research. Early research relied on state and county-level child woman ratios calculated
from published census data, which are sensitive to changes in nuptiality and child mortality. In the
last few decades, IPUMS microdata samples of the 1850-1880 censuses have opened up new
analytical possibilities, including the estimation of age-specific marital fertility rates and marital
fertility differentials. These new data suggest that a significant portion of the nineteenth-century
decline in child woman ratios, especially in the first half of the century, was driven by declines in
nuptiality and increases in child mortality. State and county differentials in child-woman ratios,
moreover, also reflected significant differentials in the timing and incidence of marriage and child
mortality. The data are also consistent, nonetheless, with a gradual shift from a demographic
regime in which fertility was regulated by the timing and incidence of marriage to a demographic
regime in which fertility was regulated by couples practicing marital fertility control (Hacker 2003;
Haines et al. 2020). This transition was accelerated in the Northeast, which experienced low levels
of marital fertility early in the century. Indirect estimation methods are able to detect parity-
dependent fertility control in New England and the Mid-Atlantic census divisions prior to the Civil
War, suggesting that significant proportions of couples were able to curtail their childbearing after
reaching a targeted number of surviving children (Hacker 2016).
        We relied on new complete-count IPUMS datasets for the 1830-1880 censuses and county-
level data--including new data on farm values, manufacturing activity, transportation, religious
denominations, and banking institutions--to examine alternative theories of the fertility decline.
These data allowed us to model couples' recent net marital fertility, thereby avoiding the inherent
ambiguity in county-level CWR models as to whether the mechanism linking fertility and
independent variables was via adjustments to the timing and incidence of marriage or via couples'
practice of marital fertility control.

                                                   30
       The land availability, local labor market/child default, conventional structuralist, ideational,
child demand/quality-quantity tradeoff, and life-cycle savings hypotheses all receive some support
from the data. Variables associated with classic demographic transition theory and ideational
theories had the greatest substantive impact on marital fertility. Despite the strong influence of
nuptiality on fertility early in the century, we found evidence of marital fertility control consistent
with hypotheses as early as 1830, with urban couples having significantly fewer children, all else
being equal, than rural couples. The addition of occupation data beginning with the 1840 census
allowed us to examine occupational differences in fertility, which were again consistent with
hypotheses. Farm couples, for example, had more children under the age of five than non-farm
couples, consistent with expectations that couples adjusted their childbearing in response to
differentials in the perceived costs and benefits of children by husbands' occupations. We
stressed, however, that lower childbearing rates among wealthier couples in years with individual-
level wealth data (1850-1870) is inconsistent with the land availability hypothesis, which assumes
couples adjusted their fertility in response to their ability to purchase nearby farms for their
children. Banks proved to be a significant correlate of marital fertility in all census years, providing
consistent support for the life-cycle savings hypothesis. Although the cross-sectional models used
in this study do not allow us to make causal estimates, we conclude that the evidence is consistent
with the hypothesis that banks facilitated financial savings, lowering couples' incentives for having
a large number of children as an alternative way to save for old age. A test of these results with
preliminary panel datasets of couples linked between the 1850-1860 and 1860-1870 censuses
largely confirm the results from the cross-sectional analysis.




                                                   31
REFERENCES
Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Boustan, and Myera Rashid. 2020. "Census Linking Project: Version 1.0"
        [dataset]. https://censuslinkingproject.org. Accessed June 25, 2020.
Atack, Jeremy, Matthew Jaremski, and Peter Rousseau. 2015. "American Banking and the
        Transportation Revolution before the Civil War." Journal of Economic History. Vol. 74. pp.
        943-986.
Basso, Alberto, and David Cuberes. 2013. "Fertility and Financial Development: Evidence from U.S.
        Counties in the 19th Century." Sheffield Economic Research Paper Series. SERP Number
        2013011. (September). University of Sheffield, UK.
Bateman, Fred and James D. Foust. 1974. "A Sample of Rural Households Selected from the 1860
        Manuscript Censuses." Agricultural History. Vol. 48, No. 1 (January). pp. 75-93.
Becker, G. S. 1981. A Treatise on the Family. Harvard University Press. Cambridge, MA.
Bailey, Martha, Connor Cole, Morgan Henderson, and Catherine Massey. 2019. "How well do
        automated methods perform in historical samples? Evidence from new ground truth."
        NBER Working Paper No. 24019.
Becker, S. O., F. Cinnirella and L. Woessmann. 2010. "The trade-off between fertility and
        education: Evidence from before the demographic transition." Journal of Economic Growth
        15:177­204.
Brodie, Janet Farrell. 1994. Contraception and abortion in 19th-century America. Ithaca, NY:
        Cornell University Press.
Bodenhorn, Howard. 2003. State Banking in Early America: A New Economic History. New York:
        Oxford University Press.
Carter, Susan B, Roger L. Ransom, and Richard Sutch. 2004. "Family Matters: The Life-Cycle
        Transition and the Antebellum Fertility Decline." In Timothy W; Guinnane, William A.
        Sundstrom, and Warren C. Whatley, eds. History Matters: Essays on Economic Growth,
        Technology, and Demographic Change. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. pp. 271-
        327.
Carter, Susan B., Scott Sigmund Gartner, Michael R. Haines, Alan L. Olmstead, Richard Sutch, and
        Gavin Wright, eds. 2006. Historical Statistics of the United States: Earliest Times to the
        Present. Millennial Edition. NY: Cambridge University Press. 5 volumes.
Coale, Ansley J., and Melvin Zelnik. 1963. New Estimates of Fertility and Population in the United
        States: A Study of Annual White Births from 1855 to 1960 and of Completeness of
        Enumeration in the Censuses from 1880 to 1960. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Craig, Lee A. 1993. To Sow One Acre More: Childbearing and Farm Productivity in the Antebellum
        North. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.

                                               32
Dribe, Martin, J. David Hacker, and Francesco Scalone. 2014. "Socioeconomic Status and Net
        Fertility during the Fertility Decline: A Comparative Analysis of Canada, Iceland, Sweden,
        Norway and the USA." Population Studies. Vol. 68, no. 2. pp. 135-149.
Dribe, M., Oris, M., and Pozzi, L. 2014. "Socioeconomic status and fertility before, during, and after
        the demographic transition: An introduction." Demographic Research. Vol. 31, No. 7. pp.
        161­182.
Easterlin, Richard A. 1976. "Population Change and Farm Settlement in the Northern United
        States." Journal of Economic History. Vol. 36, No. 1 (March). pp. 45-75.
Easterlin, Richard A., George Alter, and Gretchen Condran. 1978. "Farms and Farm Families in Old
        and New Areas: The Northern States in 1860." In Tamara K. Hareven and Maris A.
        Vinovskis, eds. Family and Population in Nineteenth-Century America. Princeton, NJ:
        Princeton University Press. pp. 22-84.
Easterlin, R. A. and E. C. Crimmins. 1985. The Fertility Revolution. A Supply-Demand Analysis.
        Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Feigenbaum, James J. 2016. "A Machine Learning Approach to Census Record Linking.:
        http://scholar.harvard.edu/files/jfeigenbaum/files/feigenbaum-
        censuslink.pdf?m=1423080976. Accessed June 25, 2020.
Ferrie, Joseph P. 1996. "A New Sample of Males Linked from the 1850 Public Use Micro Sample of
        the Federal Census of Population to the 1860 Federal Census Manuscript Schedules."
        Historical Methods 29 (4):141-156.
Finkel, S. 1995. Causal analysis with panel data. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Forster, Colin, G.S.L. Tucker, and Helen Bridge. 1972. Economic Opportunity and Whiter American
        Fertility Ratios, 1800-1860. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Goeken, Ron, Lap Huynh, Thomas Lenius, and Rebecca Vick. 2011. "New Methods of Census
        Record Linking." Historical Methods. 44:7­14
Guest, Avery M. 1981. "Social structure and U.S. inter-state fertility differentials in 1900."
        Demography 18: 465-487.
Guest, Avery M., and Stewart E. Tolnay. 1983. "Children's roles and fertility: Late nineteenth-
        century United States." Social Science History 7.4: 355-380.
Guinnane, Timothy W. 2011. The historical fertility transition: A guide for economists. Journal of
        Economic Literature. No. 49. pp. 589­614.
Hacker, J. David. 1999. "Child Naming, Religion, and the Decline of Marital Fertility in Nineteenth-
        Century America." History of the Family: An International Quarterly. Vol. 4, No. 3. pp. 339-
        365.
________. 2003. "Rethinking the `Early' Decline of Fertility in the United States." Demography. Vol.
        4, No. 4 (November). pp. 605-620.
                                                    33
________. 2008. "Economic, Demographic, and Anthropometric Correlates of First Marriage in the
       Mid Nineteenth-Century United States." Social Science History. Vol. 32, No. 3 (Fall). pp.
       307-345.
________. 2010. "Decennial life tables for the white population of the United States, 1790­1900."
       Historical Methods. 43, 45­79.
________. 2011. "A Census-Based Count of the Civil War Dead." Civil War History. Vol. 57, No. 4.
       pp. 307-348.
________. "Ready, Willing and Able? Impediments to Onset of Marital Fertility Decline in the
       United States." Demography. Vol. 53, No. 6 (December). pp. 1657-1692.
________. "Reconstruction of birth histories using children ever born and children surviving data
       from the 1900 and 1910 United States Censuses." Historical Methods. 53(1): 28-52.
Hacker, J. David and Evan Roberts. 2017. "The Impact of Kin Availability, Parental Religiosity, and
       Nativity on Fertility Differentials in the Late Nineteenth-Century United States,"
       Demographic Research. Vol. 37(34), pp. 1049-1080.
________. 2019. "Fertility decline in the United States, 1850-1940: New Evidence from Complete-
       Count Datasets." Annales de Démographie Historique. Vol. 138, No. 2, pp. 143-147.
Haines, Michael. R. 1977. Fertility, Nuptiality, and Occupation: A Study of Coal Mining Populations
       and Regions in England and Wales in the Mid-Nineteenth Century. The Journal of
       Interdisciplinary History. Vol. 8, No. 2 (Autumn). pp. 245-280.
________. 1989. "American Fertility in Transition: New Estimates of Birth Rates in the United
       States, 1900-1910." Demography. Vol. 26, No. 1 (February). pp. 137-148.
________. 1996. "Long Term Marriage Patterns in the United States from Colonial Times to the
       Present." The History of the Family: An International Quarterly. Vol. 1 pp. 15-39.
________. 2000. "The Population of the United States, 1790-1920." In Stanley Engerman and
       Robert Gallman, eds. The Cambridge Economic History of the United States. Vol. 2. "The
       Long Nineteenth Century." NY: Cambridge University Press. pp. 143-205.
Haines, Michael R., and J. David Hacker. 2011. "Spatial Aspects of the American Fertility Transition
       in the Nineteenth Century." In Myron P. Gutmann, Glenn D. Deane, Emily R. Merchant, and
       Kenneth M. Sylvester, eds. Navigating Space and Time in Historical Population Studies. (NY:
       Oxford University Press, 2011). pp. 37-63.
Haines, Michael R., and Richard H. Steckel, eds. 2000. A population history of North America.
       Cambridge University Press.
Hammond, Bray. 1957. Banks and Politics in America: From the Revolution to the Civil War.
       Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Helgertz, Jonas, Jacob Wellington, K. Thompson, and Joseph P. Price. "A new strategy for linking
       census data: A case study linking the 1900 and 1910 full-count U.S. censuses." Paper
                                                    34
        presented at the annual meeting of the Social Science History Association, Chicago, Illinois,
        November 22.
ICPSR. 2010. Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research. Study Number 2896.
        "Historical Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790-2002."
        (Michael R. Haines and ICPSR). (Ann Arbor: ICPSR, University of Michigan).
ICPSR. 2014. Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research. Study Number 35206.
        "United States Agricultural Data, 1840-2012." (Michael R. Haines, Price Fishback, and Paul
        Rhode). (Ann Arbor: ICPSR, University of Michigan).
Jaremski, Matthew. 2014. "National Banking's Role in U.S. Industrialization, 1850-1900" Journal of
        Economic History Vol. 74, pp. 109-140.
Jaremski, Matthew and Peter Rousseau. 2013. "Banks, Free Banks, and Economic Growth."
        Economic Inquiry Vol. 51, pp. 1603-1621.
Jones, Larry E., and Michele Tertilt. (2008). An economic history of fertility in the United States:
        1826­1960. In P. Rupert (ed.), Frontiers in family economics (Vol.1, pp. 165­230). Bingley,
        UK: Emerald Group Publishing.
Knodel, John. 1974. The Decline of Fertility in Germany, 1871-1939. Princeton: Princeton
        University Press.
Knodel, John, and Etienne van de Walle. 1979. "Lessons from the Past: Policy Implications of
        Historical Fertility Studies." Population and Development Review. Vol. 5, No. 2. pp. 217-
        245.
Leet, Donald R. 1976. "The Determinants of Fertility Transition in Antebellum Ohio." Journal of
        Economic History. Vol. 36, No. 2 (June). pp. 359-378.
Lesthaeghe, Ron. 1980. "On the Social Control of Human Reproduction." Population and
        Development Review. Vol. 6, No. 4 (March). pp. 527-548.
________. 1983. "A Century of Demographic and Cultural Change in Western Europe: An
        Exploration of Underlying Dimensions." Population and Development Review. Vol. 9, No. 3.
        pp. 411-435.
Maloney, Thomas, Heidi Hanson, and Ken Smith. 2014. "Occupation and fertility on the frontier:
        Evidence from the State of Utah. Demographic Research. Vol. 30(29), pp. 853-886.
McCusker, John J., and Russell R. Menard. 1985. The Economy of British America, 1607-1789.
        Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.
Modigliani, Franco. 1966. "The Life Cycle Hypothesis of Saving, the Demand for Wealth and the
        Supply of Capital." Social Research. Vol. 33, No. 2. Pp. 160-217.
Notestein, Frank W. 1953. "The Economics of Population and Food Supplies. I. The Economic
        Problems of Population Change." Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference of
        Agricultural Economists. London, England: Oxford University Press.
                                                   35
Preston, Samuel H., and Michael R. Haines. 1991. Fatal Years: Child Mortality in Late Nineteenth
       Century America. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Ruggles, Steven, Catherine Fitch, and Evan Roberts. 2018. "Historical Census Record Linkage."
       Annual Review of Sociology. Vol. 44, No. 1, pp. 19-37.
Ruggles, Steven, Sarah Flood, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, Erin Meyer, Jose Pacas and Matthew
       Sobek. 2020. IPUMS USA: Version 10.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2020.
       https://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V10.0
Ruggles, Steven and Diana Magnuson. 2020. Census technology, politics, and institutional change,
       1790-2020." Journal of American History 107: 19-51
Scalone, Francesco and Marin Dribe. 2017. "Testing child-woman ratios and the own-children
       method on the 1900 Sweden census: Examples of indirect fertility estimates by
       socioeconomic status in a historical population." Historical Methods. 50(1): 16­29.
Smith, Daniel Scott. 1987. "`Early Fertility Decline in America: A Problem in Family History." Journal
       of Family History. Vol. 12, Nos. 1-3. pp. 73-84.
________. 1993. "American family and demographic patterns and the Northwest European
       model." Continuity and Change 8: 389­415.
Steckel, Richard H. 1992. "The Fertility Transition in the United States: Tests of Alternative
       Hypotheses. In Claudia Goldin and Hugh Rockoff (eds.), Strategic Factors in Nineteenth
       Century American Economic History: A Volume to Honor Robert W. Fogel. Chicago:
       University of Chicago Press. pp. 351 ­ 374.
Sundstrom, William A., and Paul A. David. 1988. "Old-Age Security Motives, Labor Markets, and
       Farm Family Fertility in Antebellum America." Explorations in Economic History. Vol. 25,
       No. 2 (April). pp. 164-197.
Tolnay, Stewart E. 1981. "Trends in Total and Marital Fertility for Black Americans, 1886-1899."
       Demography. Vol. 18, No. 4. pp. 443-463.
Tucker, George (Joseph Atterly, pseudo.). 1827. A Voyage to the Moon. (New York: Elam Bliss).
Tucker, George. 1855. Progress of the United States in Population & Wealth in Fifty Years as
       Exhibited by the Decennial Census from 1790 to 1840. NY: Press of Hunt's Merchant
       Magazine.
Wahl, Jenny Bourne. 1992. "Trading quantity for quality: Explaining the decline in American
       fertility in the nineteenth century." In Claudia Goldin & Hugh Rockoff (eds.), Strategic
       Factors in Nineteenth Century American Economic History: A Volume to Honor Robert W.
       Fogel (pp. 375­397). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Wanamaker, Marianne H. 2012. "Industrialization and fertility in the nineteenth century: Evidence
       from South Carolina." The Journal of Economic History 72.1: 168-196.

                                                 36
Weber, Warren. 2005. Listing of all State Banks with Beginning and Ending Dates. Research
      Department, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
      http://research.mpls.frb.fed.us/research/economists/wewproj.html
________. 2008. Balance sheets for U.S. Antebellum State Banks. Research Department, Federal
      Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
      http://research.mpls.frb.fed.us/research/economists/wewproj.html
Winegarden, C. R., and Mark Wheeler. 1992. The role of economic growth in the fertility transition
      in Western Europe: Econometric evidence. Economica, 59, 421­435.
Woods, Robert. 2000. The Demography of Victorian England and Wales. Cambridge, UK:
      Cambridge University Press.
Yasuba, Yasukichi. 1962. Birth Rates of the White Population of the United States, 1800-1860: An
      Economic Analysis. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.




                                                37
                                                                             Figure 1. White woman-child ratios in the United States, 1800-1880

                                                                         2,250




                                                                         2,000
White child-woman ratio (children aged 0-9 per 1,000 women aged 15-49)




                                                                         1,750                                                          West South Central
                                                                                                                                        West North Central
                                                                                                                                        Mountain & Pacific
                                                                                                                                        East South Central
                                                                                                                                        East North Central
                                                                         1,500                                                          Rural
                                                                                                                                        South Atlantic
                                                                                                                                        Nation
                                                                                                                                        Mid Atlantic
                                                                                                                                        New England
                                                                         1,250                                                          Urban




                                                                         1,000




                                                                          750




                                                                          500
                                                                                 1800 1810 1820 1830 1840 1850 1860 1870 1880
                                                                                                   Census year
Table 1. OLS regressions of children less than age five in the household, 1830-1850, parsimonous models

                                                                            Census year
                                                       1830                   1840                   1850
Age group of imputed wife
  15-19                                                   -66.1 ***              -67.6 ***              -67.8 ***
  20-29                                                    ref.                   ref.                   ref.
  30-39                                                    11.7 ***               10.5 ***                2.4 ***
  40-49                                                   -44.9 ***              -47.5 ***              -52.6 ***
Residence type
  Rural                                                    ref.                   ref.                   ref.
  Urban, population less than 10,000                      -12.8   ***            -10.8   ***            -13.2   ***
  Urban, 10,000 - 24,999                                  -17.8   ***            -13.8   ***             -9.3   ***
  Urban, 25,000 - 99,999                                  -16.7   ***            -13.6   ***            -13.7   ***
  Urban, 100,00 or more                                   -16.6   ***            -11.9   ***            -14.5   ***
Bank availability
  No banks in county                                       ref.                   ref.                   ref.
  1 bank in county                                         -4.4   ***             -5.3   ***             -7.4   ***
  2 banks in county                                        -6.8   ***             -6.7   ***             -8.5   ***
  3 banks in county                                        -4.4   ***             -8.8   ***            -10.0   ***
  4 or more banks in county                                -7.2   ***             -8.7   ***            -10.5   ***

Mean number of children age 0-4                           1.44                   1.35                   1.17
Number of couples                                     609,158                891,204              1,124,656
R-square                                                 0.095                  0.088                  0.073


Notes: All models employ state-level fixed effects. The analytical universe includes imputed nuclear households with
one white couple present. See text for definition and selection criteria. The dependent variable is the total number
of white children ages 0-4 in the household.

*p<0.05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001
Table 2. OLS regressions of children less than five in the household, 1830-1850, full models
                                                                      Census year
Year                                                1830                1840                   1850
Age group of imputed wife
  15-19                                              -66.1 ***           -67.6 ***             -66.5 ***
  20-29                                               ref.                ref.                  ref.
  30-39                                               11.7 ***            10.2 ***               0.9 ***
  40-49                                              -44.8 ***           -47.8 ***             -54.1 ***
Occupation group of males in household
  Agricultural                                                            ref.                  ref.
  Professional, engineering                                              -23.3   ***           -14.3   ***
  Commercial                                                             -16.8   ***           -10.2   ***
  Manufacturing                                                           -7.3   ***            -1.9   ***
  Mining                                                                  -3.7   ***             8.1   ***
  Navigational                                                           -11.0   ***            -5.4   ***
  No occupation                                                           -7.8   ***            27.6   ***
  Mixed occupations                                                       -1.8   ***            -4.7   ***
Literacy of household members 20 & over
  One or more illiterate                                                  ref.                  ref.
  Both literate                                                           -7.6 ***              -2.7 ***
Nativity
  Native-born couple                                  ref.                                      ref.
  Foreign-born couple                                 -0.8                                      -0.2
Slave holdings
  No slaves in household                              ref.                ref.
  Less than 20 slaves                                 -4.6 ***            -1.9 ***
  20 or more slaves                                  -14.9 ***           -10.7 ***
Real estate wealth
  None                                                                                          -9.6 ***
  Moderate ($100 - $2499)                                                                       ref.
  High ($2500 or more)                                                                          -6.5 ***
Residence type
  Rural                                               ref.                ref.                  ref.
  Urban, population less than 10,000                 -12.7   ***          -6.5   ***           -10.5   ***
  Urban, 10,000 - 24,999                             -17.7   ***          -9.2   ***            -7.3   ***
  Urban, 25,000 - 99,999                             -16.7   ***         -10.0   ***           -10.8   ***
  Urban, 100,00 or more                              -16.5   ***          -8.2   ***           -11.7   ***
Transportation                                                            -3.9   ***            -6.7   ***
School attendance, whites age 5-17                                                             -19.2   ***
Bank availability
  No banks in county                                  ref.                ref.                  ref.
  1 bank in county                                    -4.3   ***          -3.7   ***            -5.7   ***
  2 banks in county                                   -6.6   ***          -4.0   ***            -6.1   ***
  3 banks in county                                   -4.3   ***          -5.7   ***            -8.2   ***
  4 or more banks in county                           -7.1   ***          -5.3   ***            -8.4   ***
Mean number of children age 0-4                       1.44                 1.35                 1.17
Number of couples                                 609,158              891,204            1,122,548
R-square                                             0.096                0.093                0.090


Notes: All models employ state-level fixed effects. See table 2 for universe selection criteria. Foreign-born
couples include couples with one or both partners foreign born. Literate couples include only couples in
which both partners could read and write. The dollar figure to define the cutoff between moderate and
high wealth couples was chosen to classify approximately 10 percent of all couples as high wealth. In 1850,
high real estate wealth couples reported $2500 or more in real estate wealth. Transportation is a dummy
variable indicating if the couple's county of residence was on a canal, river, or other navigable waterway in
1840 and if on a canal, river, or other navigable waterway or had a railroad in 1850. Proportion attending
school is the proportion of white children age 5-17 attending school in the county. The dependent
variable is the total number of white children ages 0-4 in the household.

*p<0.05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001
Table 3. OLS regressions of own children less than five in household, 1850-1880, parsimonious models
                                                                                   Census year
                                                      1850               1860                    1870          1880
Age group of imputed wife
  15-19                                                -71.0   ***        -72.3    ***           -61.0   ***   -61.4   ***
  20-24                                                 ref.               ref.                   ref.          ref.
  25-29                                                 27.5   ***         22.3    ***            23.2   ***    22.5   ***
  30-34                                                 20.2   ***         12.4    ***            11.8   ***     7.9   ***
  35-39                                                  4.0   ***         -7.5    ***            -8.3   ***   -15.7   ***
  40-44                                                -29.4   ***        -41.7    ***           -43.8   ***   -53.4   ***
  45-49                                                -74.7   ***        -84.5    ***           -86.8   ***   -96.0   ***
Age differential from spouse                            -0.1   ***         -0.2    ***            -0.2   ***    -0.6   ***
Occupation group of spouse (1950 classification)
    Professional                                       -17.5   ***        -18.4    ***           -22.3   ***   -23.2   ***
    Farmer                                              ref.               ref.                   ref.          ref.
    Manager-Official-Proprietor                        -14.9   ***        -16.1    ***           -20.1   ***   -22.6   ***
    Clerial & Sales                                    -20.1   ***        -19.6    ***           -24.0   ***   -25.6   ***
    Craftsmen                                           -8.9   ***         -8.6    ***           -12.6   ***   -12.6   ***
    Operatives & Apprentices                            -9.7   ***         -9.9    ***           -12.2   ***   -11.5   ***
    Service Worker                                     -15.1   ***        -16.3    ***           -20.1   ***   -19.7   ***
    Farm Laborer                                       -49.8   ***         -8.3    ***            -9.8   ***   -12.3   ***
    Laborers                                            -7.0   ***         -7.1    ***           -10.4   ***    -6.5   ***
    Miners                                              -2.2    **         -3.8    ***            -2.2   ***     3.1    **
    Non-Occupational Response                          -31.6   ***        -13.3    ***           -22.3   ***   -26.7   ***
Literacy of couple
  One or both spouses cannot read or write              ref.               ref.                   ref.          ref.
  Both spouses can read and write                      -11.3 ***          -11.7 ***               -9.3 ***     -10.2 ***
Nativity of couple
  Both spouses native born
  One or both spouses born Germany                       0.4               21.3    ***            30.1   ***    34.7   ***
  One or both spouses born Ireland                       2.5   ***         22.2    ***            29.2   ***    28.7   ***
  One or both spouses born Great Britain                 1.5   ***          8.3    ***             9.7   ***    13.1   ***
  One or both spouses born Canada                       13.1   ***         15.5    ***            17.4   ***    18.1   ***
  One or both spouses other foreign born                -4.0   ***         15.5    ***            18.4   ***    26.1   ***
Residence type
  Rural                                                 ref.               ref.                   ref.          ref.
  Urban, population less than 10,000                    -8.2   ***         -8.9    ***            -8.5   ***    -8.0   ***
  Urban, 10,000 - 24,999                                -6.5   ***         -9.0    ***            -8.2   ***    -7.1   ***
  Urban, 25,000 - 99,999                                -8.2   ***         -7.8    ***            -7.6   ***    -7.0   ***
  Urban, 100,00 or more                                 -6.4   ***        -12.7    ***            -7.5   ***    -5.8   ***
Additional county-level control variables
  School attendance, whites age 5-17                   -17.9   ***         -9.8 ***               -7.7   ***   -11.3   ***
  Proportion of labor force in manufacturing           -17.5   ***        -10.4 ***              -41.2   ***   -23.9   ***
  Average farm value per acre (ln)                      -1.2   ***         -0.2 **                -0.7   ***    -1.3   ***
  Proportion of farm acres improved                     -9.0   ***        -10.4 ***              -10.1   ***    -8.8   ***
Bank availability
  No banks in county                                    ref.                ref.                  ref.          ref.
  1 bank in county                                      -4.4   ***          -3.1   ***            -2.4   ***    -3.1   ***
  2 banks in county                                     -5.3   ***          -5.0   ***            -3.9   ***    -3.9   ***
  3 banks in county                                     -6.6   ***          -4.9   ***            -5.4   ***    -6.1   ***
  4 or more banks in county                             -5.8   ***          -6.2   ***            -5.6   ***    -6.2   ***

Mean number of children age 0-4                        0.994              0.991                  0.907         0.875
Number of couples                                  2,590,117           3,679,139           4,578,768            630,420
R-square                                                0.135               0.145               0.141              0.151

Notes: All models employ state-level fixed effects. The analytical universe includes all currently-married white women age 15-49
with spouses present in the household. See Table 2 for definition of school attendance variable. Proportion manufacturing is the
proportion of the white population age 15-69 employed in manufacturing. Average farm value per acre is the natural log of the
value in hundreds of dollars and includes improved and unimproved acreage. See www.ipums.org for dicussion of occupation
(OCC1950) and size of place (SIZEPL). The dependent variable is the number of own ages 0-4 in the household as identified by the
IPUMS variable NCHLT5.

*p<0.05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001
Table 6. Full couple-level OLS regressions of own children less than five in household, 1850-1880
                                                                                    Census year
                                                       1850                1860                   1870           1880
Age group of imputed wife
  15-19                                                 -70.3    ***        -70.5   ***           -59.4    ***   -61.3   ***
  20-24                                                  ref.                ref.                  ref.           ref.
  25-29                                                  27.1    ***         21.7   ***            22.4    ***    22.4   ***
  30-34                                                  19.5    ***         11.4   ***            10.6    ***     7.8   ***
  35-39                                                   3.2    ***         -8.6   ***            -9.6    ***   -15.7   ***
  40-44                                                 -30.2    ***        -42.8   ***           -45.3    ***   -53.4   ***
  45-49                                                 -75.6    ***        -85.7   ***           -88.4    ***   -96.0   ***
Age differential from spouse                             -0.1    ***         -0.2   ***            -0.2    ***    -0.6   ***
Labor force participation of mother                                          -9.7   ***           -35.2    ***   -37.8   ***
Occupation group of spouse (1950 classification)
    Professional                                        -16.4    ***        -17.1   ***           -20.4    ***   -22.5   ***
    Farmer                                               ref.                ref.                  ref.           ref.
    Manager-Official-Proprietor                         -13.9    ***        -15.4   ***           -18.0    ***   -22.2   ***
    Clerial & Sales                                     -18.6    ***        -18.1   ***           -21.8    ***   -25.0   ***
    Craftsmen                                            -8.1    ***         -7.5   ***           -11.0    ***   -12.0   ***
    Operatives & Apprentices                             -8.7    ***         -8.4   ***            -9.7    ***   -10.6   ***
    Service Worker                                      -13.8    ***        -14.3   ***           -16.6    ***   -18.3   ***
    Farm Laborer                                        -46.6    ***         -4.6   ***            -5.2    ***   -11.4   ***
    Laborers                                             -4.6    ***         -3.8   ***            -6.8    ***    -5.9   ***
    Miners                                                0.0                -1.6    **             1.4    ***     3.2    **
    Non-Occupational Response                           -29.9    ***         -9.9   ***           -17.2    ***   -25.7   ***
Literacy of couple
  One or both spouses cannot read or write               ref.                ref.                   ref.          ref.
  Both spouses can read and write                       -11.2 ***           -11.3 ***               -9.6 ***     -10.3 ***
Nativity of couple
  Both spouses native born                               ref.                ref.                  ref.           ref.
  One or both spouses born Germany                        0.4                21.3   ***            29.5    ***    34.6   ***
  One or both spouses born Ireland                        2.8    ***         23.4   ***            29.6    ***    28.7   ***
  One or both spouses born Great Britain                  1.9    ***          8.9   ***            10.2    ***    13.5   ***
  One or both spouses born Canada                        13.9    ***         16.3   ***            18.1    ***    18.4   ***
  One or both spouses other foreign born                 -3.2    ***         16.0   ***            19.2    ***    26.2   ***
Couples' combined real estate wealth
  None                                                    -7.1 ***           -3.8 ***               -4.5 ***
  Moderate                                                ref.               ref.                   ref.
  High                                                    -5.4 ***           -3.1 ***               -4.1 ***
Couples' combined personal estate wealth
  None                                                                      -10.5 ***               -7.0 ***
  Moderate                                                                   ref.                   ref.
  High                                                                       -2.4 ***               -5.0 ***
Residence type
  Rural                                                   ref.               ref.                   ref.          ref.
  Urban, population less than 10,000                      -7.6   ***         -7.8   ***             -7.9   ***    -7.9   ***
  Urban, 10,000 - 24,999                                  -5.7   ***         -8.4   ***             -6.6   ***    -7.0   ***
  Urban, 25,000 - 99,999                                  -7.8   ***         -6.4   ***             -6.5   ***    -6.7   ***
  Urban, 100,00 or more                                   -7.5   ***        -12.7   ***             -6.4   ***    -5.8   ***
Additional county-level control variables
  Transportation                                         -5.1 ***            -5.4 ***
  School attendance, whites age 5-17                    -16.9 ***           -10.6 ***             -10.5 ***      -11.2 ***
  Proportion of labor force in manufacturing            -10.8 ***            -4.6 ***             -35.1 ***      -20.2 ***
  Average farm value per acre (ln)                         -0.4 ***             0.4 ***            -0.2 ***            -1.3 ***
  Proportion of farm acres improved                        -8.8 ***            -6.8 ***            -9.0 ***            -8.7 ***
  Proportion liberal/pietistic churches                    -8.4 ***           -12.2 ***            -4.4 ***
Bank availability
  No banks in county                                       ref.                ref.                ref.                ref.
  1 bank in county                                         -3.5   ***          -2.2   ***          -2.1   ***          -3.1   ***
  2 banks in county                                        -4.4   ***          -4.2   ***          -3.6   ***          -3.9   ***
  3 banks in county                                        -5.5   ***          -3.9   ***          -5.2   ***          -6.2   ***
  4 or more banks in county                                -5.1   ***          -5.2   ***          -5.3   ***          -6.3   ***

Mean number of children age 0-4                          0.993               0.991               0.906               0.875
Number of couples                                   2,554,825           3,647,177           4,551,750             630,420
R-square                                                 0.136               0.148               0.145               0.153

Notes: All models employ state-level fixed effects. . See www.ipums.org for dicussion of occupation (OCC1950) and size of place
(SIZEPL). The dollar figure to define the cutoff between moderate and high wealth couples was chosen to classify approximately
10 percent of all couples as high wealth. In 1850, high real estate wealth couples reported $2500 or more in real estate wealth.
In 1860, couples with high real estate wealth reported $3500 or more in real estate wealth, while couples with high personal
estate wealth reported $2000 or more in personal estate. In 1870, couples with high real estate wealth reported $5000 or more
in real estate, while couples with high personal estate wealth reported $2000 or more in personal estate. Proportion
"liberal/individualistic" churches is the proportion of all church accomodations Congregationalist, Presbyterian, Unitarian and
Universalist. See Tables 2 and 3 for definitions of other county-level variables. The dependent variable is the number of own ages
0-4 in the household as identified by the IPUMS variable NCHLT5.


*p<0.05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001
Table 5. OLS regressions of own children less than five in household, couples in linked censuses
                                                           1850-1860 panel                           1860-1870 panel

Occupation group of spouse (1950 classification)
    Professional                                        -9.1   ***        -6.8   ***           -11.4      ***     -9.0   ***
    Farmer                                              ref.              ref.                  ref.              ref.
    Manager-Official-Proprietor                        -10.6   ***        -8.7   ***           -10.2      ***     -8.0   ***
    Clerial & Sales                                     -9.4   ***        -7.4   ***           -12.9      ***    -10.6   ***
    Craftsmen                                           -5.4   ***        -4.3   ***            -6.7      ***     -5.8   ***
    Operatives & Apprentices                            -5.8   ***        -4.7   ***            -7.5      ***     -6.5   ***
    Service Worker                                     -10.9   ***        -9.1   ***            -6.8      ***     -5.1   ***
    Farm Laborer                                        -1.4               3.1                   0.9               1.2
    Laborers                                             1.2   *           1.4   **              1.3      *        1.5   **
    Miners                                               5.0   *           5.3   *               5.3      **       5.4   **
    Non-Occupational Response                           -8.1   ***        -5.9   ***            -2.3      ***     -1.3   **
Literacy of couple
  One or both spouses cannot read or write              ref.              ref.                     ref.           ref.
  Both spouses can read and write                       -4.2 ***          -2.2 ***                 -6.3 ***       -4.2 ***
Nativity of couple
  Both spouses native born
  One or both spouses born Germany                     18.6    ***        18.3   ***               22.9   ***     19.5   ***
  One or both spouses born Ireland                     13.8    ***        13.1   ***               20.5   ***     16.8   ***
  One or both spouses born Great Britain                8.2    ***         7.4   ***                8.5   ***      6.7   ***
  One or both spouses born Canada                       7.5    ***         5.9   ***                9.2   ***      7.1   ***
  One or both spouses other foreign born               20.0    ***        19.4   ***               22.8   ***     19.4   ***
Couples' combined real estate wealth
  None                                                   2.0 ***           2.5 ***                  1.8 ***        2.2 ***
  Moderate                                              ref.              ref.                     ref.           ref.
  High                                                  -3.1 ***          -2.5 ***                 -2.0 ***       -1.7 ***
Couples' combined personal estate wealth
  None                                                                                             -0.7            0.1
  Moderate                                                                                         ref.           ref.
  High                                                                                             -3.6 ***       -3.2 ***
Residence type
  Rural                                                 ref.              ref.                     ref.           ref.
  Urban, population less than 10,000                    -5.1 ***          -4.3 ***                 -5.2 ***       -4.3 ***
  Urban, 10,000 - 24,999                                -3.4 ***          -2.7 **                  -3.3 ***       -2.6 ***
  Urban, 25,000 - 99,999                                -5.3 ***          -4.6 ***                 -1.4           -0.4
  Urban, 100,00 or more                                 -1.4              -1.0                     -3.8 ***       -2.5 **
Additional county-level control variables
  Transportation                                        -2.2   ***        -1.7   ***            -3.0      ***     -2.4   ***
  School attendance, whites age 5-17                   -25.3   ***       -21.7   ***           -15.7      ***    -13.8   ***
  Proportion of labor force in manufacturing            -3.1              -1.8                 -12.1      ***    -11.4   ***
  Average farm value per acre (ln)                       0.3               0.3                   0.5      *        0.4
  Proportion of farm acres improved                    -15.3   ***       -13.0   ***           -16.3      ***    -14.3   ***
  Proportion liberal/pietistic churches                 -5.9   ***        -4.9   ***           -12.8      ***    -10.6   ***
Bank availability
  No banks in county                                    ref.              ref.                     ref.           ref.
  1 bank in county                                      -1.9   ***        -1.5 ***                 -1.5 ***       -1.1 **
  2 banks in county                                     -1.7   **         -1.4 *                   -1.7 ***       -1.3 **
  3 banks in county                                     -1.4   *          -0.8                     -0.7           -0.4
  4 or more banks in county                             -2.0   **         -1.4 *                   -1.8 ***       -1.4 **
Lagged Dependent Variable
  Number children age 0-4                                                 13.8                                    13.8

Mean number of children age 0-4                       1.178             1.178                 1.147             1.147
Number of couples                                  266,251           266,251               323,423           323,423
R-square                                             0.176             0.203                 0.170             0.196

Notes: All models employ state-level fixed effects. All independent variables are measured in the first census. See
www.ipums.org for dicussion of occupation (OCC1950 ) and size of place (SIZEPL ). See Tables 1-3 for definitions of county-
level variables. Control variables include women's age group and age differential of spouse (not shown). The dependent
variable is the number of own ages 0-4 in the household as identified by the IPUMS variable NCHLT5 and is measured in the
second census. All coefficients were divided by the mean value of the dependent variable to increase comparability across
models.
*p<0.05; **p<0.01; ***p<0.001
