                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




VALUATION OF LONG-TERM PROPERTY RIGHTS UNDER POLITICAL UNCERTAINTY

                                          Zhiguo He
                                        Maggie Rong Hu
                                        Zhenping Wang
                                         Vincent Yao

                                      Working Paper 27665
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27665


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020




We thank Kwong Wing Chau, Lennon Choy, Bryan Kelly, Jason Wu, and Bernard Yeung for
helpful insights and discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Zhiguo He, Maggie Rong Hu, Zhenping Wang, and Vincent Yao. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Valuation of Long-Term Property Rights under Political Uncertainty
Zhiguo He, Maggie Rong Hu, Zhenping Wang, and Vincent Yao
NBER Working Paper No. 27665
August 2020, Revised August 2020
JEL No. G11,G12,G18,K25,N25,O53,P26,R30

                                          ABSTRACT

We empirically analyze pricing of political uncertainty in long-term property rights, guided by a
theoretical model of housing assets subject to contract extension in the remote future. To identify
exposure to political uncertainty, we exploit a unique variation around land lease extension
protection beyond 2047 in Hong Kong's housing market due to the historical arrangements under
the "One Country, Two Systems" design. Relative to properties that have been promised an
extension protection, those with legally unprotected leases granted by the current Hong Kong
government are sold at a substantial discount of around 8%. Similar contracts issued during the
colonial era suffer an additional discount of about 8% due to their reneging risk. Our
parsimonious model matches well the estimated discounts across long-term lease horizons, and
implies that to extend their leases homeowners expect about 25% of penalty on ground rent after
2047. The discount is higher when people's confidence declines and where residents feel more
uncertain of the city's future.


Zhiguo He                                        Zhenping Wang
University of Chicago                            University of Chicago
Booth School of Business                         Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue                          5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637                                Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                         zhenping.wang@chicagobooth.edu
zhiguo.he@chicagobooth.edu
                                                 Vincent Yao
Maggie Rong Hu                                   Georgia State University
The Chinese University of Hong Kong              J. Mack Robinson College of Business
Room 710, 7/F Cheng Yu Tung Building             35 Broad Street NW
No.12, Chak Cheung Street                        Atlanta, GA 30303
Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong               wyao2@gsu.edu
China
maggiehu@cuhk.edu.hk
1. Introduction

It has been widely recognized that political uncertainty plays a significant role in asset valuations as

well as economic activity (for example, P´
                                         astor and Veronesi, 2013; Baker et al., 2016; Hassan et al.,

2019). While most of the existing evidence on the connection between political uncertainty and asset

pricing is from financial markets in developed economies, typically associated with established and

stable political environments, one would expect this universal economic force to prevail the most in

emerging market economies, especially those that are struggling with protracted indeterminacy in

their political systems complicated by colonial history.

      We fill this gap by studying Hong Kong's property market and identifying a causal link between its

ongoing political uncertainty and long-term property rights, reflected by housing prices. Although

Hong Kong's economy has straddled the boundary between being developed and emerging,1 our

setting offers several advantages to study this topic. First, Hong Kong, caught in the middle of the

conflict between China and the western world, has become a political battleground for the fate of the

unprecedented political experiment "One Country, Two Systems," especially since its ongoing 2019­

20 social unrest. Second, all land in Hong Kong is leasehold, in which land tenure is granted to lessee

by the government for a fixed term; this is subject to renewal/extension at the end of term possibly

by a different government, hence exposing property rights to substantial political risk. Third, the

political outlook of Hong Kong, for historical reasons, features an impending uncertainty that will

resolve on a predetermined future date (July 1st , 2047) when the current authority in power--Hong

Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR)--ceases to exist. Fourth, as the predominant long-

term asset and liability on the balance sheet of households, housing valuation should be affected by

the political uncertainty, whether imminent or in the future. This last point is particularly relevant

for Hong Kong, a city known for its notoriously expensive housing market, hence any noticeable

difference in the housing market can be sizable and meaningful for quantifying the real and financial

effect of political uncertainty.

      We identify the impact of political uncertainty on long-term property rights via studying housing

prices. The main empirical challenge in exploring the relationship between political uncertainty and
  1
    Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI) classifies Hong Kong as a developed market because
of its world-renowned financial market (https://www.msci.com/market-classification), while the United Na-
tions still lists Hong Kong as an emerging economy in 2019 (https://www.un.org/development/desa/dpad/wp-
content/uploads/sites/45/WESP2019 BOOK-web.pdf).




                                                    1
              Figure 1. Hone Kong Home Price Indices across Two Groups of Leases




     This figure plots the home price indices estimated using the repeat sales methods (Bailey et al., 1963;
     Case and Shiller, 1989) based on residential housing transactions for two types of land leases in Hong
     Kong from 2004 to 2020. The first type of land lease expires on 6/30/2047, while the second type expires
     between 7/1/2047 and 12/31/2064. The 95% confidence intervals of price indices are indicated by the
     grey shaded area.



asset valuation is the difficulty in isolating exogenous variation in the political uncertainty. Politi-

cal uncertainty is often highly correlated with fundamental economic conditions, which then affect

supply and demand in the asset market. We overcome the challenge by exploiting the heterogeneity

among land lease extension protections that are linked to the expiry of the HKSAR in 2047. This

methodology takes its most stark form when comparing land leases expiring on June 30th , 2047,

right before the expiry of the HKSAR, that have been promised a 50-year extension protection, to

those expiring immediately after that date, hence left unprotected legally. The different treatment

is rooted in the historical arrangements the "One Country, Two Systems" design which are all set to

expire on July 1st , 2047, giving rise to the largest political uncertainty regarding any lease renewal

after that point.

   Although our later analysis focuses on the level difference between the above-mentioned two

housing assets, i.e., one with land leases expiring on June 30th , 2047 and the other with leases

expiring after that date, we show as important motivating evidence that home price trajectories of

these two groups appear to diverge over time. Figure 1 plots the home price indices we estimate

using the repeat sales methods based on housing transactions with the two different land leases. It



                                                        2
shows that the two real estate assets had similar trends from 2004 to 2010, but have since become

increasingly divergent. From 2004 to 2019, houses with land leases expiring after that date have

appreciated by 264% (17.6% annualized rate), but 82 percentage points (5.5 percentage points based

on annualized rate) less than those with leases expiring on June 30th , 2047.

   Our empirical analysis is guided by a theoretical asset pricing framework where we incorporate dif-

ferent land lease extension policies facing the political uncertainty after 2047 into housing valuation.

The model assumes a "natural" housing rent as well as a ground rent mandated by the government

for leasing the land, typically calculated as a percentage of the property's rateable (rental) value.

The ground rent is subject to change, instead of being kept constant at 3% per today's practice,

upon the next lease renewal in the future, affecting the house's value in present transaction. This

uncertainty in the future ground rent schedule is linked to the political fate of Hong Kong, which

is determined by the complicated political struggle between all parties in Hong Kong, the HKSAR,

and Beijing.

   Our model captures the key idea that the greatest political uncertainty in Hong Kong's housing

market occurs at a predetermined future date--July 1st , 2047--when the Basic Law and the HKSAR

are set to expire. Since the 50-year renewal decision made by the HKSAR before 2047 say at year

n--but in effect beyond 2047 (up to n + 50)--will be respected by the new government in Hong

Kong, this fixed-term lease extension protection predicts that house prices should increase with

their lease expiration years approaching 2047. As a result, our model implies a "periodic" housing

price pattern with a discrete downward jump at the HKSAR expiry date, and further posits a price

discount schedule that smoothly decays with the expiration years of the lease after 2047. In other

words, properties with lease contracts expiring in the distant future either sell at small or no discount

relative to the control group.

   We provide strong empirical support for our theoretical model using the property and land

transactions in Hong Kong and hedonic regressions. Relative to the control group whose leases are

set to expire on June 30th , 2047, and expect to receive an extension to 2097, properties with leases

expiring immediately after that date are sold at a 14.1% discount. The estimated price discount

relative to the control group decays as the expiration year moves further away from 2047, and the

prices of those set to expire after 2097 are similar to the control group with an estimated discount

statistically insignificant from zero. The results are robust when we use a more exogenous control



                                                   3
subgroup whose lease terms were historically determined following the Second Convention of Peking

in 1898 as well as using matched samples.

   We also find properties with colonial leases granted by the British Hong Kong governments are

sold at significantly greater discount--about another 8%--than leases expiring in similar years but

granted by the HKSAR. This suggests that property rights granted by the British colonial government

are subject to another layer of political uncertainty. Homeowners assess a reneging risk in these legacy

leases due to the expectation that the future government will be still under China's rule and thus

more aligned with the HKSAR than the British colonial government.

   We hence extend our baseline model by incorporating a reneging risk with lease extension penalty

applied to the land lease contracts granted during the colonial era (i.e., before 1997). This full-blown

model is calibrated/estimated, in that we search for the parameters that minimize the difference

between the model-implied discounts and the empirical estimates, both relative to the control group.

The resulting calibration implies that under the risk-adjusted measure, after the HKSAR ceases to

exist in 2047 homeowners expect a 25% penalty as a fraction of the house rental value to renew

their expired land leases; and British Hong Kong leases are expected to be reneged every 74 years

with an additional penalty of 13% of the house value upon receiving a 50-year HKSAR-style renewal

contract.

   We further establish the link between the relative valuation discount embedded in land leases

and the political uncertainty faced by Hong Kong. Interestingly, according to surveys that measured

citywide sentiment, the estimated lease discount has appeared to increase over time since 2004 as

people's confidence in Hong Kong's future has declined, reaching about 20% for leases expiring

between 2047 and 2064 in recent years.

   To provide plausible economic mechanisms, we construct two local political sentiment measures

that are time-varying district-level characteristics that are unique to Hong Kong. The first measure is

the percent of pro-democracy seats from district council elections, which captures the local residents'

discontent due to fear and panic of losing a "high degree of autonomy" promised under the "One

Country, Two Systems" design. The second is the percentage of migrants from mainland China

recorded on Hong Kong's censuses each five-year period, capturing Hong Kongers' rising antagonistic

sentiments toward cultural influences from the mainland and their increasing fear of losing their own

identity.



                                                   4
   As expected, both local political sentiment measures help explain the observed lease discount

present in the Hong Kong housing market. In addition to the significant price discount associated

with citywide political uncertainty in the leases expiring after 2047, a one standard deviation (SD)

increase of pro-democracy seats as well as in the percentage of mainland migrants at the local district

level is associated with an additional discount of 4.0 percentage points (or 27% increase in the base

effect) and 9.4 percentage points (or 75%) for the treatment lease group. Both measures, which

might well reflect both causes and consequences in a complicated political economy equilibrium in

Hong Kong, yield a significant effect of sentiments in political uncertainty on the estimated price

discount in the remote future.


Literature Review. In a related work, Giglio et al. (2015a) estimate the price discount of lease-

holds with maturities ranging from 99 to 999 years relative to perpetual ownership contracts in

freeholds using U.K. and Singapore housing transactions. Both their and our papers belong to a

large literature on exploring the effect of long-run factors on asset valuation, which also includes

another paper of theirs (Giglio et al., 2015b), which study the appropriate long-run discount rate for

investments in climate change abatement using housing assets.

   However, in contrast to the focus on the "very long-run discount rate" in Giglio et al. (2015a),

our paper differs in a significant way as we aim to identify the exposure to political uncertainty based

on different land leases regarding extension protection. While our setting in Hong Kong's housing

market also contains land leases that were largely influenced by the same British system, there are

also leases granted by the HKSAR that are exposed to a different degree of political uncertainty.

Moreover, our treatment of land leases differs from the control group primarily in their having

extension protection beyond 2047, not the original terms as in Giglio et al. (2015a). Finally, we

quantify the effect of political uncertainty and link it to time-varying and location-specific political

sentiments.

   The literature on property rights is an active field that can date back to Coase (1960) as well

as Grossman and Hart (1986) and Hart and Moore (1990). There is ample evidence that prop-

erty rights institutions have a first-order effect on long-term economic growth, investment, financial

development, management of natural resources, and household welfare (Besley, 1995; Besley and

Burgess, 2000; Acemoglu and Johnson, 2005; Field, 2007; Goldstein and Udry, 2008; Galiani and

Schargrodsky, 2010; Abdulai et al., 2011). We emphasize the role of political uncertainty where the

                                                   5
long-term property rights granted by the previous government might be subject to the discretion of

next government.

   In a number of papers, P´
                           astor and Veronesi analyze the effect of political uncertainty on financial

assets and find that political uncertainty is priced in stock prices (P´
                                                                       astor and Veronesi, 2012), risk

premium (P´
          astor and Veronesi, 2013), and equity options prices (Kelly et al., 2016). Hassan et al.

(2019) construct a new measure of political risk at the firm level and document that political decision-

making can incur social costs by creating idiosyncratic political risk for individual firms, in turn

decreasing corporate investment. Several studies explore the relationship between term structure and

long-run properties of risky assets (van Binsbergen et al., 2012; Pindyck, 2013; Barro, 2015). More

generally, Hansen (2014) develops and applies methods for pricing the exposure to macroeconomic

shocks over alternative investment horizons and investigates the implications of the pricing of long-

term uncertainty.

   Instead, we highlight the effect of political uncertainty in the context of Hong Kong on a major

asset class on households' balance sheets. Since most of the above-mentioned papers focus on financial

markets in countries with developed economies and established and stable political environments, our

paper is perhaps more relevant for studying "political uncertainty," in that Hong Kong is an economy

that has been struggling with protracted indeterminacy in its political system, but at the same time

possesses a well-functioning property market so that researchers can measure the economic effect of

political uncertainty. Our angle is also novel in that we investigate the effect of political uncertainty

on the decision-making of households who are believed to be not as sophisticated as institutional

investors.

   The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. We explain the institutional details of

housing markets in Hong Kong in Section 2. In Section 3, we lay out the theoretical framework

using a pricing model of housing assets with different land leases to incorporate the effect of political

uncertainty on asset pricing. We describe the data sources, sample construction, summary statistics,

and empirical design in Section 4. Our main baseline analysis is also presented in Section 4 while

Section 5 presents additional results on reneging risk along with extended and calibrated model

results. In Section 6, we explore the empirical relation between political uncertainty and price

discounts by exploiting variations in citywide, district-level and individual transaction­level measures

of sentiments in political uncertainty. Section 7 concludes.



                                                   6
2. Hong Kong's Housing Markets: History and the Present

In this section we discuss the relevant institutional details of housing markets in Hong Kong, high-

lighting the historical changes of leaseholds in the past several decades.


2.1. A Brief History of Hong Kong

We offer a brief introduction of Hong Kong and its relationship with China in this section, which

lays the foundation for the concept of "One Country, Two Systems."


2.1.1. Before the 1997 Handover

The region of Hong Kong has been loosely incorporated into the Chinese empire since the Qin

Dynasty (221­206 BC), starting out as a farming and fishing village and salt production site. The

British Empire took possession of Hong Kong Island in 1841 during the First Opium War with Qing

China, the last dynasty in China, making the Island a British crown colony. Britain also won the

Second Opium War, forcing the Qing China to cede Hong Kong Island and years later Kowloon "in

perpetuity" as ratified in the 1860 Treaty of Nanking. In the wake of China's defeat in the First

Sino-Japanese War (1894­1895), the British forced the Second Convention of Peking (1898) on the

weakened Qing Dynasty, stipulating that they must lease the New Kowloon and New Territories to

Britain for 99 years until June 30th , 1997, which had become the legal basis of the handover, decades

later, of Hong Kong in its entirety including Hong Kong Island, Kowloon and New Territories to

China in 1997.

   In the early 1980s, the negotiations began between the two governments and ended up with the

Sino-British Joint Declaration (JD) signed on December 19th , 1984 and ratified on May 27th , 1985.

The JD lays out the groundwork for the transfer of sovereignty over Hong Kong from the United

Kingdom to the People's Republic of China (PRC) based on the "One Country, Two Systems"

principle proposed by late Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping.

   The Basic Law was adopted by China's National People's Congress on April 4th , 1990, and came

into effect on July 1st , 1997 to replace Hong Kong's colonial constitution of the Letters Patent and

the Royal Instructions. The Basic Law, as the de facto constitution of the HKSAR, describes the

relationship between the HKSAR and China, and how Hong Kong, as a highly-autonomous region

of China, practises different legal and political systems. This reflects the principle of "One Country,


                                                   7
Two Systems," a topic we turn to in Section 2.2.


2.1.2. After the 1997 Handover

After the handover in July 1997, Hong Kong has experienced significant changes in all aspects of

society, not only demographically and culturally, but also economically and politically. While the

Basic Law guarantees a high degree of autonomy under Chinese sovereignty, it is not without contro-

versy and debate. Concerns over the possibility of central government's interference in Hong Kong's

affairs, especially civil and political rights, have been present since the handover and intensified over

the years.

   A major sticking point has been article 23 in the Basic Law, which requires Hong Kong to enact

local national security laws that prohibit treason, secession, sedition, subversion against the central

government, theft of state secrets and foreign organizations from conducting political activities in

Hong Kong. In 2003, the Hong Kong government tabled the National Security Bill, which triggered

a series of massive protests in the years that followed, most notably the 2014 Umbrella Revolution

or Occupy Central movement, and the ongoing 2019­2020 social unrests.

   After the 2004 Legislative Council (LegCo) election, political parties and politicians from different

political ideologies joined hands to form two broad political alignments: the pro-establishment camp,

which is perceived to be more supportive of the HKSAR and Chinese central government; and the

pro-democracy camp or pan-democrats, which is identified as the opposition camp, with one of its

main goals being to achieve universal suffrage of the HKSAR's chief executive and the LegCo as laid

out in the Basic Law (Articles 45 and 68). Many new political groups emerged from the Umbrella

Revolution, labelled "localists," and called for "self-determination" or Hong Kong independence from

Chinese rule as many of them considered "One Country, Two Systems" to have failed. Following

the massive protest triggered by the extradition bill in 2019, the pro-democracy camp achieved its

biggest victory in the history of Hong Kong in the 2019 Hong Kong local elections, gaining control

of 17 of the 18 district councils and tripling their seats from around 124 to about 388.


2.2. "One Country, Two Systems"

"One Country, Two Systems" is a constitutional principle of the PRC describing the governance

of Hong Kong and Macau since they became Special Administrative Regions of China in 1997 and



                                                   8
1999, respectively. As an unprecedented political experiment, it was formulated in the early 1980s

by the then-leader Deng Xiaoping during negotiations with the United Kingdom over Hong Kong.

He suggested that there would be only one China to maintain the sovereignty, but these regions

could retain their own economic and administrative systems, while the rest of mainland China uses

the "socialism with Chinese characteristics system." As the signature political arrangement of Hong

Kong, the system has been implemented through the Basic Law, under which Hong Kong as a Special

Administrative Region of China enjoys a high degree of autonomy and will retain its capitalist society,

including legal and legislative systems, for at least 50 years, until July 1st , 2047.2


2.3. The Economy and Housing Market in Hong Kong

As China's economy surges to the second in the world by GDP, Hong Kong's economy has become

increasingly more dependent on the mainland over the years, causing significant shift in business

lives in Hong Kong. It is widely believed that the sky-high property prices fueled by mainland

property investors have diminished the prospect that young adults might be able to afford their own

homes in their lifetime. The gap between the rich and the poor has widened significantly to record

levels, and all these factors have contributed to the population's general discontent with Hong Kong's

governance (Taylor, 2019; The Economist, 2019; Xie, 2019).

    We choose to study the effect of political uncertainty through the lens of the housing market

in Hong Kong for two reasons. First, compared to other markets, the housing market consists of

very long-term assets and liabilities. The typical mortgage in Hong Kong has a 30-year term whose

collateral value in underwriting the loans by a financial institution depends on the perpetuity and

continuity of land ownership. The price the household pays to buy the property is a present value

of expected net cash flows in the future, including those beyond the current land lease term. Thus

the participants in housing market, both the households and financial institutions, are exposed to
   2
     As stipulated by the Basic Law, while foreign affairs and defence remains the purview of the central government,
Hong Kong is guaranteed a high degree of autonomy under Chinese rule. The Basic Law provides constitutional
protection on various fundamental human rights and freedoms; for instance, Article 18 states that all national laws,
except the Constitution, are not enforced in Hong Kong unless they are listed in Annex III. However, the same Article
18 of the Basic Law says that in events that endanger national security in Hong Kong the central government may issue
an order applying the relevant national laws; and Article 23 requires Hong Kong to enact local national security laws
that prohibit treason, secession, sedition, subversion against the central government, theft of state secrets and foreign
organisations from conducting political activities in Hong Kong. In 2003, the HKSAR tabled the National Security Bill
amid widespread social protests. In 2015, the proposed electoral reform failed to pass the LegCo, further deepening
the mistrust that existed among different political parties. In June 2020, a partially equivalent law was enacted by the
China's National People's Congress instead of the Hong Kong LegCo, and was added to Annex III.




                                                           9
the risk in property value due to the change in political uncertainty, making it uniquely suitable to

study the effect of political uncertainty on asset price.

   Second, housing is the dominant source of household wealth, even more so in Hong Kong given

its rapid home price appreciation over the past two decades. Demographia (2019) rates the housing

in Hong Kong the most unaffordable among all 309 worldwide cities based on the ratio of median

household income to median home price, known as price to income ratio. The Hong Kong price

to income ratio stands at 20.8, which far exceeds the "severely unaffordable" threshold of only 5.1.

Thus if households respond to the changes in political uncertainty in asset markets, housing would

be the most important decision choice by magnitude.


2.4. Land Tenure System and Land Policy in Hong Kong

The real estate and property market plays an important role in the financial and economic stability

in Hong Kong (Peng et al., 2001). Although almost all the lands in Hong Kong are owned by

the British government during the colony era and now by the PRC, the chief executive has the

authority to lease and grant state land to the public for ownership over a limited period of time;

this is legally defined as leasehold versus fee simple prevalent in U.S. The chief executive can do so

by: (1) granting government leases for a certain period, or (2) granting licences for individuals or

corporations to occupy government land for special purposes for a certain period (usually shorter

than a government lease). The chief executive is allowed to invoke the Land Resumption Ordinance

to order the requisition of any land for public purposes, i.e., reneging on the original land contract.

   The provisions in (1) also include chief executive's power to renew the renewable leases at its

expiration date and extend the non-renewable leases. The HKSAR Lands Department sets the

policy to be premised on the basic guiding principles of continuity in the arrangements, simplicity

in procedures, and certainty in the tenure of leases. In other words, the government seeks to provide

clarity, consistency, and certainty in the land lease terms. However, "certainty" here is apparently

limited by the inherent political uncertainty faced by the "One Country, Two Systems" principle

and the HKSAR. This is the exactly the focus of our paper.




                                                   10
2.4.1. Leaseholds Granted Prior to 1984

Table 1 summarizes different types of land leases. The earliest land leases in Hong Kong dated back

to 1843 with a period of 999 years, labeled as Type 1.3 From 1843 to 1898, the British government

auctioned "75" year leases or "99" year leases (Type 2), which could be regranted at expiration

by paying additional land premium and adjusted ground rent. From 1899 to 1985, the British

government had widely implemented "75 + 75" year leases, with a single right of renewal ("+")

for another 75 years period after the initial 75­year term. Exceptions include some leases granted

for "99 + 99" years. All these leases are located in Hong Kong Island and Old Kowloon, which

are classified as Type 3 in Table 1. There are also non-renewable leases in New Kowloon and New

Territories that expired on June 27th , 1997, due to historical reasons (Type 4).

       The government has had to make two decisions in renewing land leases. The first is recalculating

the ground rent at renewal (e.g., 1974 for "75 + 75" leases auctioned from 1899); it was determined

to be 3% of rateable value,4 fixed throughout the lease period, and this practice has been in effect

ever since. The second is whether to regrant or extend non-renewable leases upon their expiry (e.g.,

1951 for the 75-year Kowloon leases auctioned from 1876). In 1946, the government announced that

unless the land is needed for public purposes, it would offer regrants using the contemporary zone

crown rental and assessing the full and fair market value of the land lease (excluding buildings).

In the years that followed, the government also offered various concessions to bring down the land

premium required for regrants.5


2.4.2. Leaseholds Granted or Regranted After 1984

The 1984 JD states that new leases could be granted during the transition period for terms expiring

no later than June 30th , 2047. Because of this, almost all the leases (Type 5 in Table 1) granted

from the effective date of the JD (May 27th , 1985) through June 30th , 1997 are set to expire on June

30th , 2047, so their terms range from 50 to 62 years.
   3
     For example, the Consulate General of the United States, located at 26 Garden Road, Central, Hong Kong, sits
on an 999-year lease. Although the original lease stated that it had a lease term of 75 years, renewable for 75 years in
1960, the Hong Kong government, later ratified by the HKSAR in 1999, extended the lease term to 999 years backdated
to April 19, 1950.
   4
     Rateable value is basically an estimate of the annual rent achievable for the property. Because the rents are fixed
upon renewal, they decline in real terms due to inflation over the 75­ or 95­year lease.
   5
     In the two examples mentioned above, we observe their final expiration years in the data, 2049 for "75 + 75" leases
auctioned from 1899, and 2026 for the 75-year Kowloon leases auctioned from 1876, making them similar in our setting.
The only difference is that the latter is required to pay additional land premium at regrant and subject to stepwise
rateable value.


                                                          11
   However, the 1984 JD did not explicitly address the right to regrant for the historical leases

after the handover in 1997. The HKSAR, upon its establishment, announced on July 15th , 1997,

that non-renewable leases may, upon expiry and at the sole discretion of the HKSAR, be extended

for another term of 50 years without payment of an additional premium. Thus, for example, leases

expiring on June 30th , 2047, will be automatically extended to 2097.

   The extended leases are subject to an annual ground rent of 3% of the property's rateable value,

which will be adjusted in step with any changes in rateable value thereafter. Although the government

may require the lessee to pay additional premium that reflects market appreciation of the land value

when applying for lease renewal and extension, the actual practice is much more lenient and flexible.

For example, according to lease modification transactions in 2012 that are publicly available on the

Lands Department website, all 96 applications were granted, with only 29 of them requiring payment

of an additional premium (6 applications were required to pay a nominal value of HKD 1,000).

   The HKSAR also grant new land leases after the handover. This group of land leases, corre-

sponding to Type 6 in Table 1, will expire 50 years after the initial land auction date. For example,

those granted on July 1st , 1997 are set to expire on July 1st , 2047; and those on July 1st , 2000, are

set to expire on July 1st , 2050, and so forth.


2.5. Political Uncertainty and Legitimacy of Leasehold Extensions Beyond 2047

Thus far, the HKSAR practices have been to i) extend the non-renewable leases without requiring

an additional land premium instead requiring an annual ground rent of 3% of rateable value that

is adjusted in step with its market value; and ii) set the ground rent for renewable leases at 3% of

rateable value that is fixed throughout the term. This is aimed to provide as much clarity in the

land tenure system and land policy and to minimize the possible disruption to the housing market.

Despite the practice, several uncertainties of the renewal policy remain: (1) whether the government

will renew land leases in the future; (2) if yes, whether the government will require additional land

premium and/or increase the ground rent to above the current 3% rateable level fixed at renewal.

   The policy uncertainty regarding the land lease renewal policy in Hong Kong, which lies at

the center of the long-term property rights, has always existed, resulting in market confusion and

valuation fluctuations in Hong Kong's housing market throughout its history. It is worth emphasizing,

though, that the effect of policy uncertainty manifests only when it intertwines with changes in the



                                                  12
political uncertainty of Hong Kong itself. More specifically, since the arrangements under the "One

Country, Two Systems" design are set to expire in 2047, this makes all the land leases that have

been renewed/extended by the HKSAR beyond its official expiration date (i.e., July 1st , 2047) a

focal point.

   To address the concern, on July 15th , 1997, HKSAR affirmed its constitutional authority to grant

land leases beyond July 1st , 2047, based on the following grounds: (1)) under Article 7, HKSAR

is entrusted to manage and grant land leases without being limited to a duration of 50 years; (2)

under Article 120, all leases granted or renewed before 1997 and all rights in relation to such leases

shall continue to be protected under the Basic Law; (3) under Article 123, leases expiring after 1997

without right of renewal shall be dealt with by the HKSAR, thus not imposing any restriction on

the HKSAR's power to grant leases beyond 2047; and finally, (4) there is no provision in the Basic

Law that restricts the otherwise unlimited power of HKSAR to grant land leases beyond 2047.

   The legitimacy of renewal extension beyond July 1st , 2047, made by the HKSAR, besides being

respected by the new Hong Kong government in the post-HKSAR era, is an important assumption

underpinning our analysis. We will come back to this point in Section 3.3 after presenting our

theoretical framework in the next section.



3. A Pricing Model of Housing Asset with Political Uncertainty

The model in this section lays out the theoretical framework that connects political uncertainty with

asset pricing and serves two goals for this empirically oriented paper. First, we use a stylized example

in Section 3.2 to illustrate the role of political uncertainty in determining the equilibrium price for a

long-term asset (i.e., a real estate property) with different renewal dates over its life horizon. In our

model setup, we use renewal, extension, and regrants interchangeably. Section 3.3 then clarifies the

underlying driving force of the relative discount in our model.

   Second, the theoretical framework also allows us to further incorporate the "reneging risk" to

capture the relative discount of British colonial leases and the HKSRA leases, a robust empirical

pattern established later in Section 5.1.

   Last, and perhaps the most important, today's price of a long-term asset depends on the entire

stream of cash flows in the future in any typical asset pricing model. By establishing a link between

the observed housing transaction prices and the (expected) future schedule of ground rent as well as


                                                   13
the reneging risk, which are the primary policy tools of the Hong Kong government (and hence reflect

the political uncertainty), the model allows us to back out the implied deep structural parameters

from price discounts estimated from real transaction data. This is exactly what we do in Section 5

on model calibration.


3.1. Model Setup

Consider an infinite-horizon model of a housing asset that generates a "natural" rent (or rental
        ^ t , for t  [0, ); for the ease of illustration our model is cast under the risk-neutral
income) R
                                                      ^ 0 to
measure. We normalize the time-0 housing natural rent R                    1
                                                                         1-3% .   Assuming a constant discount

rate r and that the rent grows at a constant rate g , we see that


                                                  ^t =     egt
                                                  R             .
                                                         1 - 3%

    As explained in Section 2.4, homeowners build properties on land leased from the government

and are required to pay a ground rent, set at 3% of the rateable--a relatively small number--as of

now. Before the lease expires, a homeowner's net cashflow from the property can be expressed as


                                                 ^ t (1 - 3%) = egt .
                                            Rt = R                                                              (1)


However, the current house value not only depends on the ground rent today, but also the expected

ground rent in the future when the lease is considered to be extended after the current term expires.

Denote the nearest land lease expiration date by L; when it expires at time L > t, the government

may extend the lease for another T years by charging an additional ground rent and land premium

(beyond 3% of the rateable).
                                                              ( )
    In general, we define the extra ground rent as fs ,6 imposed by the government on land leases

upon renewal at a future time s by


                                              ( )
                                             fs    f (s;  )  [0, 1].                                            (2)
   6       ( )
     Here, fs captures both the additional ground rent (assuming that the rateable value always adjusts in step with
market value.) and potential additional premium, paid by the government lessee (the `owner') to the government in
return for the right to hold and occupy the land for the term specified in the lease document. Government may charge
additional ground rent by increasing the current 3% to a higher percentage. Land premium is an upfront payment
due at the time of extension while ground rent is payable annually from the date of extension as a percentage of the
rateable.


                                                         14
                       ( )
We highlight that fs         depends also on a fixed time in the future  > t and is linked to the political

fate of Hong Kong, which is determined by the complicated political struggle between all parties

in Hong Kong, the HKSAR, and Beijing. This predetermined future time  is the date on which

the policy uncertainty resolves to a large extent, in the case of Hong Kong, July 1st , 2047; we will
                                                                                                    ( )
provide a more detailed explanation in Section 3.2. Also note that the entire profile of fs               can be

fairly flexible, and under the risk-neutral measure it suffices to consider a deterministic schedule.

   For a given renewal date L, the extra ground rent in Eq. (2) applies to the following T -year

interval t  [L, L + T ]. As a result, for any future time s > L, the homeowner's cashflow is


                              ^ s (1 - 3%)(1 - f ( )
                         Rs = R                                  gs      ( )
                                                                    1 - fL+T ·N (s) ,
                                                L+T ·N (s) ) = e                                             (3)


                 s-L             s-L                                                         s-L
where N (s)       T      and      T      denotes the greatest integer that is smaller than    T .   Before the

renewal, i.e., for s  [t, L], there is no additional ground rent, and hence Rs = egs . We can then

calculate the house price Pt at time t to be

                                               
                                                                          ( )
                               Pt = Et            e-r(s-t) egs (1 - 1s>L fL+T ·N (s) )ds .                   (4)
                                           t


3.2. An Illustrating Example

For illustration, we set t = 0 in this subsection. For the sake of parsimony, given the penalty

parameter   [0, 1], we consider the simple schedule of additional ground rent to be:


                                                      ( )
                                                     fs   =  1{s } .                                         (5)


The predetermined time  is right after the deadline of the current HKSAR land policy in which the

government will extend the lease for another T years without charging any additional ground rent;

recall the discussion in Section 2.4.2. In the context of our paper, the HKSAR has been extending

the land leases for another 50 years (T = 50) for leases that are set to expire before June 30th , 2047,

without additional ground rent, but renewed ground rents may increase sharply for leases set to

expire after July 1st , 2047, right after the official end date of the HKSAR government. This current

practice in Hong Kong corresponds to  = July 1st , 2047.

   The simplified schedule in Eq. (5) captures the key idea that the greatest political uncertainty in


                                                            15
Hong Kong's housing market occurs at a predetermined future date  (i.e., July 1st , 2047) when the

Basic Law and HKSAR expire, after which the expectation of the extra discount  remains constant.

In one stark interpretation, 1 -  can be viewed as the probability that the post-2047 Hong Kong

government will maintain the current practice by regranting the land every 50 years at 3% of the

rateable as well as not requiring additional land premium;  is the probability of the post-2047

Hong Kong government taking back the land completely (or charging a rent/premium sufficient to

eliminate the ownership value completely) when leases are due for extension after July 1st , 2047. In

other words,  can be considered as expected extra ground rent and/or land premium charged at

the lease expiration date, in addition to 3% of the rateable.

   Now consider a house with land lease expiring at L with its value denoted by P (L;  ). Denote

  r - g , and we have

                                                L                 
                                                                               ( )
                        P (L;  ) =                  e-s ds +         e-s 1 - fL+T ·N (s) ds.                  (6)
                                            0                  L


If L <  and L + T   , the homeowner can extend the land lease to L + T before the uncertainty

resolution date  , implying that

                                                           
                                  L+T
                                                                                     1 - e-(L+T )
                 P (L;  ) =             e-s ds +                  e-s (1 -  ) ds =                .           (7)
                              0                           L+T                             


In contrast, if L   , then the house value is

                                                               
                                        L
                                                                                     1 - e-L
                     P (L;  ) =             e-s ds +              e-s (1 -  ) ds =           .                (8)
                                    0                      L                             


   For illustration, Figure 2 plots the model-implied house value P (L;  ) as a function of the lease

expiration date L. As explained,  corresponds to July 1st , 2047, indicated by a dashed red vertical

line. In Figure 2 we also plot the cutoff years in blue dotted vertical lines for several boundaries of

leasehold groups constructed in Section 4.

   We see that P (L;  ) first increases with the lease expiration date L, dips at L =  , and then

slowly grows back at L =  + T with almost the same height as the previous cycle but slightly greater

due to the standard discount effect. This periodic pattern in valuation can be best illustrated by

investigating the lease group with L =  -                 (say, land leases expiring on June 30th , 2047) and the


                                                               16
lease group with L =  + T (e.g., land leases expiring on June 30th , 2097): the former group can

be successfully renewed right before  and hence enjoy the normal ground rent of 3% for another

T = 50 years, which exactly matches the ground rent schedule faced by the latter lease group.


3.3. Discussion: What Drives the Value Discount due to Political Uncertainty?

It is worth pausing to highlight the key underlying assumption of our model. Although the HKSAR

government is expected to expire in 2047 and this expiration is the underlying source of political

uncertainty regarding the land lease renewal/regrant policy after 2047, we assume that the renewal

decision made by HKSAR before 2047 at year n­but in effect beyond 2047 (up to n + 50)--will be

respected by the new government in Hong Kong. This is why land leases that expire right before 2047

face no discount in the next 50 years but those expiring right after do, driving the sharp downward

jump in Figure 2 at L =  .

      Exactly on this point, Section 2.5 explains the legitimacy of the HKSAR to extend land leases that

are set to expire before 2047 to beyond 2047. For instance, the last point in the formal affirmation

issued by the HKSAR on July 15th , 1997, states, "there is no provision in the Basic Law that restrict

the otherwise unlimited power of the HKSAR to grant land leases beyond 2047." This precedence

of policy continuity is respected in the previous negotiations between the United Kingdom, China,

and Hong Kong, and the policy announced on July 15th , 1997, appeared to have implicit approval

from the central government in Beijing. In other words, the legitimacy of the HKSAR to extend

land leases offers an important protection of the long-term property rights for a particular group of

land leases beyond the HKSAR's own term.

      Even if these leases granted by HKSAR might not be fully honored in the case of a complete

collapse of the "One Country, Two Systems" principle, the possibility of this dire political scenario

does not invalidate our analysis. Our key prediction of a significant price discount at L =  only

requires a differential treatment by the new regime (in power after 2047) with respect to the land

leases that have already been promised by HKSAR versus those that have not. This differential

treatment, which should exist even under the most extreme scenario, reflects the guiding principle

of "policy continuity" that is present in both Hong Kong's historical precedents after the JD as well

as Beijing's practices in China's economic reform including its land policy.7 Last, but not least,
  7
    Historical precedents in Hong Kong came from the Land Leases annex (Annex III) in JD, which was signed amid
periods of political uncertainty and market turbulence. The Annex guarantees that all leased lands granted by the


                                                       17
this underlying assumption is strongly supported by our empirical finding of a significant valuation

discount regarding political uncertainty that is consistent with Figure 2, suggesting that it is widely

expected that the central government in Beijing will honor the long-term property rights promised

by the HKSAR.



4. Empirical Design and Main Results

In this section, we first introduce main data sources along with our sample design and descriptive

statistics. We then examine data distribution across different land lease groups, which forms our

main empirical design guided by the theory developed in Section 3. Lastly, we present the baseline

analysis to show that estimated price discounts exhibit the empirical pattern predicted by our model

with political uncertainty, together with a battery of robustness tests.


4.1. Data Sources

This paper uses three major sources of data, two of which are acquired from the same data vendor

while the third is publicly available.


4.1.1. Residential Transactions and Amenities

In Hong Kong, all property transactions have to be registered with the Land Registry. We obtain all

residential property transactions in Hong Kong from EPRC Ltd., a data vendor that has purchased

all electronic transaction data from the Land Registry and added other attributes such as net floor

area and district codes. Our EPRC data starts in January 1992 and is updated through February

2020. It contains a comprehensive set of information on housing characteristics and transaction

details in Hong Kong: for instance, address, building construction year and month, district name

or code, floor and unit numbers, property characteristics (e.g., swimming pool and club house),

transaction information (sale date and transaction prices), whether the transaction is a first­ or

second­hand market transaction, and names of buyers and sellers.
British Hong Kong government which extend beyond June 30th , 1997, and all rights in relation to such leases, shall
continue to be recognised and protected under the law of HKSAR. The practice in mainland China concerns the
extension of 20- or 30-year land leases in Qingdao, Shenzhen, and Wenzhou, which resulted in a policy set by the
Ministry of Land that homeowners would not have to pay a renewal fee to continue to use their residences after the
shorter lease expires (Hsu, 2017).




                                                        18
   We highlight the land lease expiration year (e.g., 2047) in the transaction data, which is used in

our study to identify different lease groups. As explained in Sections 2 and 3, the land lease groups

play an important role in linking the property value and policy uncertainty in Hong Kong. We also

geocoded all the buildings in our sample and calculated their distance to nearby amenities using their

longitudes and latitudes. The amenities include Mass Transit Railway (MTR), bus stop, hospitals,

schools (K­12), universities, and the coastal line. Proximity to any of these nearby amenities is an

important determinant of the fundamental value of the estate.


4.1.2. Land Sales

In the EPRC data, only the year of land lease expiration is provided, without information on the

date of expiration. Since it is important for us to separate leases expiring before and after July

1st , 2047, we obtain the land auction data from the Land Registry website, which includes all land

transactions between the Hong Kong government and land developers and for each land transaction,

a unique land lot number, which can be matched to the housing transaction data, along with land

transaction price and auction date. The land auction date, however, may significantly differ from

the building completion date in housing transactions data due to developers holding on to the land

as a real option.


4.1.3. Hong Kong Quinquennial Census Data and Local Elections

To obtain demographic characteristics of the residents, we use the 1% Quinquennial Population Cen-

sus data from 2001, 2006, 2011, and 2016. Each of the census data sets contains rich information on

the quarters (apartments), households, and persons with district of residence disclosed. We capture

several important district-level characteristics. In addition, to measure the political sentiment at the

district level, we collect the percent of pro-democracy seats from Hong Kong district council elections

in 1999, 2003, 2007, 2011, 2015 and 2019.


4.2. Sample Design and Summary Statistics

We apply several filters to construct the final sample of transactions. First, we require observations to

have non-missing values in land lease expiration year, transaction price and date, and floor number.

This excludes transactions before 1998 due to missing data on several unit characteristics in early



                                                   19
years. Second, we exclude all the government housing projects based on a list of home ownership

scheme courts in Hong Kong. Third, we exclude houses, townhomes, and non-arm's length trans-

actions (e.g., deeds of gift, assignments, changes of name and sub-agreements). Fourth, we exclude

transactions in Island district, the smallest district. Lastly, we trim the top and bottom 1% extreme

values in unit and total transaction price. Our final sample contains 551,790 residential housing

transactions sold from 1998 to February 2020.

   Table 2 Panel A reports the summary statistics of all the variables used in our analysis. First,

the average sale price of the units is HKD 2,796,556 (logged value of 2.80 = 1.16) in total and HKD

5,534 (logged value = 8.62) per square feet. Using the exchange rate of 0.13 pegged to USD, they are

valued at USD 363,552 in total and USD 719 per square feet. The total price varies widely, ranging

from HKD 663,650 to HKD 16.78 million. Hong Kong is known for its small living quarters with net

living area ranging from 258 to 1,157 sq feet, with an average of 528. The average age of buildings at

the time of sale is 18 years. The building completion year is well populated from 1959 to 2018 with

more than half of the transactions involving those built after 1993. Number of bedrooms and living

rooms are both 2 on average. In our sample, most of the units have bay window, which reduces the

gross living area. We also calculate market turnover at the individual land lease by year level as the

ratio of the number of transactions in a given year to the number of unique properties that have ever

transacted in our data. The average turnover rate is 7.9% in our sample period.


4.3. Identifying Lease Groups

The variation in exposure to political uncertainty is identified by grouping various land leases as

explained in Section 2.4 based on their expiration years.


4.3.1. Control Lease Group

We first identify all the leases set to expire on June 30th , 2047, as our control lease group, which,

according to the current HKSAR policy, will be automatically extended to 2097 and hence are subject

to the least degree of political uncertainty in our model as laid out in Section 3. Recall that only the

year of land lease expiration is provided in our EPRC data, and thus we take the following steps to

identify our control group.

   As explained in Section 2.4, there are four types of land leases that are set to expire in 2047



                                                  20
based on Hong Kong's historical land lease policies. First, according to JD, which became effective

on May 27th , 1985, all existing non-renewable leases that were going to expire before June 30th , 1997,

were automatically extended to June 30th , 2047. These leases primarily cover land in New Kowloon

and New Territories, shown as Type 4 in Table 1, and a small portion of such leases cover land in

Hong Kong Island and Old Kowloon, shown as Type 2 in Table 1. We will come back to these leases

later in Section 4.6. Second, any land auctioned between May 27th , 1985, and June 30th , 1997, i.e.,

after JD but before the handover, are set to expire on June 30th , 2047, shown as Type 5. These two

groups of land leases form our control group.

    In contrast, the other two types of leases are not part of our control group. Any land that

happened to be auctioned in the year of 1897 with a "75 + 75" year lease (part of Type 2 in Table

1) will also expire in 2047, but only in the second half of the year according to the historical auction

data.8 Finally, any land auctioned by the newly established HKSAR between July 1­December 31st ,

1997, will expire between July 1­December 31st , 2047,9 which constitutes part of Type 6 in Table 1.


4.3.2. Treatment Lease Groups

Our treatment leases include three broad categories. The first category contains all the leases set to

expire before 2047, labeled as "pre-2047" leases, which will also be automatically extended until up

to 2096 and thus are also subject to a similar degree of political uncertainty as the control group. To

test the sharp predictions delivered by our model as shown in Figure 2, we further decompose the

pre-2047 leases into three groups: i.e., 2029­2033, 2034­2039, and 2040­2046 (Type 2 in Table 1).

    On the other hand, leases set to expire after July 1st , 2047, but before 2097 have relatively

high exposure to the ongoing and expected political uncertainty since neither the Basic Law, nor

policies set forth by HKSAR have clarified the future of the leases beyond 2047. These post-2047

leases are further decomposed into four groups (July 1st 2047­2049, 2050­2052, 2053­2064, and
   8
     We collected all such land auction information from Hong Kong Government Gazette and verified that the land
leases of matched properties in our data were all auctioned in the second half of 1897 and thus are set to expire during
the second half of 2047.
   9
     We identify such land by collecting land auction data from the Land Registry website, which has recorded all Hong
Kong government land auctions since April 1985. The land auction data includes the unique land lot number with
land transaction price and date. There were twelve land lots auctioned between July 1­December 31st , 1997, eight of
which could be found in the EPRC data by matching the land lot number. Thus, properties with those eight land lots
will expire between July 1st and December 31th , 2047. The other unmatched four land lots could have been developed
as non-residential properties or could be held by developers as a real option. In Hong Kong, given the volatile housing
market, it is common for developers to wait for a few years or even decades before developing the land into building
properties.




                                                          21
2065­2097). According to our theory, the first post-2047 lease group should the most exposed to

political uncertainty; the exposure diminishes as the lease expiration year moves further away. In

later analysis we also combine the three groups (July 1st 2047­2049, 2050­2052, 2053­2064) together

and call them the main treatment group.

   The third group consists of those leases that are set to expire after 2097, so we call this group

"distant" leases. There are two groups of distant leases (2098­2135 and 2842­2959); here, the last

lease group contains the 999-year leaseholds that were granted before the 1960s. Panels A and B

of Figure 3 plot the number of transactions by individual lease expiration year and by lease group

(except the control lease group), respectively. It shows that while there are not enough transactions

for an individual expiration year, the lease groups are constructed such that they all have sufficient

observations to be used in the empirical analysis.


4.3.3. Summary by Lease Group

In Table 3, we report the number of transactions (Panel A), number of estates (Panel B), and number

of districts (Panel C) by these lease groups and sale year groups (e.g., 1998­2005, 2006­2010, 2011­

2015, 2016­February 2020). The table shows that all leasehold groups are well represented across

sale year cohorts using number of transactions, estates or districts. The largest lease group contains

the leases set to expire on June 30th , 2047, which account for 66% of the sample.


4.4. Empirical Design and Predictions

As mentioned, in our empirical specification throughout, we set the lease group June 30st , 2047, as

the main control group, which include all transactions with land leases expiring on June 30st , 2047.

   In the baseline specification, we estimate the relative price discounts of all other leasehold groups,

whose leases are subject to different exposures to ongoing political uncertainty, relative to the main

control lease group in the following hedonic specification (Rosen, 1974):

                                      N
                       ln(Pi,t ) =         n · Leasen +  · Xi,t + d×m(t) + i,t ,                     (9)
                                     n=1


where Pi,t is the total or unit sale price of house i at time t; Xi,t is a full set of housing charac-

teristics, including the number of bedrooms (in categories: 1, 2, 3), the number of living rooms (in

categories: 0, 1, 2, 3), bay window indicator, bay size (in 10 equally sized categories), the floor area

                                                    22
(in 10 equally sized categories), age of the building (in 10 equally sized categories), direction fac-

ing dummies, swimming pool indicator, club house indicator, and neighborhood (estate) amenities;

d×m(t) represents the district × year-month fixed effects. Neighborhood amenities include a set of

calculated distances to MTR, bus stops, hospitals, schools, universities, and coast line; each of them

is defined in 10 equally sized categories. Standard errors are clustered at the estate and year-month

level.

    According to our theoretical framework in Section 3, the control group has the lowest exposure

to ongoing political uncertainty, owing to the promised 50-year renewal policy from HKSAR. As a

result, we expect all estimated ^n in Eq. (9) to be negative, i.e., properties in the treatment lease

groups are sold at a discount relative to those in the control group due to their expected political

uncertainty. In contrast, properties in the post-2047 lease groups whose leases are set to expire after

the HKSAR ceases to exist have the highest exposure to political uncertainty and should bear the

largest discount, corresponding to the downward jump on L =  in Figure 2.

    The 50-year renewal policy also applies to other pre-2047 lease groups and thus effectively miti-

gates their exposure to political uncertainty. However, our theory predicts that the value of 50-year

renewal protection is greater for the leases with expiration years closer to 2047 and thus ^n on these

lease groups is anticipated to be negative, but to a lesser extent. Lastly, our theory posits a price

discount schedule that decays with their expiration years, implying that transactions in the distant

groups either sell at small or no discount relative to the control group.


4.5. Baseline Analysis

Hong Kong is comprised of three parts (Hong Kong Island, Kowloon, and New Territories) and

divided into 18 districts with each represented by a district council. We control for district by year-

month fixed effects in Eq. (9). Panel A and Panel B of Figure 4 plot the district-level distribution

of transactions in the control lease group which expires on June 30th , 2047, and the main treatment

group which expires between July 1st , 2047 and December 31st , 2064, respectively. In Panel C, we

present the number of leases for the control group and main treatment group across all districts. The

pattern shows that while all districts except the Islands are well populated with both lease groups,

the control group is more concentrated in Sha Tin while the treatment group has more observations

in southern part of New Territories and most districts in Kowloon.



                                                  23
   Panel B of Table 2 presents the summary statistics based on control lease group and main

treatment lease group, respectively. On average, the unit (total) price of the units in the control

group is 51% (44%) lower than those in the main treatment lease group. All structural characteristics

and amenities except the number of bedrooms are significantly different between the two lease groups,

which are likely driven by their locations. We hence in Figure A.1 plot the residuals of the property

attributes by the two lease groups, obtained from the regression of each hedonic characteristic on

the district by year fixed effects. We find few differences in net living area, number of bedrooms, bay

window, land-level turnover, and almost all the neighborhood amenities between the groups after

controlling for the location and time, but buildings in the control group are still older and located

further away from MRT stations on average. We control all of these characteristics in our later

regressions.

   Table 4 presents the results from different regressions, with dependent variables of logarithm

of unit price in Columns (1)­(4) and logarithm of total price in Columns (5)­(8). Our baseline

specification is reported in Columns (1) and (5) where we control for property attributes and district

by year-month fixed effects. In Columns (2) and (6), we control for property attributes by year and

district by year fixed effects to allow for time-varying (annually) coefficients on individual property

attributes in addition to the district-level home price trends. In Columns (3) and (7), we estimate

the baseline specification but based on a restrictive sample that excludes properties missing data on

number of bedrooms and living rooms.

   Results in Columns (1) and (5) suggest that relative to the control group whose leases are to

expire at June 30th , 2047, properties with leases expiring immediately after July 1st , 2047, are

sold at a 14.1% discount using unit price or 14.9% in terms of total price, both significant at 1%

level. The other three post-2047 lease groups, those set to expire in 2050­2052, 2053­2064, and

2065­2097, sell at statistically significant discounts as well of 12.7%, 12.7%, and 10.5% using unit

price, respectively, and of 12.7%, 13.0%, and 10.7% using total price, respectively. Estimates from

alternative specifications reported in other columns are quite similar to our baseline results but with

slightly smaller magnitude. For instance, in Columns (2) and (6), for our main treatment group with

leases expiring July 1st , 2047­2049, properties are sold at a discount of about 12.4% (12.8%) using

unit (total) price. Consistent with our model prediction, discounts decay for land leases that expire

in the remote future.



                                                  24
    In Columns (4) and (8) of Table 4, we include market turnover rate as an additional control to

the baseline specification. Market turnover rate, which captures "market liquidity" of the properties

under different leases, might be an endogenous outcome driven by political uncertainty and hence we

report these results separately. However, estimates are also very similar when we control for market

turnover rate, suggesting on that turnover is not a significant factor explaining the price discount.

    Properties in the lease groups set to expire before 2047 are sold similarly to those in the control

group with estimates of price differentials not statistically different from 0. However, in terms of

magnitude, their discounts relative to the control group shrink smoothly when lease expiration years

approach 2047 for pre-2047 or are further from 2047 for post-2047 lease groups. The broad empirical

pattern matches that in Figure 2, confirming that properties with "pre-2047" leases face a small and

similar degree of political uncertainty as laid out in the model.

    Finally, the coefficients on the "distant" lease groups are negative--but always insignificant--in

any of the specifications. For example, the coefficient on 999-year leases (the 2842­2959 group) is

5.2% (5.4%) for unit (total) price. These large point estimates of price discount relative to the control

group, though insignificant, warrant some discussion as they are likely driven by two features of these

leases. First, they are all legacy leases granted by the British Hong Kong colonial government, subject

to a reneging risk that we introduce in Section 5. Second, the 2842­2959 group contains 999-year

leases which, unlike other leases, do not specify any land use (e.g., residential, commercial, industrial,

institutional, transport, recreational) in the original contracts, making them more likely to fall out of

compliance with contemporary zoning codes. Anecdotally, the government will modify these leases

to a 50-year term upon redevelopment.10

    Based on the baseline estimates in Column (4), we can calculate aggregate effect on all properties

with leases expiring after July 1st , 2047, but before 2097. Without the estimated price discount,

properties in these lease groups would have been sold at 13.6% discount (= 12.0% / (1 - 12.0%))

based on the weighted average discount 12.0%). Based on their average sale price at HKD 4.78 million

and total sales of HKD 119 billion in 2019, lost property sales revenue for Hong Kong homeowners is

estimated to be HKD 652,000 per property and HKD 16.2 billion in total, equivalent to 0.6% of GDP

in Hong Kong in 2019. The estimated cost of political uncertainty, however, does not necessarily

imply net welfare loss because the scope of this paper is limited and other parties may benefit from
  10
     For example, Pokfulam Gardens, a large development of six 28-story highrises, is built on a lot with a 75-year lease
granted in 1931. When it was regranted in 2006, the government changed the lease to 50 years.



                                                           25
the lower property price.


4.6. A More Exogenous Control Group Based on a Historical Treaty

Is it possible that our control lease group, with land leases expiring on June 20t h, 2047, are endoge-

nously affected by political uncertainty regarding the future of "One Country, Two Systems" in Hong

Kong? We leverage rich institutional feature of Hong Kong's land market to address this concern

regarding identification.

   Although our main control lease group contains leases expiring on June 30th , 2047, they can be

further divided into three finer groups: control a), whose leases were granted after JD; control b),

whose leases were granted before JD and are located in Hong Kong Island and Old Kowloon; and

finally, control c) whose leases were granted before JD and are located in New Kowloon and New

Territories districts. Note, control a) corresponds to Type 5 land leases in Table 1 while control b)

could be traced to Type 2 land leases and control c) constitutes Type 4 leases. They are formed

due to different historical reasons. The origin of control c) dates back to the Second Convention of

Peking in 1898, which leased the New Territories (New Kowloon used to be part of New Territories)

to Britain until June 30th , 1997, and thus all land leases in those districts were set to expire on

June 27t h, 1997, which was extended to June 30th , 2047, according to the JD in 1985. From the

perspective of causal inference, land leases of control c) are the most exogenous control group, as

they were granted almost one-and-a-half centuries ago and thus are not endogenously affected by

any contemporary factors.

   In contrast, control a) can be potentially endogenous to market conditions in the post-JD period;

these market conditions might affect their transaction prices in these subgroups differently from those

in the treatment groups. For example, it is quite possible that lands granted in the post-JD period

were more likely to go to developers who had closer relationships with or have more confidence in

mainland China compared to other periods.

   Table 5 reports the results based on the baseline specification but using control c) as the control

lease group. We include indicators for controls a) and b) as additional explanatory variables. First,

we find that coefficients on all the treatment lease groups change little from the baseline results.

Second, coefficients on control groups a) and b) are close to zero and statistically insignificant. This

suggests that property prices in these two control groups are similar to those in the control group c),



                                                  26
implying a negligible (potential) endogeneity concern in control groups as well as the baseline results

in Table 4.


4.7. Robustness Tests

One potential concern with the baseline analysis is that transaction heterogeneity between the control

and treatment groups might affect our findings, and we address them in this section. We first

restrict our sample to only transactions that are repeat sales, excluding properties that have only

been transacted once from 1998 to 2020. In Table 6, we run the baseline hedonic regression in

Columns (1) and (5) based on the overall sample that contains transactions in the control and main

treatment lease groups. Relative to the control group, properties with leases expiring in July 1st ,

2047­2064 sell at statistically significant discount of 13.3% using unit price and 13.6% using total

price, corresponding to the average effect on the three disaggregated lease groups in Table 4. We

further run the same hedonic regression in Columns (2) and (6) based on a restricted sample where

we can identify repeat sales of the same property, and obtain slightly smaller discount estimates

(10.7% and 12.4% for unit and total prices, respectively).

    Our second test uses a propensity score matching (PSM) methodology based on location, time,

and housing characteristics that we use in Eq. (9).11 The results reported in Columns (3) and (7)

suggest a similar discount of 11.9% for unit and total price. Finally, Columns (4) and (8) estimate our

main specification employing a generalization of the propensity score matching, i.e., entropy balance

weighting, which involves a reweighting scheme that is more flexible than the nearest neighbor

matching (Hainmueller, 2012). They suggest that properties with leases in the main treatment

group are sold at a discount of 15.6% (15.4%) using unit (total) price, even greater than the baseline

estimates.



5. Reneging Risk: Extending and Calibrating Model

In this section we study the price differential of land leases granted by the HKSAR relative to those

by the British Hong Kong government. This strong empirical pattern present in our data suggests a

potential "reneging" risk embedded in the leases originally granted by the colonial government. We
  11
     The PSM yields a sample of 46,874 transactions using the "nearest-neighbor" option, evenly split between the
control and treatment groups. The detailed procedure is available in Table 6 notes.




                                                       27
then extend our baseline model to capture this feature, which is calibrated to inform us about the

magnitude of our underlying model parameters in light of estimated land lease discounts.


5.1. The Price Differential between British Hong Kong and HKSAR Leases

The reneging risk refers to a scenario under which the future government may renege on the land

leases granted by previous governments after 2047. This is likely because neither JD nor the Basic

Law prescribe any arrangements beyond 2047 and thus the future government will not be legally

bound to honor the existing leases. Under the existing laws, the government can invoke the Land

Resumption Ordinance to order the requisition of any land for public purposes.12 We argue that

leases granted under the British Hong Kong would be subject to greater reneging risk than those

granted by the HKSAR since the future government will be still under China's rule even in the

worst-case scenario.

       To empirically investigate this reneging risk, we identify land leases that were granted by HKSAR,

whose expiration years range from 2047 to 2064 in our data.13 In Table 7, we further interact our

treatment group, 2047­2064, with an indicator as to whether the lease was granted under HKSAR (

July 1st , 1997), which captures the relative price differential between British Hong Kong and HKSAR

leases within the lease group 2047­2064. We find that, within the same expiration years, properties

with land leases granted by the HKSAR government are traded at a premium at 7­8 percentage

points (about half of the base effect which is about 15 percentage points) in various specifications

relative to those granted by British Hong Kong government. This is consistent with how market

participants might perceive the Hong Kong government reneging on land leases issued by the British

colonial government as at least a possibility.


5.2. Model Extension

Motivated by the above evidence, we extend our baseline model by incorporating a reneging risk

applied to the land contracts issued during the colonial era (i.e., before the handover). The land
  12
     The ordinance has been used 13 times since the handover in 1997 to turn the city's idle land into public housing . It
was used successfully for the Yan Tin Estate in Tuen Mun district in northwestern Hong Kong, which was constructed
in 2018 and now provides 42,687 units for 13,500 residents, 10 years after government reclaimed the land.
  13
     We collect all land publicly auctioned by HKSAR and match them with property transactions by the land lot
number in our data; we also collect all the buildings initiated by Urban Renewal Authority of Hong Kong, which issues
a new HKSAR lease for the land they redevelop. The most remote HKSAR lease expiration year in our data is 2064
because i) we only include second-hand transactions, and ii) there is some delay in developing land into properties.




                                                           28
lease will be renewed to another 50-year lease either when the original lease expires; or when a

reneging event (modeled as a Poisson shock) occurs. In both scenarios, the homeowner who is

leasing land granted by the British colonial government will first be charged with an extra "penalty"

 > 0 (i.e., additional land premium, calculated as a fraction of the house market value) and will

then receive another new 50-year non-colonial lease contract with ground rent schedule given in Eq.

(2).

   We assume that this reneging shock is i.i.d. across all properties with British Hong Kong leases,

and will emerge only after July 1st , 2047 when the current HKSAR government ceases to exist.

Recall that Footnote 7 mentions that Annex III in the JD guarantees that all leased lands granted

by the British Hong Kong government shall be protected under the law of HKSAR; but HKSAR

only exists through June 30th , 2047, not even considering the anecdotal reports mentioned above.

Our assumption keeps the parsimony while capturing the potentially heightened lease renege risk

after July 1st , 2047.

   Suppose that the intensity of the reneging shock is , and the extra land premium faced by

colonial leases is  . Then when the lease expires in L   , the value of a house with its underlying

lease granted by the British colonial government, denoted by P (L; , Brit), can be calculated as

                                         LT
             P (L; , Brit) = E                 e-s ds + e-(LT ) · (1 -  ) · P (L  T +50; HK )              (10)
                                     0


where T denotes the reneging event (Poisson arrival) with intensity 1{s } , L  T  min(L, T ),

and P (L  T + 50; HK ) is a standardized Hong Kong land lease with a 50 year-term standing at
                                                                ( )
the renewal date L  T (which is subject to the same fs                schedule) as given in Section 3.1.
                                         ( )
   Taking the simple schedule of fs            =  1{s } considered in Section 3.2, we derive the house value

in Eq. (10) in closed-form as

                                           1 ( +  -  )e-
                         P (L; , Brit) =    -            ( + e-(+)(L- ) ).                                 (11)
                                                ( + )


5.3. Calibration Method

We have estimated the price discount of discrete treatment lease groups using a reduced-form method.

However, these estimates are in terms of housing value and we need to convert them the policy tools

taken by the Hong Kong government. To do this, we carry out a simple calibration exercise based


                                                         29
on the asset pricing framework developed in this paper, which allows us to back out the underlying

schedule of additional ground rent  as well as the magnitude of reneging risk implied by the housing

transaction data.

       Given the estimated price discounts in Table 7 for different land lease groups relative to the

control group, we perform a calibration exercise in which we attempt to find the model parameters

that minimizes the difference between the model implied discounts and the estimates. We first set

 = r - g = 1% based on the mean of the difference between Hong Kong's 12-month HIBOR rate

and rental price growth from 1998 to 2019.14 Then, given the set of remaining parameters denoted

by   {, ,  }, we first calculate n (), which is the model-implied average discount for each

leasehold group n  {1, 2, ..., N }, as follows:


                                                  {ln Pti (Li ; ) - ln Pti (L =  ; )}
                                           Li n
                                n () =                                                   ,                           (12)
                                                 # of transactions in group n

where i indexes each housing transaction in our data, Li denotes its land lease expiration date, and

ti denotes its transaction date.15 In other words, for transaction i in lease group n, ln Pti (Li ; ) -

ln Pti (L =  ; ) is the model-implied price discount relative to the control lease group. As a result,

n () is the average model-implied discount for all transactions in the leasehold group n, conditional

on a set of parameters .

       In sum, we pre-set the effective time discount rate  = r - g = 1% based on its corresponding

empirical moment that is external to the model, and search for three structural parameters that

are internal to the model, i.e., ^ = (^  ^ 
                                       , , ^), that minimize the model's mean squared error (MSE)

defined as follows:
                                                        N
                                                    1               ^n )2 .
                                              min           (n () -                                                  (13)
                                                    N
                                                        n=1

The MSE is over all twelve lease groups (leases groups granted by the British colonial government

and the HKSAR government, with N = 12), where ^n is the empirically estimated discount for lease
  14
     Hong Kong's 12-month HIBOR rate is from the website of Hong Kong Monetary Authority
(www.hkma.gov.hk/eng). Annual growth of rental price is calculated using the average of five rental indices provided
by Rating and Valuation Department of HKSAR (www.rvd.gov.hk/en/property market statistics/index.html).
  15
     Since the EPRC only records the information about the lease expiration year, we simply assume Li to be the last
day (December 31st ) of the leasehold year. Of course, for the leasehold expiration year 2047, we set the leasehold date
to be June 30th , 2047 if it belongs to the control group. If not, we then set the leasehold expiration date to be December
31th , 2047. Finally, to simplify the estimation, we also set the transaction date to be June 30th of the transaction year.




                                                              30
group n in Table 4.16


5.4. Calibration Results

Figure 5 plots the discounts of each lease group relative to the control group from the regression

(light blue) and the model calibration (dark blue), respectively. The overall model fit is quite good

and is shown as the close price discounts between model and regression for all lease groups except

two small ones, i.e., 2040­2046 and 2098­2135, for which the model underpredicts and overpredicts

the price discount, respectively.

      What are the model parameters implied by the empirical estimates of land leases discounts, as

a result of the optimization procedure in Eq. (13)? We find that ^ = 25.117%, implying that after

2047 Hong Kong homeowners expect an about 25% of penalty in order to extend their land leases

2047. This seemingly large expected penalty in the remote future take into account all political

uncertainty in the future (from the perspective of the first two decades of the 21st century), with the

most imminent uncertainty being in mid-2047.

      On the parameters for reneging risk in colonial leases, we find that the British Hong Kong leases

are expected to be reneged every 74 years (^ = 1.342%); and Hong Kong homeowners need to pay

a penalty of about ^ = 13.100% of the house value upon receiving a 50-year HKSAR-style renewal

contract in the modern era. Again, both parameters are under the risk-adjusted measure. Together,

these two parameters imply that relative to an otherwise identical 50-year HKSAR contract, a

hypothetical 50-year British Hong Kong lease is traded at an effective discount of 11.1% from today's

viewpoint (or a discount of 13.4% if the lease term is 100 years).



6. Political Uncertainty and Price Discounts

In this section, we exploit sentiment measures at citywide, district, and individual levels and explore

their relation with the estimated price discounts. In other words, we offer both time-series and cross-

sectional evidence that the estimated housing discounts are closely connected to political uncertainty

regarding "One Country, Two Systems" in Hong Kong. For ease of illustration, we will focus on the

main treatment lease group, July 1st , 2047­2064, as the primary explanatory variable and the logged

unit price as the primary dependent variable.
 16
      In some strict sense we estimate our model by following the M-estimation method (Huber, 1992).


                                                         31
6.1. Citywide Sentiments in Political Uncertainty

We first relate the estimated price discount in the properties with leases expiring after 2047 to the

citywide public sentiment in Hong Kong's political outlook. Political uncertainty regarding the fate

of Hong Kong has been lingering throughout society since the 1984 JD, but its severity and gravity

have been evolving over time and often manifest more significantly when public sentiment rises. Our

paper argues that the severity of political uncertainty should drive the price discounts of different

land leases.

   Figure 6 plots a popular measure of public sentiment toward political risk in Hong Kong, which

is based on a survey conducted by the Public Opinion Programme at the University of Hong Kong,

a pro-democracy group, on a biannual basis. In this survey, participants are asked about their

confidence in Hong Kong's future, as well as their confidence in "One Country, Two Systems." The

figure shows that Hong Kong people's confidence in their own future as well as in "One Country, Two

Systems" began to decline in 2007. The two series are almost perfectly aligned since 2008, suggesting

that people's confidence in the future of Hong Kong is entirely driven by politics. Both series become

negative after the "Occupy Central" movement in 2014; and although the net confidences had briefly

recovered and been positive in 2017, they remain negative since then.

   The movements in public sentiment and underlying political uncertainty should be reflected in

our estimated price discount through affecting households' perceptions of the government land lease

renewal policy after 2047. To explore this, we estimate the treatment group's price discount relative

to the control group by transaction year to obtain the price discount over time. Results are plotted

in Panel (A) of Figure 7. Consistent with view that the discounts of treatment group are driven by

the political uncertainty faced by Hong Kong, the price differentials of leases expiring after 2047 are

not statistically significant from zero until after 2003 amid rising anxiety about the anti-subversion

law as well as the advent of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) that first appeared in China

in 2002 and spread to large parts of Hong Kong in 2003. Since then, the price differential has become

significant and negative, and this trend has been exacerbated over time. It has settled at 20% since

2015.

   Panel (A) also plots the net confidence in Hong Kong's future. The trends in the confidence

series are almost perfectly aligned up with the estimated price discounts. As people's confidence

in Hong Kong's future declines, the relative price discount associated with political uncertainty in


                                                  32
the housing market climbs, hinting at a connection between the estimated price discount and public

sentiment in political uncertainty since 2007.


6.2. Local Political Sentiment Measures

The above analysis focuses on the time-series variation of citywide political uncertainty. We now

explore time-varying socioeconomic characteristics at the district level to capture different local

sentiments in political uncertainty and their relations with the estimated price discounts.

   Our socioeconomic characteristics at the district level come from the census data as well as district

council elections. The census survey is conducted by the Census and Statistics Department of HKSAR

every five years, while the district council is elected every four years. For each census year (2001,

2006, 2011, 2016), we match the census variables in each census year to all the transactions since the

last census year (e.g., transactions in 2012 and later are matched with 2016 census variables). From

each local election (1999, 2003, 2007, 2011, 2015, 2019), we match the percentage of pro-democracy

seats for each district to all the transactions from two years before the election year through two

years after (e.g., transactions in 2018­2020 are matched with 2019 pro-democracy seats).

   Panel A of Table 8 reports the summary statistics of district characteristics based on the merged

data. The average median age is 40.4 years old, and the average median monthly income is HKD

12,422. On average, about 17% of adult residents have a college degree or higher, and about 51%

are homeowners.

   In the next two subsections we explain two additional district-level characteristics that are unique

to Hong Kong: percent of pro-democracy seats, and percent of residents who were born in mainland

China (hereafter, mainland migrants). The average percent of pro-democracy seats is 30%, but with

a wide range from 4 to 100 percent. Mainland migrants include renters as well as homeowners,

roughly split 57/43 between them; together, they account for 31% of the Hong Kong population.


6.2.1. Pro-Democracy Seats

We obtain the percent of pro-democracy seats from Hong Kong's district council elections, which

are mandated to advise the government on matters affecting the well-being of people, the provision

and use of public facilities and services, and the use of public funds allocated to each of the eighteen

districts. Councils also undertake the promotion of cultural activities and community outreach



                                                  33
activities as a way to monitor grassroots sentiment. Although district councilors deal with local

matters, they get to choose five seats on the LegCo (totalling 70 seats) and 117 seats on the 1,200-

member panel that selects the city's chief executive.17

       Local elections have become more important since 2014 when the Occupy Central movement

failed to achieve its political goals and more people switched to elections as a way to express their

political opinion. As a result, the percent of pro-democracy seats from district council elections

not only captures the general discontent of local residents about contemporaneous governance, but

also local sentiments in Hong Kong's political future given that this has been the dominant topic in

the elections. For example, many of the candidates' campaign flyers during the 2019 local election

mentioned a key citywide protest slogan, "five demands, not one less."18

       Panel (A) of Figure 8 shows that after suffering some defeats in 2007, 2011 and 2015 elections,

the pro-democracy camp in conjunction with the localist groups in 2019 gained control of 17 of the

18 district councils and tripled their seats from around 124 to about 388 amid this record turnover.

It was the pro-democracy camp's victory by the largest margin in the history of Hong Kong, and

contributes to the significant time-series variation in the local election results within the same districts

from 2003 to 2019. The figure also illustrates the significant cross-sectional variation in the percent

of pro-democracy seats across districts within the same elections, the focus of our study later.


6.2.2. Mainland Migrants

Figure 6 suggests that Hong Kongers' confidence in their own future almost entirely overlaps with

their confidence in "One Country, Two Systems." In this regard, the percent of mainland migrants

provides a measure of local sentiments against cultural influences from mainland China that has

less to do with political encroachments. Since the handover, a large influx of tourists and migrants

from the mainland had been blamed anecdotally by some locals for their lost Hong Kong identity.19

There has been growing anxiety that Hong Kong will no longer belong to Hong Kongers as both
  17
      The district council system's roots go back to the deadly 1967 riots in Hong Kong, which began over labor grievances.
It was set up to provide a channel for officials to better know the feelings of local residents to avoid future mass unrest
or riots. Both the district council and the LegCo elections are held every four years, but the latter is held one year
after the former (e.g., 2019 and 2020, respectively).
   18
      The demands are: the complete withdrawal of the extradition bill; establishment of an independent commission of
inquiry into police conduct; retraction of the designation of "riot" describe the protests; amnesty for arrested protesters;
and full democracy.
   19
      The Chinese government relaxed its travel policy in 2003 to allow mainlanders easier access to Hong Kong. Over the
past decade, the number of mainland Chinese tourists who frequently visited Hong Kong has increased exponentially,
reaching over 40 million annual arrivals in 2013.



                                                            34
local and transnational businesses in the city begin catering almost exclusively to mainlanders by

speaking Mandarin Chinese instead of the local Hong Kong dialect, effectively altering the cultural

and socioeconomic landscape of the city.

   Panel (B) of Figure 8 shows that the percent of mainland migrants was high across all districts

in the early censuses, but has deceased slightly in the latest census. While they are spread across

the city, they have been most concentrated in the districts of Kowloon, an area of Hong Kong that

is attached to the Chinese mainland.


6.2.3. Correlations

Panel B of Table 8 reports the correlations among the district characteristics, with most of them

being statistically significant at the 1% level. For instance, education (proxied by the percent of

college and higher degrees) is negatively correlated with age but positively correlated with income.

   The two local sentiment measures, i.e., percent of pro-democracy seats and percent of mainland

migrants, are positively correlated with each other (with  = 0.34), and both are positively corre-

lated with median income and negatively with percent of homeowners. However, median age and

education are (negatively) correlated with percent of mainland migrants only, but not with percent

of pro-democracy seats. This suggests that mainland migrants tend to live in older and poorer com-

munities with less educated residents and lower homeownership rate. Consistent with the causes

of pro-democracy movements, the percentage of pro-democracy seats tends to be higher in affluent

neighborhoods where people do not own or have the prospect of owning homes.

   We highlight that the geographic pattern of the proportion of mainland migrants reflected in

Panel (B) differs from that of the proportion of pro-democracy seats in Panel (A) of Figure 8. In the

2019 local elections, pro-democracy sentiment is the highest in most of Hong Kong Island (all but

Wan Chai), and most of the New Territories districts, but only parts of the Kowloon districts. As we

will see later, these two local sentiment measures exhibit quite different powers in explaining the price

discount of the treatment lease group due to political uncertainty. Taking stock, the results suggest

that the two measures, percent of pro-democracy seats and mainland migrants, capture different

aspects of local sentiments, a fact that we will confirm shortly.




                                                   35
6.3. Local Sentiments and Housing Discounts

We now take the percentage of pro-democracy seats and the percentage of mainland migrants as

our two primary measures of local sentiments and explore their relations with the price discount

associated with political uncertainty. In all the regressions reported below, we standardize district

variables to mean 0 and standard deviation 1 within each district-cohort year for easier interpretation.


6.3.1. The Effect of Local Sentiments

In Panel C of Table 8, we follow the specification in Eq. (9) but include only the transactions in

the control (June 30th , 2047) and main treatment group (July 1st 2047­2064). In Column (1), the

coefficient captures a significant discount of 13.3% in properties with leases expiring between July

1st , 2047, and 2064, corresponding to the average discount among three lease groups (i.e., July 1st ,

2047­2049, 2050­2052 and 2053­2064).

   In Columns (2)­(4), we include the interaction of the main treatment lease group and the per-

centage of pro-democracy seats as well as the percentage of mainland migrants. The coefficient on

the treatment group dummy ranges from -0.121 to -0.149, all significant at the 1% level, capturing

a base price discount at city level. Coefficients on the interaction terms give the incremental effect

of district-level variations and they are all significant at the 1% level. We find a negative coefficient

in Column (2) on the interaction between the treatment group with percent of pro-democracy seats,

suggesting that in addition to the -14.9% price discount, a one SD increase in pro-democracy seats

in the local district (i.e., 18%) is associated with an additional discount of 4.0 percentage points (or

27% increase of base effect) for the treatment group. Similarly, results in Column (3) suggest that

on top of the -12.6% average price discount, a one SD increase of mainland migrants in the local

district (i.e., 6%) is associated with 9.4 percentage points (or 75%) in additional price discount. Col-

umn (4) includes interactions with both measures in a horse-race setting and finds similar estimates

as in Columns (2) and (3), suggesting that these two measures capture quite distinct local political

sentiments, echoing the raw correlation pattern discussed in Section 6.2.3.

   In Columns (5)­(6), we replace percentage of pro-democracy seats and percent of mainland

migrants with indicators showing whether the district is above the median value of each variable

(within each cohort year), respectively. This helps us quantify a potential nonlinear effect of local

sentiments. Column (5) shows that properties in the treatment group located in districts with


                                                   36
high proportion of pro-democracy seats see an additional 7.2 percentage points (60% of the base

discount) of the price discount on top of 12% base discount already observed for properties in the

treatment lease groups located in districts with lower percentage of pro-democracy seats. Hence the

combined discount is 19.2% for the properties in the former group. Similarly, Column (6) suggests

that properties in the treatment group located in the districts with high percent of mainland migrants

see an additional 10.2 percentage points (111% of the base discount) of the price discount on top

of 9.2% base discount already observed for properties in the treatment lease groups located in the

districts with lower percentage of mainland migrants.

       Pane D reports the regression results where we treat leases granted by British Hong Kong and

HKSAR separately. In addition to all the explanatory variables in Panel C, we also control for

the double interaction of treatment leases with the indicator for HKSAR leases as well as its triple

interaction terms. While results confirm the significant price premium in transactions with leases

granted by the HKSAR relative to their British Hong Kong government counterparts, all but one of

the triple interaction terms are statistically insignificant, suggesting no significant difference between

the colonial and HKSAR leases in how local sentiments affect price discount.20

       Taken together, these results confirm that the two series provide valid measures of local sentiment

in political uncertainty and the housing price discount due to future political uncertainty increases

where we see increases in local sentiment.


6.3.2. Time-varying Effect

We also repeat the regression analysis in Section 6.1 after splitting the samples based on whether the

districts have a higher percentage of pro-democracy seats or high percentage of mainland migrants.

The coefficients are plotted in Panels B and C of Figure 7, respectively. Compared to the average

effects reported in Table 8, the two panels in Figure 7 display the evolution of political uncertainty

effects across districts with different sentiments.

       Regardless of which measure we use, price discounts in districts with greater local political sen-

timent are almost always more negative than those in districts with less sentiment. But in districts

with greater local sentiment we observe a significant price discount even before 2005, a result absent
  20
    The only significant estimate is on the triple interaction of HKSAR leases in the treatment group and the indicator
for high percentage of mainland migrants, suggesting that an additional discount is placed in the transactions with
HKSAR land leases in districts with many mainland migrants.




                                                          37
from Panel A of Figure 7. A significant price discount did not emerge in the districts with less

sentiment until after 2005 when the citywide sentiments increased, and has been steadily worsening

since 2005. The comparison suggests that estimated price discounts in transactions in the treatment

group do capture the price of political uncertainty, which is manifested through the change in public

sentiment in political uncertainty, whether local or citywide.


6.3.3. Plausible Social and Economic Mechanisms

There are several plausible mechanisms through which the local sentiment measures can have a

significant effect on the price discount in the treatment lease group relative to the control group. First,

one of the primary, common goals of the pan-democracy camp is to achieve universal suffrage for the

elections of both chief executive and LegCo. The pan-democrats also generally embrace liberal values

such as rule of law, human rights, and civil liberties. Thus, residents in places where pro-democratic

camps won more seats should be more sensitive to the future of "One Country, Two Systems,"

the very principle that provides the foundation of an autonomous Hong Kong. Moreover, since the

elections have been widely viewed as a de facto referendum on the ongoing pro-democracy protest

out of the fear and panic of losing a "high degree of autonomy," residents in districts with a high

percentage of pro-democracy seats may feel more uncertain over Hong Kong's future. Thus regardless

of specific reasons or demographic characteristics of the residents, percentage of pro-democracy seats

has a direct effect on the estimated price discount associated with political uncertainty in the remote

future.

       Moving on to the percentage of mainland migrants in a district, we believe this captures Hong

Kongers' rising antagonistic sentiments toward cultural influences from the mainland. Hong Kongers

over time have grown increasingly fearful of losing their own identity, and the resulting tension and

anxiety are particularly high where there are a lot of tourists and mainland migrants, causing not only

a shift in culture but also overcrowded public facilities and services.21 Such anxiety stems partly from

their eroding social position, but more importantly it is induced by mainland China's overwhelming

political and economic dominance over HKSAR. As a result, in places where more mainland residents
  21
    Some of the chief complaints include grocery shoppers, parallel businesses, and birth tourism. For example, Yam
(2016) reports that between 2006 and 2012, over 100,000 pregnant women from mainland China crossed the border to
give birth in Hong Kong so that their children could become permanent residents of HKSAR. Despite the fact that the
mainland Chinese visitors and immigrants in Hong Kong come from different social backgrounds and possess different
intentions, Hong Kongers tend to represent them collectively as "locusts" and employ warlike tropes such as "invasion,"
"survival," and "defend."



                                                          38
are present22 and where the cultural differences between Hong Kongers and mainlanders are on full

display, local residents tend to see their lives as more affected by the mainland, and ultimately

become more pessimistic about the future of "One Country, Two Systems."


6.4. The Effect of Mainlander Buyers

In the above analysis, we focus on local sentiment from the perspective of Hong Kongers using

district-level data. We now explore the perspective of people from mainland China--especially those

who have moved to Hong Kong--identified through the buyer and seller names in the transaction

data.23 Our premise is that mainlander buyers or sellers may have different "private" valuations

regarding the political uncertainty embedded in the land lease. These individual private valuations

should matter for the equilibrium transaction prices in the context of housing markets where over-

the-counter bilateral bargaining is common.

    Table A.1 reports the results from regressions on the interaction of the main treatment lease group

and mainlander buyer dummies. Regardless of whether we control for the interaction of treatment

group and district-level percentage of Chinese mainlanders, we find a significant and positive coef-

ficient on the interaction of the treatment group and mainland buyer transactions, suggesting that

relative to the significant price discount valued by non-mainlanders, similar transactions involving a

mainlander buyer exhibit a slightly smaller political uncertainty price discount with a difference of

1.2­1.4 percentage points.



7. Conclusion

In the context of Hong Kong, where the indeterminacy of its political system is always looming, we

find that political uncertainty is priced in the property market where the value of the housing assets

depends on the continuity of land ownership in the far future. Housing is also the dominant form of

household wealth in Hong Kong, making its exposure to political uncertainty particularly costly to

households, financial institutions, and larger society.
   22
      It is worth noting that Hong Kongers still account for absolute majority of the population as well as homeowners.
The average percent of mainland migrants is 39%, and many of them have lived in Hong Kong many years and may
have been localized already.
   23
      Mainlander buyers are identified if one of the well-known surnames from mainland China is matched for buyers
following the algorithm developed in Fan et al. (2019). These well-known surnames from mainland China are distinctly
different from those used by natives of Hong Kong or Taiwan.




                                                          39
   We exploit an unique feature in the Hong Kong's housing market: land leases expiring on June

30th , 2047, have been promised a 50-year extension protection, while those expiring immediately

after that date are left unprotected legally. The different treatment translates to a 14% discount

for the second group of leases, and is rooted in the historical arrangements in the JD and the "One

Country, Two Systems" design which are all set to expire in 2047, giving rise to the largest political

uncertainty regarding any lease extension beyond that point.

   We guide our reduced-form regressions by a pricing model of housing assets with future political

uncertainty, which is to be resolved at a predetermined future date when the HKSAR expires. The

model is further extended to incorporate a reneging risk applied to land contracts issued during the

colonial era, motivated by the significant price differential between British Hong Kong and HKSAR

leases within the same lease group. Finally, citywide and local sentiments in political uncertainty

provide plausible mechanisms through which housing prices fall with rising political uncertainty as

residents feel more uncertain of Hong Kong's future.




                                                 40
References

Abdulai, Awudu, Victor Owusu, and Renan Goetz, 2011, Land Tenure Differences and Investment

  in Land Improvement Measures: Theoretical and Empirical Analyses, Journal of Development

  Economics 96, 66­78.

Acemoglu, Daron, and Simon Johnson, 2005, Unbundling Institutions, Journal of Political Economy

  113, 949­995.

Bailey, Martin J., Richard F. Muth, and Hugh O. Nourse, 1963, A Regression Method for Real

  Estate Price Index Construction, Journal of the American Statistical Association 58, 933­942.

Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis, 2016, Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty,

  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131, 1593­1636.

Barro, Robert J., 2015, Environmental Protection, Rare Disasters and Discount Rates, Economica

  82, 1­23.

Besley, Timothy, 1995, Property Rights and Investment Incentives: Theory and Evidence from

  Ghana, Journal of Political Economy 103, 903­937.

Besley, Timothy, and Robin Burgess, 2000, Land Reform, Poverty Reduction, and Growth: Evidence

  from India, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 115, 389­430, Publisher: Oxford Academic.

Case, Karl, and Robert Shiller, 1989, The Efficiency of the Market for Single-Family Homes, Amer-

  ican Economic Review 79, 125­37.

Coase, Ronald, 1960, The Problem of Social Cost, Journal of Law and Economics 56, 837 ­ 877.

Demographia, 2019, 16th Annual Demographia International Housing Affordability Survey: 2020,

  Demographia http://demographia.com/dhimedia2020.pdf.

Fan, Yi, Maggie Rong Hu, and Wayne Xinwei Wan, 2019, A Tale of Two Cities: The Impact of

  Cross-Border Migration on Hong Kong's Housing Market, Available at SSRN 3477421 .

Field, Erica, 2007, Entitled to Work: Urban Property Rights and Labor Supply in Peru, The Quar-

  terly Journal of Economics 122, 1561­1602.



                                               41
Galiani, Sebastian, and Ernesto Schargrodsky, 2010, Property Rights for the Poor: Effects of Land

  Titling, Journal of Public Economics 94, 700­729.

Giglio, Stefano, Matteo Maggiori, and Johannes Stroebel, 2015a, Very Long-Run Discount Rates,

  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130, 1­53.

Giglio, Stefano, Matteo Maggiori, Johannes Stroebel, and Andreas Weber, 2015b, Climate Change

  and Long-Run Discount Rates: Evidence from Real Estate, Working Paper 21767, National Bureau

  of Economic Research.

Goldstein, Markus, and Christopher Udry, 2008, The Profits of Power: Land Rights and Agricultural

  Investment in Ghana, Journal of Political Economy 116, 981­1022.

Grossman, Sanford J., and Oliver D. Hart, 1986, The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory

  of Vertical and Lateral Integration, Journal of Political Economy 94, 691­719.

Hainmueller, Jens, 2012, Entropy Balancing for Causal Effects: A Multivariate Reweighting Method

  to Produce Balanced Samples in Observational Studies, Political Analysis 20, 25­46.

Hansen, Lars Peter, 2014, Nobel Lecture: Uncertainty Outside and Inside Economic Models, Journal

  of Political Economy 122, 945­987, Publisher: The University of Chicago Press.

Hart, Oliver, and John Moore, 1990, Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm, Journal of Political

  Economy 98, 1119­1158.

Hassan, Tarek A., Stephan Hollander, Laurence van Lent, and Ahmed Tahoun, 2019, Firm-Level

  Political Risk: Measurement and Effects, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134, 2135­2202.

Hsu, Sara, 2017, Good News For Chinese Homeowners: Premier Li Offers Some Clarity On

  Land Leases, Forbes https://www.forbes.com/sites/sarahsu/2017/03/21/good-news-for-chinese-

  homeowners-premier-li-offers-some-clarity-on-land-leases/.

Huber, Peter J., 1992, Robust Estimation of a Location Parameter, in Samuel Kotz, and Norman L.

  Johnson, eds., Breakthroughs in Statistics: Methodology and Distribution , Springer Series in Statis-

  tics, 492­518 (Springer, New York, NY).

              
Kelly, Bryan, Lubos P´
                     astor, and Pietro Veronesi, 2016, The Price of Political Uncertainty: Theory

  and Evidence from the Option Market, The Journal of Finance 71, 2417­2480.

                                                  42
Peng, Wensheng, Lillian Cheung, and Cynthia Leung, 2001, The Property Market and the Macro-

  Economy, HKMA Quarterly Bulletin .

Pindyck, Robert S., 2013, Climate Change Policy: What Do the Models Tell Us?, Journal of Eco-

  nomic Literature 51, 860­872.

P´
 astor, Lubos, and Pietro Veronesi, 2012, Uncertainty about Government Policy and Stock Prices,

  The Journal of Finance 67, 1219­1264.

P´      
 astor, Lubos, and Pietro Veronesi, 2013, Political Uncertainty and Risk Premia, Journal of Finan-

  cial Economics 110, 520­545.

Rosen, Sherwin, 1974, Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in Pure Com-

  petition, The Journal of Political Economy 82, 34­55.

Taylor, Chloe, 2019, Hong Kong Named the Most Expensive City In the World for Ex-

  pats, CNBC https://www.cnbc.com/2019/06/26/hong-kong-named-the-most-expensive-city-in-

  the-world-for-expats.html.

The Economist, 2019, The Turmoil in Hong Kong Stems in Part from Its Unaffordable Housing,

  The Economist https://www.economist.com/china/2019/08/22/the-turmoil-in-hong-kong-stems-

  in-part-from-its-unaffordable-housing.

van Binsbergen, Jules, Michael Brandt, and Ralph Koijen, 2012, On the Timing and Pricing of

  Dividends, American Economic Review 102, 1596­1618.

Xie,     Andy,    2019,   Hong      Kong   and   Singapore,   So   Similar    Yet    So   Different   ­

  It's    All    About    Housing,     Money     and   Politics,   South     China    Morning     Post

  https://www.scmp.com/comment/opinion/article/3020789/hong-kong-and-singapore-so-similar-

  yet-so-different-its-all-about.

Yam, Shui-yin Sharon, 2016, Affective Economies and Alienizing Discourse: Citizenship and Mater-

  nity Tourism in Hong Kong, Rhetoric Society Quarterly 46, 410­433.




                                                  43
       Figure 2. Model Implied Price Discounts with Constant Penalty Schedule




This figure plots the model implied house value as a function of lease expiration date L. The political
uncertainty will be largely resolved on  = 7/1/2047, when a new Hong Kong government replaces
the current HKSAR. Red vertical dashed line indicate leases expiring in  = 7/1/2047. Blue vertical
dotted lines indicate several lease expiration date used as boundaries of our lease groups.Parameters:
 = r - g = 0.01,  = 0.25, t = 1/1/2010.




                                                  44
                 Figure 3. Distribution of Transactions by Lease Groups

                 Panel A: Number of Transactions By Leasehold Expiration Year




                        Panel B: Number of Transactions by Lease Group




This figure plots the number of housing transactions by individual lease expiration year (except leases
expiring on 6/30/2047). Panel A presents the number of transactions by lease expiration year from 2030
to 2135, and from 2842 to 2959. Panel B presents the number of transactions by lease groups and lease
types (British colonial leases or HKSAR leases).




                                                  45
Figure 4. Geographic Distribution of Transactions and Leases

                 Panel A: Control Lease Group




             Panel B: Main Treatment Lease Group




                             46
                                     Panel C: Number of Leases




Panel A plots the number of transactions by district for the control lease group with leases expiring on
6/30/2047. Panel B plots the number of transactions by each district for the main treatment lease group
with leases expiring between 7/1/2047 and 2064. Panel C plots the number of leases for control group
and main treatment group by each district.




                                                  47
                                  Figure 5. Model Calibration

                                 Discounts from Model versus Data




This figure presents the model-implied discounts and discounts estimated from hedonic regressions (col-
umn (1) in Table 7 with additional control of turnover) across twelve lease groups (including British
colonial and HKSAR ones). The resulting parameters from the calibration/estimation are  = r - g = 1%
(set by matching empirical moments outside the model) and  = 1.342%,  = 13.001%,  = 25.117%
(optimally chosen to match the empirical moments inside the model).




                                                  48
                      Figure 6. Citizen's Net Confidence from Surveys




This figure plots two widely used measures of public sentiments toward political risk in Hong Kong over
time from 1998 to 2020. The two sentiment measures, Net Confidence in Hong Kong's future and Net
Confidence in "One Country, Two Systems", are provided by the public sentiment survey conducted by
the Public Opinion Programme at the University of Hong Kong on a biannual basis. In this survey,
participants are asked about their confidence in Hong Kong's future, as well as their confidence in "One
Country, Two Systems".




                                                  49
                          Figure 7. Price Discount Over Time

                    Panel A: Dynamic Estimates based on Entire Sample




Panel B: Dynamic Estimates based on Districts with High Versus Low % of Pro-Democracy Seats




                                            50
Panel C: Dynamic Estimates based on Districts with High Versus Low % of Mainland Migrants




Panel A plots the price discounts over time for the main treatment group with lease expiring between
[7/1/2047] and 2064. Panel B plots the price discounts over time for two groups: main treatment groups
which have the percentage of Pro-Democracy Seats above median, main treatment groups which have the
percentage of Pro-Democracy Seats below median. Panel C plots the price discounts over time for two
groups: main treatment groups which have the percentage of Mainland Migrants above median, main
treatment groups which have the percentage of Mainland Migrants below median.




                                                 51
Figure 8. District Characteristics Over Time

      Panel A: % of Pro-Democracy Seats




                     52
                               Panel B: % of Mainland Migrants




Panel A plots % of Pro-Democracy Seats by voting year and districts. Panel B plots % of Mainland
Migrants by census year and districts.




                                              53
                                                                  Table 1: Summary of Lease Types


     Auction Date      Hong Kong Island & Old Kowloon                                                   New Kowloon & New Territories                                   Land Proceeds



     Before JD         (1) 999 years lease (auctioned from 1843 to 1898 and expiring in from 2842 to    (4) Nonrenewable lease expires on 6/27/1997 due to histori-
     ( 4/1/1985)       2897).                                                                           cal reason. According to Joint Declaration, these leases will
                                                                                                        be automatically renewed to 6/30/2047. Thus, they will
                       (2) 75 years lease (auctioned from 1843 to 1898, first regrant from 1918 to
                                                                                                        expire on 6/30/2047 in our data.
                       1973 which will expire from 1993 to 2048). 99 years lease (rare, auctioned
                       from 1843 to 1898, first regrant from 1942 to 1997 which will expire from 2041
                       to 2084. Note that if the first regrant happens after JD, the second regrant
                       lease will expire on 6/30/2047 according to JD instead of another 99 years.)
                       (3) 75+75 years lease (auctioned from 1899 to 1985, first renewed from 1974
                       to 2060 and expiring from 2049 to 2135); 99+99 years lease (rare, auctioned
                       from 1899 to 1985, first renewed from 1998 to 2084 and expiring from 2097 to
                       2183).




54
     Transition                                                       (5) Non-renewable lease expires in 6/30/2047.                                                     Split between UK
     (4/1/1985­                                                                                                                                                         & HKSAR
     6/30/1997)



     Post Handover                                            (6) Non-renewable lease expires in (auction date + 50 years).                                             HKSAR
     ( 7/1/1997)

         This table presents summary of different land leases in the history of Hong Kong. JD was signed on Dec 19, 1984 and went effective on May 27, 1985.
         However, according to our data, lease was set to 2047 even if the land was auctioned from April 1, 1985 to May 26, 1985. So we use April 1, 1985 as
         the starting date for this policy. In our regression sample, the longest lease expires in 2959. Since 1899, 999 leases were sold as exceptions instead of
         regular land policy. For Type (2), when this type of leases ends, it could be regranted for another 75 years by paying premium and updated rent if the
         government did not need the land for public proposes. If 75 years lease was sold in 1897 and got regranted once in 1972, then they will expire in 2047
         in our data. It is important to separate leases before or after 6/30/2047 in our paper. Thus, we collect 75 year leases sold in 1897 from Hong Kong
         Government Gazette. We do not find any 75 year lease sold before 6/30/1897. We find two 75 year leases sold between 7/1/1897 and 12/31/1897, and
         we classify them as leases expiring in the second half year of 2047. Furthermore, if 99 years lease was sold in 1849 and got regranted once in 1948, then
         they will expire in 2047 in our data. We do not find any 99 year lease sold in 1849 according to Hong Kong Government Gazette.
                                          Table 2: Summary Statistics
                                               Panel A: Overall Sample
Variable                         N        Mean        SD        Min      1st       5th    Median        95th      99th     Max
Log(Price)                    551,790      1.03        0.65     -0.41   -0.24     0.00        0.99    2.13         2.53      2.82
Log(Unit Price)               551,790      8.62        0.54      7.44    7.57      7.78       8.57    9.56        9.77       9.90
Net Living Area Area          551,790     528.57     163.80      258     277       306        504     852         1,043     1,157
Floor                         551,790       18          12         0       1         3         16      41           56        80
No of Bedrooms                526,155        2           1         0       0         0          2       3            3         4
No of Living Rooms            530,719        2          1          0       0         0         2        2            2        4
Bay Window Size               551,790     20.32       15.37       0        0         0         22      44           54       250
Building Age                  551,790     16.01        9.03        2       2         3         15      32           38        40
Building Completion Year      551,790      1992        8.98     1959    1972      1978       1992    2006         2012      2018
Distance To MRT               551,790      702         886         8      24        59        423    2,462        4,708    10,633
Distance To Bus Stop          551,790      314         276        8       12        48        258     711        1,312      3,365
Distance To Hospital          551,790     1,644       1,268       80     251       394       1,359   3,978        6,565    10,589
Distance To School            551,790      138         196        0        5        22        101     303          946      2,526
Distance To University        551,790     3,564       2,466       85     309       611       3,022   8,348       10,311    10,311
Distance To Coastal Line      551,790     1,358       1,635       17      31        72        732    5,441        7,338     8,227
Turnover                      551,790     0.079       0.043     0.000   0.006     0.024      0.072   0.156       0.209      0.517
                                               Panel B: Split Samples
                                        Control Lease Group              Main Treatment Lease                  Control -
      Variable                            N        Mean        SD          N        Mean        SD             Treatment
      Log(Price)                     363,923        0.89        0.62     92,407       1.40       0.63           -0.51***
      Log(Unit Price)                363,923        8.51        0.53     92,407       8.95      0.51            -0.44***
      Net Living Area Area           363,923       513.90     157.00     92,407     551.50     162.10          -37.67***
      Floor                          363,923        16.98      10.97     92,407      24.07      15.90           -7.08***
      No of Bedrooms                 363,923        2.06        0.98     92,407       2.06       0.98              0.00
      No of Living Rooms             363,923        1.61        0.77     92,407      1.75       0.71            -0.14***
      Bay Window Size                363,923       22.62       15.25     92,407     22.81      13.55            -0.19***
      Building Age                   363,923       16.44        8.41     92,407       9.46       8.02            6.98***
      Building Completion Year       363,923        1991        7.31     92,407      2002         9              -11***
      Distance To MRT                363,923         799        945      92,407       692        900             107***
      Distance To Bus Stop           363,923         313        292      92,407       352        278             -39***
      Distance To Hospital           363,923       1,689       1,382     92,407      1,549     1,181             140***
      Distance To School             363,923         150        230      92,407       128        108              22***
      Distance To University         363,923       4,010       2,539     92,407      3,349      2,365            661***
      Distance To Coastal Line       363,923       1,608       1,742     92,407      1,254      1,634            354***
      Turnover                       363,923       0.079       0.043     92,407      0.082     0.050           -0.003***

Panel A presents summary statistics for all the variables used in the analysis. Our sample contains all second-hand
housing transactions of Estates in Hong Kong from 1998 to February, 2020 with the following restrictions: exclude
transactions with missing date, total price, unit price, net living area size, building unique ID, lease expiration
date, latitude or longitude, and floor number; exclude complexes that belong to public housing projects; exclude
houses or townhouses; exclude transactions in Island district, which consists several islands that are not part of
Kowloon peninsula or Hong Kong Island. Panel B presents number of observations, mean and standard deviation
of property characteristics for the control group (lease=6/30/2047) and main treatment group (lease[7/1/2047,
2064]). The last column presents the mean difference of these two groups and the t-test significance. Variables are
defined as: Log(Price) is log of price in million HKD; Log(Unit Price) is log of unit price in HKD; Unit price is
price divided by net size in square feet; Net Living Area Area is net size in square feet (We use net size instead of
gross size since a large portion of gross size is missing in the sample since 2010); Building age is year of transaction
minus building completion year; Bay Window Size is the size of bay window in square feet; Distance to MRT/Bus
Stop/Hospital/School/University/Coastal line measures the closest distance of the property to the corresponding
location in meters; turnover is calculated as the number of transactions over the number of units for each land
(identified by land lot number) and transaction year. The number of units is proxied by the number of unique
units in the entire transaction sample.
                                                              55
                       Table 3: Distributions by Lease Group and Year

                                                       Sale Year                          All
             Lease Group        1998-2005     2006-2010   2011-2015     2016-Feb 2020   Years
                                     Panel A: Number of Transactions
             2030 to 2033           678         960        315               157         2,110
             2034 to 2039          1,621       1,404       631               222          3,878
             2040 to 2046          4,569       3,131      1,502              805         10,007
             6/30/2047            120,869     134,766    72,002            36,286       363,923
             7/1/2047 to 2049      1,746       7,573      4,094            2,489        15,902
             2050 to 2052          1,120       9,886      9,457            5,577        26,040
             2053 to 2064          3,550       4,975      6,997            7,963        23,485
             2065 to 2097          4,177       5,465      2,825            1,354        13,821
             2098 to 2135         15,368      12,251      5,800            3,019        36,438
             2842 to 2959         12,656      10,458      4,443            1,649        29,206
             HKSAR Leases          1,534       12,098     7,925             5,423        26,980
                                         Panel B: Number of Estates
             2030 to 2033           4              4          5              6             6
             2034 to 2039           4              4          4              2             4
             2040 to 2046           3              3          2              2             3
             6/30/2047             353           353        342             328          376
             7/1/2047 to 2049      18             24         24              22           26
             2050 to 2052          14             37         36              33           38
             2053 to 2064          22             30         48              61           71
             2065 to 2097          40             34         28              23           43
             2098 to 2135          43             41         33              28           46
             2842 to 2959          64             59         55              44           66
             HKSAR Leases          18             40         54              79           84
                                         Panel C: Number of Districts
             2030 to 2033           3              3          3              3             3
             2034 to 2039           3              3          3              2             3
             2040 to 2046           3              3          2              2             3
             6/30/2047              17            17         17              16           17
             7/1/2047 to 2049       8             12         12              12           12
             2050 to 2052           9             16         16              16           16
             2053 to 2064           6             13         16              15           16
             2065 to 2097           5              6          6              5             6
             2098 to 2135           5              5          5              5             5
             2842 to 2959           6              6          6              6             6
             HKSAR Leases           10            11         14              15           15

This table presents number of transactions (Panel A), number of estates (Panel B), and number of districts
(Panel C) by these lease groups and sale year groups.




                                                     56
                                          Table 4: Baseline Analysis

                                (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)            (5)        (6)         (7)           (8)
Dep Var                                    Log (Unit Price)                                  Log (Total Price)
I(2030  Lease  2033)           -0.057      -0.054      -0.076      -0.071        -0.043      -0.043      -0.065        -0.058
                               [0.043]     [0.045]     [0.046]     [0.045]       [0.046]     [0.046]     [0.050]       [0.049]
I(2034  Lease  2039)           -0.038       0.002      -0.022      -0.040        -0.042       0.001      -0.027        -0.044
                               [0.039]     [0.038]     [0.036]     [0.038]       [0.042]     [0.041]     [0.040]       [0.042]
I(2040  Lease  2046)           -0.024      -0.009      -0.006      -0.022        -0.013       0.001       0.008        -0.011
                               [0.057]     [0.056]     [0.057]     [0.058]       [0.060]     [0.058]     [0.060]       [0.060]
I(7/1/2047  Lease  2049)     -0.141***   -0.124***   -0.125***   -0.138***     -0.149***   -0.128***   -0.132***     -0.146***
                               [0.028]     [0.026]     [0.029]     [0.029]       [0.029]     [0.027]     [0.030]       [0.030]
I(2050  Lease  2052)         -0.127***   -0.121***   -0.126***   -0.128***     -0.127***   -0.120***   -0.124***     -0.128***
                               [0.028]     [0.027]     [0.028]     [0.028]       [0.030]     [0.028]     [0.030]       [0.030]
I(2053  Lease  2064)         -0.127***   -0.090***   -0.117***   -0.126***     -0.130***   -0.090***   -0.118***     -0.129***
                               [0.032]     [0.028]     [0.034]     [0.032]       [0.033]     [0.029]     [0.035]       [0.033]
I(2065  Lease  2097)         -0.105***   -0.090***   -0.098***   -0.110***      -0.107**    -0.091**    -0.101**     -0.112***
                               [0.035]     [0.033]     [0.036]     [0.034]       [0.043]     [0.040]     [0.044]       [0.042]
I(2098  Lease  2135)           -0.022      -0.014      -0.002      -0.023        -0.029      -0.019      -0.009        -0.030
                               [0.039]     [0.035]     [0.039]     [0.038]       [0.040]     [0.036]     [0.041]       [0.040]
I(2842  Lease  2959)           -0.052      -0.034      -0.037      -0.054        -0.054      -0.034      -0.039        -0.057
                               [0.035]     [0.034]     [0.037]     [0.035]       [0.038]     [0.036]     [0.040]       [0.038]
Turnover                                                            0.170                                               0.103
                                                                   [0.113]                                             [0.120]
Property Attributes             Yes         No          Yes         Yes           Yes         No          Yes          Yes
Property Attributes × Year      No          Yes         No          No            No          Yes         No           No
District Month FE               Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
N                             551,790     551,790     525,730     551,790       551,790     551,790     525,730      551,790
Adj R2                         0.9288     0.9405      0.9316      0.9289        0.9421      0.9509      0.9440       0.9421



    This table presents the baseline hedonic housing price regression results using the entire sample of housing
    transaction records in Hong Kong from 1998 to February, 2020. The following four variables are trimmed
    at 1% and 99% percentiles to remove outliers: log of unit price, log of total price, net size, and building
    age. The dependent variable is log of unit price in Columns (1)-(4), whereas log of total price (in million
    HKD) is used as dependent variable in Columns (5)-(8). Control variables include a full set of property
    and building characteristics. Property characteristics includes the number of bedrooms (in categories,
    e.g., 1, 2, 3. Missing value is used as an extra category. ), the number of living rooms (in categories, e.g.,
    0, 1, 2, 3. Missing value is used as an extra category.), bay window indicator (whether or not included
    in housing prices), bay window size (in 10 equally sized categories), the net size (in 10 equally sized
    categories), direction facing dummies, and floor group dummies (each floor group is formed by firstly
    classifying buildings to four groups, which are VeryLowRise (3 to 10 floors), LowRise (11 to 30 floors),
    MidRise (31 to 60 floors), HighRise (61 floors or higher). Secondly, for each building type, form a floor
    group every 5 floors. For example, group VeryLowRise1 includes floors below 5 in buildings belonging
    to VeryLowRise category.). Building characteristics includes age of the building (in 10 equally sized
    categories), building completion year ( in 10 equally sized categories), swimming pool indicator, club
    house indicator, and distance to MRT/Bus Stop/Hospital/School/University/Coastal Line (each in 10
    equally sized categories). In each regression we include district by year-month fixed effects. Standard
    errors are clustered by estate and year-month. Columnss (1) and (5) presents the regression with controls
    above and trimmed sample. Columns (2) and (6) presents the regression with control interacted by year
    and trimmed sample. Columns (3) and (7) has the same setting with (1) and (5) except that the sample
    excludes observations with missing number of bedrooms and living rooms. Columns (4) and (8) has the
    same setting with (1) and (5) except that they had additional control of turnover.


                                                         57
                           Table 5: A More Exogenous Control Group

                                                             (1)         (2)           (3)        (4)
   Dep Var                                                  Log (Unit Price)         Log (Total Price)
   I(2030  Lease  2033)                                    -0.064       -0.061       -0.052      -0.044
                                                           [0.047]      [0.052]      [0.051]     [0.056]
   I(2034  Lease  2039)                                    -0.033       -0.032       -0.038      -0.033
                                                           [0.039]      [0.043]      [0.043]     [0.046]
   I(2040  Lease  2046)                                    -0.004       -0.002        0.006       0.012
                                                           [0.058]      [0.061]      [0.061]     [0.065]
   I(Lease = 6/30/2047 & After JD)                          0.025        0.025        0.024       0.025
                                                           [0.019]      [0.019]      [0.020]     [0.020]
   I(Lease = 6/30/2047 & Before JD and in HKL+KIL)                       0.005                    0.014
                                                                        [0.037]                  [0.040]
   I(7/1/2047  Lease  2049)                               -0.134***   -0.132***    -0.141***   -0.137***
                                                            [0.028]     [0.032]      [0.030]     [0.033]
   I(2050  Lease  2052)                                   -0.123***   -0.122***    -0.123***   -0.120***
                                                            [0.028]     [0.030]      [0.030]     [0.031]
   I(2053  Lease  2064)                                   -0.124***   -0.122***    -0.126***   -0.122***
                                                            [0.032]     [0.035]      [0.034]     [0.036]
   I(2065  Lease  2097)                                   -0.106***   -0.104***     -0.108**    -0.102**
                                                            [0.035]     [0.040]      [0.042]     [0.046]
   I(2098  Lease  2135)                                     -0.018      -0.016       -0.025      -0.020
                                                            [0.038]     [0.043]      [0.040]     [0.044]
   I(2842  Lease  2959)                                     -0.052      -0.050       -0.054      -0.049
                                                            [0.036]     [0.040]      [0.038]     [0.042]
   Property Attributes                                       Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes
   District × Month                                          Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes
   N                                                       551,790    551,790       551,790     551,790
   Adj R2                                                   0.9289    0.9289        0.9422      0.9422

This table presents the baseline hedonic housing price regression results using the entire sample of housing
transaction records in Hong Kong from 1998 to February, 2020. We separate control groups to three parts.
The first part includes leases expiring on 6/30/2047 which were granted after JD, denoted by indicator
I(lease = 6/30/2047 & After JD). The second part includes leases expiring on 6/30/2047 which were
granted before JD and located in Hong Kong Island and Old Kowloon, denoted by indicator I(lease
= 6/30/2047 & Before JD and in (HKL,KIL)). The last part, which serves the control group in this
regression, includes leases expiring on 6/30/2047 which were granted before JD and located in New
Kowloon and New Territories. The regression sample, controls and dependent variables of Columns (1)
and (2) are the same with Column (1) in Table 4. The regression sample, controls and dependent variables
of Columns (3) and (4) are the same with Column (4) in Table 4.




                                                    58
                                        Table 6: Robustness Tests
                               (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)
                                        Repeated     PSM-        Entropy                Repeated     PSM-        Entropy
Sample                       Overall      Sales     Matched     Balancing    Overall      Sales     Matched     Balancing
Dep Var                                  Log (Unite Price)                                Log (Total Price)
I(7/1/2047  Lease  2064)    -0.133***   -0.107***   -0.119***   -0.156***   -0.136***   -0.124***   -0.119***   -0.154***
                              [0.022]     [0.021]     [0.021]     [0.023]     [0.023]     [0.023]     [0.022]     [0.025]
Property Attributes            Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
District Month FE              Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
N                            456,330    246,022      46,874      456,330     456,330    246,022      46,874      456,330
Adj R2                        0.9362    0.9387       0.9511      0.9258       0.94      0.9484       0.9595      0.9467


    This table presents the hedonic regression results of our main treatment lease group [7/1/2047,2064]
    using different sample settings. The dependent variable of Columns (1) to (4) is the log of unit price,
    and the dependent variable of Columns (5) to (8) is the log total price. Columns (1) and (5) perform
    hedonic regression using the observations of control group and main treatment group in the sample of
    Columns (1) and (4) of Table 4. Columns (2) and (6) perform hedonic regression using the repeated
    sales sample, which include only properties that have been transacted at least twice. The regressions in
    Columns (3) and (7) use the PSM-matched sample. For each treated building, we find controlled buildings
    within 0.5 kilometers requiring they have the same facilities (swimming pool and club house). Using the
    transactions of the treated building and nearby controlled buildings, we calculate the propensity score
    by a probit regression of treatment dummy on property characteristics including number of bedrooms,
    living rooms, living area size, bay window size, floor number, and building completion year. We match
    each treated observation with a controlled observation with the same year of transaction and the closest
    propensity score (1:1 nearest-neighbor matching). Columns (4) and (8) perform the weighted regression
    using the entropy reweighting scheme by Hainmueller (2012).




                                                       59
              Table 7: Leases Granted by the British Hong Kong versus HKSAR

                                     (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
    Dep Var                                Log (Unit Price)                      Log (Total Price)
    I(2030  Lease  2033)            -0.042      -0.043        -0.062      -0.028      -0.032      -0.051
                                    [0.043]     [0.044]       [0.046]     [0.046]     [0.045]     [0.050]
    I(2034  Lease  2039)            -0.039       0.001        -0.021      -0.042       0.001      -0.027
                                    [0.038]     [0.038]       [0.037]     [0.042]     [0.041]     [0.041]
    I(2040  Lease  2046)            -0.030      -0.015        -0.012      -0.019      -0.005       0.003
                                    [0.058]     [0.057]       [0.059]     [0.060]     [0.059]     [0.061]
    I(7/1/2047  Lease  2049)      -0.168***   -0.148***     -0.150***   -0.176***   -0.152***   -0.158***
                                    [0.029]     [0.026]       [0.030]     [0.030]     [0.027]     [0.031]
    I(2050  Lease  2052)          -0.150***   -0.141***     -0.147***   -0.151***   -0.141***   -0.146***
                                    [0.030]     [0.028]       [0.030]     [0.032]     [0.029]     [0.032]
    I(2053  Lease  2064)          -0.135***   -0.097***     -0.125***   -0.138***   -0.097***   -0.126***
                                    [0.032]     [0.027]       [0.033]     [0.033]     [0.028]     [0.035]
    I(2065  Lease  2097)          -0.099***   -0.085***     -0.092***    -0.101**    -0.086**    -0.095**
                                    [0.035]     [0.033]       [0.036]     [0.043]     [0.040]     [0.044]
    I( 2098  Lease  2135)           -0.020      -0.012         0.000      -0.027      -0.018      -0.007
                                    [0.038]     [0.035]       [0.039]     [0.040]     [0.037]     [0.041]
    I( 2842  Lease  2959)           -0.049      -0.032        -0.034      -0.051      -0.032      -0.036
                                    [0.035]     [0.034]       [0.037]     [0.038]     [0.036]     [0.040]
    I(7/1/2047  Lease  2064)       0.085***    0.074***     0.073***    0.088***     0.075***   0.074***
      × I(HKSAR Leases)             [0.027]     [0.025]       [0.027]     [0.028]     [0.026]     [0.028]
    Property Attributes              Yes         No           Yes         Yes          No            Yes
    Property Attributes × Year       No          Yes          No          No           Yes           No
    District × Month FE              Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
    N                              551,790     551,790      525,730     551,790      551,790     525,730
    Adj R2                         0.9294      0.9409       0.9321      0.9425       0.9511      0.9443

This table presents the baseline hedonic housing price regression results with an additional dummy for
leases issued by HKSAR. The sample includes the housing transaction records in Hong Kong from 1998 to
February, 2020. The following four variables are trimmed at 1% and 99% percentiles to remove outliers:
log of unit price, log of total price, net size, and building age. The dependent variable is log of unit
price in Columns (1)-(3), whereas log of total price (in million HKD) is used as dependent variable in
Columns (4)-(6). Control variables include a full set of property and building characteristics. Property
characteristics includes the number of bedrooms (in categories, e.g., 1, 2, 3. Missing value is used as an
extra category. ), the number of living rooms (in categories, e.g., 0, 1, 2, 3. Missing value is used as
an extra category.), bay window indicator (whether or not included in housing prices), bay window size
(in 10 equally sized categories), the net size (in 10 equally sized categories), direction facing dummies,
and floor group dummies (each floor group is formed by firstly classifying buildings to four groups, which
are VeryLowRise (3 to 10 floors), LowRise (11 to 30 floors), MidRise (31 to 60 floors), HighRise (61
floors or higher). Secondly, for each building type, form a floor group every 5 floors. For example,
group VeryLowRise1 includes floors below 5 in buildings belonging to VeryLowRise category.). Building
characteristics includes age of the building (in 10 equally sized categories), building completion year ( in
10 equally sized categories), swimming pool indicator, club house indicator, and distance to MRT/Bus
Stop/Hospital/School/University/Coastal Line (each in 10 equally sized categories). In each regression
we include district by year-month fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by estate and year-month.
Columns (1) and (4) presents the regression with controls above and trimmed sample. Columns (2) and
(5) presents the regression with control interacted by year and trimmed sample. Columns (3) and (6) has
the same setting with (1) and (4) except that the sample excludes observations with missing number of
bedrooms and living rooms.



                                                       60
                   Table 8: Local Political Sentiments and Price Discount
                                         Panel A: Summary Statistics
Variable                     N       Mean       SD      Min      1st          5th     Median       95th        99th      Max
% of Pro-Democracy Seats   551,790     0.3     0.18    0.04    0.04       0.1           0.26       0.7      0.92           1
% of Mainland Migrants     551,790    0.39      0.06    0.24    0.25      0.31          0.37       0.50     0.55         0.58
Median Age                 551,790   40.42     2.59      34      34        35            41         44       45           45
Median Income              551,790   12,422    2,111   9,000   9,200     10,000        12,500     16,300   16,500       16,800
% of College or Above      551,790    0.17     0.06    0.05    0.06       0.08          0.16       0.26     0.32         0.38
% of Home Owners           551,790    0.51     0.08    0.29    0.29       0.32          0.54       0.61     0.62         0.62

                                              Panel B: Correlation
                              % of Pro-          % of Mainland     Median           Median      % of College     % of Home
                           Democracy Seats         Migrants         Age             Income       or Above         Owners
% of Pro-Democracy Seats         1.00
% of Mainland Migrants            0.34                  1.00
Median Age                       0.00                  -0.40           1.00
Median Income                     0.33                  0.16           0.26          1.00
% of College or Above             0.01                 -0.45           0.84           0.09          1.00
% of Home Owners                 -0.28                 -0.67           0.51          -0.24          0.64              1.00




                                                       61
                 Panel C: Main Lease Groups Interacted with District Characteristics
                                       (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
Dep Var                                                       Log (Unit Price)
I(7/1/2047  Lease  2064)            -0.133***   -0.149***   -0.126***   -0.121***   -0.120***   -0.092***
                                      [0.022]     [0.021]     [0.023]     [0.023]     [0.025]     [0.027]
 × % of Pro-Democracy Seats                     -0.040***               -0.041***
                                                  [0.013]                 [0.013]
 × % of Mainland Migrants                                   -0.094***   -0.095***
                                                              [0.029]     [0.029]
 × I(High % Pro-Democracy Seats)                                                    -0.072***
                                                                                      [0.023]
 × I(High % Mainland Migrants)                                                                  -0.102***
                                                                                                  [0.026]
 × Median Age                                    -0.023     -0.040***    -0.018      -0.030*    -0.049***
                                                 [0.017]      [0.015]    [0.017]     [0.017]      [0.015]
 × Median Income                                 -0.007       -0.035     -0.034       -0.003      -0.044
                                                 [0.030]      [0.032]    [0.031]     [0.029]      [0.032]
 × % of College Above                             0.018        0.037      0.041        0.014       0.048
                                                 [0.031]      [0.031]    [0.031]     [0.030]      [0.031]
 × % of Home Owners                               0.021       -0.020     -0.027        0.026       0.010
                                                 [0.025]      [0.029]    [0.028]     [0.025]      [0.026]
Property Attributes                   Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes
District × Month FE                   Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes
N                                    456,330    456,330     456,330     456,330     456,330     456,330
Adj R2                               0.9362     0.9372      0.9374      0.9378      0.9372      0.9375




                                                 62
                             Panel D: Adding Interaction with HKSAR Leases
                                            (1)           (2)       (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
Dep Var                                                            Log (Unit Price)
I(7/1/2047  Lease  2064)                 -0.153***   -0.156***   -0.146***   -0.149***   -0.117***   -0.116***
                                           [0.022]     [0.021]     [0.021]     [0.021]     [0.024]     [0.028]
  × % of Pro-Democracy Seats                         -0.049***               -0.047***
                                                       [0.013]                 [0.013]
  × % of Mainland Migrants                                       -0.060**     -0.054**
                                                                  [0.024]      [0.024]
  × I(High % Pro-Democracy Seats)                                                        -0.084***
                                                                                           [0.026]
  × I(High % Mainland Migrants)                                                                      -0.068**
                                                                                                      [0.028]
  × HKSAR Leases                         0.076***    0.071***    0.082***    0.077***    0.070***    0.117***
                                          [0.025]     [0.024]     [0.024]     [0.023]     [0.026]     [0.032]
    × % of Pro-Democracy Seats                        -0.001                   0.010
                                                      [0.019]                 [0.018]
    × % of Mainland Migrants                                      -0.042      -0.041
                                                                  [0.029]     [0.030]
    × I(High % Pro-Democracy Seats)                                                        0.001
                                                                                          [0.036]
    × I(High % Mainland Migrants)                                                                     -0.069*
                                                                                                      [0.040]
Property Attributes                        Yes            Yes      Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
District Month FE                          Yes            Yes      Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
N                                        456,330     456,330     456,330     456,330     456,330     456,330
Adj R2                                    0.9367     0.9375      0.9374      0.9381      0.9373      0.9375

This table presents the district variation of price discounts for our main treatment lease group, which
expires between 7/1/2047 and 12/31/2064. The sample includes the housing transaction records in Hong
Kong from 1998 to February, 2020, and we only include transactions with leases expire between 6/30/2047
and 12/31/2064. The following four variables are trimmed at 1% and 99% percentiles to remove outliers:
log of unit price, log of total price, net size, and building age. For each district, we calculate % of Pro-
Democracy Seats using district voting data in 1999, 2003, 2007, 2011, 2015, 2019. We merged this variable
with property transaction data by matching voting year to transaction years within [voting year-1, voting
year+2]. Other district variables are calculated using Census survey data in 2001, 2006, 2011, 2016. %
of Mainland Migrants is the percentage of households with heads born in Mainland. Median Age is the
median age of survey participant. Median Income is the median income of survey participants who are
employed. % of College Degree or Above is the percentage of survey participants with bachelor's degree or
higher among those who are older than 25 years. % of Home Owners is the percentage of household who
own their homes. We merged census district variables with property transaction data by matching census
year and transaction year within [transaction year-4, transaction year]. For transaction data from 2017
to 2020, we merge them with census data in 2016. To facilitate the result interpretation in regressions,
we standardize each district variable to mean 0 and standard deviation 1 by the district cross section
at each voting or census year. Panel A shows the summary statistics of raw values using the merged
sample. Panel B shows the correlation of standardized values using the merged sample. Panel C presents
the hedonic housing price regression results on the effect of main treatment group (i.e., lease expiry date
from 7/1/2047 to 12/31/2064), interacted with % of Pro-Democracy Seats, % of Mainland Migrants.
The regression setting is the same with Column (1) in Table 4 with additional controls including the
multiplication of main treatment indicator and Median Age, Median Income, % of College Above, % of
Home Owners. I(High % of Pro-Democracy Seats) equals to 1 if the variable is above the median of the
district cross section, and 0 otherwise. I(High % of Mainland Migrants) equals to 1 if the variable is above
the median of the district cross section, and 0 otherwise. Panel D presents the hedonic housing price
regression results on how the effect of main treatment group (i.e., lease expiry date from 7/1/2047 to
12/31/2064), interacted with % of Pro-Democracy Seats, % of Mainland Migrants, differ by leases types,
colonial leases or HKSAR leases. I(HKSAR Leases) equals to 1 if the leases were issued by HKSAR
government after the handover. The regression setting is the same with Column (1) in Table 4 with
additional controls including the multiplication of main treatment indicator and Median Age, Median
Income, % of College Above, % of Home Owners.


                                                     63
Appendix

                          Figure A.1. Distribution of Residuals
           (A) Net Living Area                             (B) No of Bedrooms




        (C) No of Living Rooms                            (D) Bay Window Size




      (E) Distance to MRT stations                      (F) Distance to Bus Stops




                                          A.1
          (G) Distance to School                                      (H) Distance to University




       (I) Distance to Coastal Line                                     (J) Distance to Hospital




             (K) Building Age                                                 (L) Turnover




This figure plots the residuals from regressing each property characteristic on the district fixed effects for
our control lease group [6/30/2047] and main treatment group [7/1/2047, 2064].




                                                    A.2
                  Table A.1: Mainlander Transactions and Price Discount
                                                                 (1)        (2)
                        Dep Var                                 Log (Unit Price)
                        I(7/1/2047lease2064)                 -0.133***   -0.090***
                                                               [0.022]     [0.027]
                          × I(Mainland Buyer)                 0.013**     0.013**
                                                               [0.006]     [0.006]
                          × I(High % Mainland Migrants)                  -0.104***
                                                                           [0.026]
                            × I (Mainland Buyer)                            0.001
                                                                           [0.009]
                        I(Mainland Buyer)                     0.003***     0.003*
                                                               [0.001]     [0.002]
                        Property Attributes                     Yes         Yes
                        Main Treatment District Attributes      Yes         Yes
                        District Month FE                       Yes         Yes
                        N                                     456,330     456,330
                        Adj R2                                0.9361      0.9375

This table presents the 2 by 2 interaction effect of our main treatment lease group, which expires between
7/1/2047 and 12/31/2064, with the involvement of mainlander on the home sale price. The dependent
variable is the log of unit price. The sample includes the housing transaction records in Hong Kong
from 1998 to February 2020, and we only include transactions with leases expire between 6/30/2047 and
12/31/2064. The following four variables are trimmed at 1% and 99% percentiles to remove outliers:
log of unit price, log of total price, net size, and building age. I(Mainland Buyer) equals to 1 if the
assignee names are matched with a set of surnames unique for mainland migrants, which are distinctly
different from those adopted by natives in Hong Kong and Taiwan, and 0 otherwise. I(High % of Mainland
Migrants) equals to 1 if the variable is above the median of the district cross section, and 0 otherwise.
The regression controls are the same with Column (1) in Table 4 with additional controls including the
interaction term of main treatment indicator with Median Age, Median Income, % of College Above, %
of Home Owners.




                                                   A.3
