                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


                           DATA AND POLICY DECISIONS:
                      EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM PAKISTAN

                                       Michael Callen
                                        Saad Gulzar
                                     Syed Ali Hasanain
                                    Muhammad Yasir Khan
                                      Arman B. Rezaee

                                      Working Paper 27678
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27678


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020

This paper combines two previous papers circulated with the titles "The Political Economy of
Public Sector Absence: Experimental Evidence from Pakistan" and "Personalities and Public
Sector Absence: Evidence from a Health Experiment in Pakistan". We thank Farasat Iqbal for
championing and implementing the project and Asim Fayaz and Zubair Bhatti for designing the
smartphone monitoring program. Support is generously provided by the International Growth
Centre (IGC) political economy program, the IGC Pakistan Country Office, and the University of
California Office of the President Lab Fees Research Program Grant #235855. Callen was
supported by grant #FA9550-09-1-0314 from the Air Force Office of Scientific Research. We
thank Erlend Berg, Eli Berman, Leonardo Bursztyn, Ali Cheema, Melissa Dell, Ruben
Enikolopov, Barbara Geddes, Naved Hamid, Gordon Hanson, Michael Kremer, Asim Ijaz
Khwaja, Craig McIntosh, Ijaz Nabi, Aprajit Mahajan, Monica Martinez-Bravo, Benjamin A.
Olken, Gerard Padro-i-Miquel, Karthik Muralidharan, Rohini Pande, Daniel N. Posner, Ronald
Rogowski, Jacob N. Shapiro, Christopher Woodruff, Oliver Vanden Eynde, David Yanagizawa-
Drott, Ekaterina Zhuravskaya and various seminar participants for insightful comments. Excellent
research assistance was provided by Muhammad Zia Mehmood and Haseeb Ali. We thank Ali
Cheema and Farooq Naseer for kindly sharing their data on election outcomes. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Michael Callen, Saad Gulzar, Syed Ali Hasanain, Muhammad Yasir Khan, and Arman
B. Rezaee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Data and Policy Decisions: Experimental Evidence from Pakistan
Michael Callen, Saad Gulzar, Syed Ali Hasanain, Muhammad Yasir Khan, and Arman B.
Rezaee
NBER Working Paper No. 27678
August 2020
JEL No. C93,D02,D73,K42,O17

                                              ABSTRACT

We evaluate a program in Pakistan that equips government health inspectors with a smartphone app
which channels data on rural clinics to senior policy makers. The system led to rural clinics being
inspected 104% more often after 6 months, but only 43.8% more often after a year, with the latter
estimate not attaining significance at conventional levels. There is also no clear evidence that the increase
in inspections led to increases in general staff attendance. In addition, we test whether senior officials
act on the information provided by the system. Focusing only on districts where the app is deployed,
we find that highlighting poorly performing facilities on a dashboard viewed by supervisors raises
doctor attendance by 75%. Our results indicate that technology may be able to mobilize data to useful
effect, even in low capacity settings


Michael Callen                                        Muhammad Yasir Khan
London School of Economics                            University of California at Berkeley
Houghton Street                                       2220 Piedmont Ave
London, WC2A 2AE                                      Student Services Building 545
United Kingdom                                        Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER                                              yasir.khan@berkeley.edu
m.j.callen@lse.ac.uk
                                                      Arman B. Rezaee
Saad Gulzar                                           University of California, Davis
Stanford University                                   1149 Social Sciences & Humanities Building
616 Serra Street                                      One Shields Avenue
Encina Hall West, Room 100                            Davis, CA 95616
Stanford, CA 94305-6044                               abrezaee@ucdavis.edu
gulzar@stanford.edu

Syed Ali Hasanain
Lahore University of Management Sciences
Street 29 Lahore 54792, Pakistan
hasanain@lums.edu.pk




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/1329
1       Introduction

Information technology is providing governments across the globe with greater access to data
to inform policymaking. Technologies like smartphones and tablets make it simple and cheap
to collect, compile, and visualize specialized and timely information relevant to a range of
decisions. Increasingly, policymakers no longer need to rely on the collection and aggregation
of geographically disparate paper records to understand how their government is operating.
They can have this information instantly, and presented in the form that best suits their
needs.
    But will policymakers use these data? Will activating such technologies improve the qual-
ity of service provision? These are complex questions where the capabilities of government
personnel, the specific government organization, and the broader political and institutional
environment all potentially impact the answers.
    To provide evidence on these questions, we conduct a randomized controlled evaluation
of a smartphone monitoring program in Punjab, Pakistan. The program--officially termed
`Monitoring the Monitors'--equips government inspectors with a smartphone application
that collects data and feeds it to an online dashboard system. This provides real-time
information on rural public health clinics in Punjab, Pakistan, aggregated into simple charts
and tables for the review of senior health officials.1 It also includes several fail-safes to ensure
accurate reporting: reports are geo-stamped and time-stamped and all staff reported present
must be photographed with the inspector. In this environment, irregular inspections (in our
baseline, only 23% of facilities had received their required monthly inspection) and doctor
absence (doctors were present at 24% of facilities during regular operating hours in our
baseline) are serious issues. The smartphone system supplanted the previous paper-based
system for collecting operational data on public health facilities, which rarely functioned.
    The evaluation spans 35 of 36 districts in Punjab.2 Punjab is a province of 100 million
    1
     The data include staff attendance, availability of medicine, patient visits, vaccines provided, cleanliness,
and so on.
   2
     One district was withheld to pilot the system.


                                                       1
people, with many citizens utilizing public health services. The experiment involved 117
inspectors, 35 senior officers, 2,496 rural health clinics (of which, we sample 850), and took
place across 240 different parliamentary assembly constituencies. This scale allows us to
cluster randomize at a relevant policy unit ­ the district.3 This setting also provides varia-
tion to begin to speculatively examine whether individual and institutional constraints are
relevant to the performance of the system.
    Beyond improving the flow of data, the system also changed the behavior of inspectors,
at least temporarily. In independent audits conducted six months after the survey, the in-
spection rate increased from 25.5% to 51.9% (p < 0.01). After a year of operation, inspection
rates were 33.8% in the treatment districts and 23.5% in control districts, with this difference
not being significant at conventional levels.4
    Theoretically, if clinic staff base their beliefs about the likelihood they will be inspected
on how often they are actually inspected, this increase in inspections could change staff at-
tendance. However, the data generally do not indicate that increases in inspections resulted
in better staff attendance. Of the seven categories of clinic staff, we only find highly specu-
lative evidence that doctors may have increased attendance. However, this result is highly
sensitive to the choice of specification, and should be interpreted accordingly.
    We also built into the experiment a feature that allows us to examine whether providing
senior officials with data changes their behavior.5 Specifically, if more than three of the seven
health workers that are supposed to staff a rural clinic are absent during a health inspection,
we `flagged' a facility as underperforming by highlighting it in red on the dashboard.6 We
   3
      Indeed, at the conclusion of the evaluation, the system was scaled to cover the province and continues
to operate.
    4
      The standard error of the difference clustered at the district level is 7.9 percentage points and so not
significant at conventional levels. With 35 clusters, asymptotic reference distributions may not be valid, so
we also use Fisher exact tests which do not appeal to asymptotic distributions. The Fisher exact p-value of
the difference is 0.065.
    5
      We do not directly observe corrective actions taken by senior officials. Rather, we look at whether doctor
attendance improves when senior officials learn about absence, which is a possible outcome of corrective
actions.
    6
      We selected the threshold of three as this gave us the largest mass of inspections and so afforded the
most statistical power.



                                                       2
test for effects on officials' behavior by examining whether doctor attendance increases in
flagged facilities.7 We find that flagging increases doctor attendance from 23.6% to 41.3%
(standard error of difference = 8.2 percentage points), while it has no effect on the attendance
of other, less senior, clinic staff. We conceive of this as creating a regression discontinuity
that allows us to study whether data changes the behavior of senior policymakers. We discuss
the identifying assumptions required for this to be causal and subject it to an extensive set
of validity tests. We interpret this as evidence that policymakers use data when making
decisions. We report results from a battery of robustness checking the causal interpretation
of this result in 4.4.1.
   Last, we investigate two dimensions of heterogeneity for flagging effects. First, we find
that attendance responds more to flagging when the information is channeled to senior
health officials with normatively better personality measures as measured using the Big Five
Personality Test and the Perry Public Sector Motivation battery. Second, we find smaller
effects in less politically competitive parliamentary constituencies. While speculative, these
results suggest that both intrinsic and extrinsic forces are important factors in determining
the extent to which senior bureaucrats might act on new information.
   Our study principally concerns the potential for information technology and data to
increase accountability and improve policy (Duflo et al., 2012; Blum and Pande, 2015; Callen
and Long, 2015; Callen et al., 2016; Nealer et al., 2017), but relates to three additional
literatures. The first regards whether monitoring of government workers improves attendance
(Banerjee and Duflo, 2006; Banerjee et al., 2008; Chaudhury et al., 2006; Dhaliwal and
Hanna, 2017; Muralidharan et al., 2019, 2020). The second broadly studies incentives in
bureaucracies in developing countries (Ashraf et al., 2014, 2015; Bertrand et al., 2017; Dal
B´
 o et al., 2013; Deserranno, 2017; Finan et al., 2017; Gulzar and Pasquale, 2017; Khan et
al., 2016; Rogger and Rasul, forthcoming; Xu, 2017; Habyarimana et al., 2020). The final
involves experiments at scale (Muralidharan et al., 2016; Muralidharan and Niehaus, 2017).
   7
       We discuss instruments available to officials to encourage attendance in section 2.



                                                       3
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides background on the `Monitoring the
Monitors' program. Section 3 describes the data and the experiment. Section 4 provides
results, and section 5 concludes.



2     Background

2.1    Public Health Services in Punjab

In Punjab, public health services are provided by the Department of Health, which is headed
by the Secretary of Health. The smartphone intervention we describe in this paper works by
facilitating flows of information through the existing chain of command, so describing that
chain is fundamental to characterizing the reform.
    This provincial Department comprises 36 District Health Departments, each headed by
an Executive District Officer, hereafter referred to as a `senior health official'. Senior health
officials report directly to the Secretary. Performance by senior health officials is commonly
rewarded with appointment to a higher office. Senior health officials are, in turn, each
supported by several Deputy District Officers, hereafter referred to as `health inspectors',
typically one for each sub-district (there are, on average, 3.4 sub-districts per district). Figure
1 depicts this administrative hierarchy.
    Health inspectors are charged with inspecting all of the health facilities in their sub-
district at least once every month (see Appendix Section B for further details of health
inspector duties). There are several ways that senior officials can compel or encourage in-
spectors to do their jobs. Conversations with several senior officials reveal that they typically
begin simply by having a conversation with a problematic inspector. The next step is to refer
the matter to a senior provincial-level official in charge of general administration. This can
result in a formal inquiry and ultimately in pay cuts. Recent research in the same context
provides direct evidence of how structured interactions between senior health officials and




                                                4
                                         Post                 Most senior official in...


                                   Health Secretary                    Province
                                                                      (i.e. Punjab)




                                 Senior health official                District
                                                                     (36 in Punjab)




                                   Health inspector                 Tehsil (County)
                                                                      (145 in Punjab)




                                        Doctor                          Clinic
                                                                    (2,496 in Punjab)




             Figure 1: Organization Chart for the Punjab Department of Health


clinic staff can improve performance (Khan, 2020).8
    While their primary job is to collect data, health inspectors do have the authority to
directly punish absent clinic staff by issuing a `show-cause notice', which requires staff to
explain their absence to senior health officials. They can also suspend and deny pay to
contract staff, including doctors. In severe cases of persistent absence, health inspectors
can transfer staff to less-desirable locations, but they cannot terminate employment. Unlike
their superiors, health inspectors rarely ascend to higher leadership positions.
    Senior health officials do not typically sanction facility-level staff directly. Rather, they
will send verbal communications through the chain of command via the inspector. The next
step is to call for a formal explanation for absence. After that, the matter is referred to a
provincial-level official who can recommend pay cuts or transfers.
    There are five classifications of health facilities; we focus on the frontline tier, called
Basic Health Units, hereafter referred to as `health clinics'. Each health clinic is headed
     8
       The exercise in this paper encourages frontline community health workers to watch a video of the senior
health official describing the mission of the Health Department and requires them to take part in sessions
reflecting on that mission. This is cross-randomized with a performance bonus. Both increase performance,
though financial incentives are less effective in the presence of the mission treatment.



                                                          5
by a Medical Officer, henceforth `doctor'.9 These doctors are of particular interest for this
study. Doctors are general practitioners who have completed five years of medical school,
and are therefore the most trained health professionals in rural areas (see Appendix Section
C for details on doctor hiring practices). While more senior doctors are paid more, they have
essentially the same portfolio of responsibilities. Very few doctors rise through the ranks to
become health inspectors: compared to the 2,496 Medical Officer posts in clinics, there are
only 123 such senior positions.


2.2     Pre-existing Paper-Based Monitoring System

During their required monthly inspections, health inspectors are required to collect infor-
mation on a standard paper form. This form records utilization, resource availability, and
worker absence. We provide this form in Appendix E. Once collected, forms are brought to a
central district facility, manually entered into a spreadsheet, and aggregated into a monthly
report for senior health officials.
    This inspection system affords only limited visibility into inspectors' activities to senior
officials. Compounding this problem, senior health officials have only two weak means of
sanctioning an inspector: issuing a verbal reprimand or, in serious cases, sending a written
request for investigation to provincial authorities. The investigation process is long, highly
bureaucratic, and, anecdotally, prone to interference by elected politicians.


2.3     `Monitoring the Monitors' Smartphone Monitoring Program

We partnered with the Department of Health to design and experimentally evaluate the
`Monitoring the Monitors' program. This program replaced the existing paper-based moni-
toring system with an Android-based smartphone application, which collects the same data
as the paper forms and transmits them instantly to a central online dashboard for the Sec-
    9
      Additional clinic staff include a Dispenser, a Lady Health Worker, a Health Technician, a School Health
and Nutrition Supervisor, a Computer Operator, and a Midwife. Officially, health clinics are open from 8am
to 2pm, Monday through Saturday.


                                                     6
retary of Health and senior health officials.10 The dashboard provides summary statistics,
charts, and graphs in a format designed in collaboration with senior health officials. In-
spections are geotagged, timestamped, and require photos of the inspector and all health
clinic staff marked present to check for reliability. The geotagging and timestamping features
are designed to ensure inspectors visit health clinics, while the staff photos are intended to
ensure that the digital reports of staff attendance are accurate.
     Figure 2, Panel A, depicts the view of the dashboard that the Secretary of Health sees
when first logging on. It presents a bar chart giving the number of health clinic inspections
conducted in a district as a proportion of number of inspections assigned that month, allowing
the Secretary to compare performance across districts. Panel B provides an alternate view
available to senior health officials--a summary spreadsheet where each row corresponds to
a different health clinic inspection that occurred in a senior health official's district.



3        Data and Experiment

3.1      Data

To measure the impacts of our smartphone monitoring on health clinic inspections and doctor
attendance, we collected primary data on a representative sample of 850 (34%) of the 2,496
health clinics in Punjab.11 All districts in Punjab except Khanewal are represented in our
data.12 To our knowledge, this is the first representative survey of health clinics in Punjab.
Figure 3 provides a map of the health clinics in our experimental sample along with district
boundaries.
     Enumerators made three unannounced visits to these 850 health clinics: one before smart-
    10
      Appendix F provides the training manual for the mobile application provided to inspectors and Ap-
pendix G provides the training manual provided to senior health officials to assist them in using the dash-
board.
   11
      Health clinics were selected randomly using an Equal Probability of Selection (EPS) design, stratified
on district and distance from the district headquarters. Our estimates of performance are thus self-weighting,
and no sampling corrections are used in the analysis.
   12
      The smartphone technology was piloted in Khanewal.



                                                      7
Panel A: Summary of Health Clinic Inspection Compliance by District




  Panel B: Summary of Health Clinic Inspections within a District




     Figure 2: Online Dashboard Screenshots

                             8
                                        Control
                                        Treatment
                                        Pilot District - Khanewal




                          Figure 3: Locations of Health Clinics Surveyed
Notes: Borders demarcate districts in Punjab.


phone monitoring began, in November 2011, and two after smartphone monitoring began
(in treatment districts), in June and October 2012.
    During these unannounced visits, enumerators collected the same information that health
inspectors record--information on health clinic utilization, resource availability, and worker
absence--as well as information on the occurrence of health clinic inspections themselves.
Enumerators physically verified health clinic staff presence, filling out an attendance sheet
at the end of their visit and in private for doctors as well as dispensers, lady health work-
ers, health/medical technicians, school health and nutrition supervisors, and midwives.13
Summary statistics from unannounced visits at baseline are presented in Appendix Table
A1.
    Health inspectors record visits by signing paper registers maintained at the health fa-
cility. Enumerators measured whether a health inspection occurred in the prior month by
interviewing facility staff and verifying the register record. In some cases enumerators were
  13
     Doctors are officially required to be present and see patients at the health clinic. An unannounced visit
therefore captures the official work assigned to doctors. We did not capture data on computer technicians
as they are rarely assigned.


                                                                    9
unable to confidently verify whether or not an inspection had occurred in the prior month.
We treat such cases as missing data for analysis and verify in Appendix Table A1 (con-
sidering a dummy variable equal to one if the enumerator could not verify the last health
inspection) that such cases do not correlate with treatment assignment at baseline and in
Appendix Table A2 that we do not have treatment-driven attrition wave by wave. Additional
information about data collection can be found in Appendix Section D.
    We also conducted face-to-face time use surveys with all health inspectors in Punjab
between February and March 2013.


3.2     Experiment

Our experimental sample comprises 35 of the 36 districts in Punjab. We randomly imple-
mented the smartphone program in 18 of the 35 remaining districts. We randomized at
the district level for two reasons. First, the intervention channels information about health
inspections to district-level senior health officials. Second, all inspectors in a district are
required to attend monthly meetings and so interact frequently, while these relations are
much weaker across districts. District-level randomization therefore makes sense in terms of
the design of program and also reduces concerns about contamination.
    We stratified treatment on baseline health clinic staff attendance, the number of clinics in
a district (to ensure a roughly even number of clinics in treatment and control), and whether
or not the district was being run by the World Bank-led Public Sector Reform Program
(PSRP). Figure 3 depicts control and treatment districts. We then re-randomized to achieve
balance on a set of variables related to health clinic staff attendance, the frequency of health
inspections, and the quality of service provision.14
  14
     Specifically, we randomized using the `big stick' approach, whereby we redrew our treatment assignment
until the minimum p-value from difference in means tests between health clinics in treatment and control
districts for a pre-specified set of balance variables was greater than some threshold. In our case we selected
a threshold of 0.21. We balanced on the share of assigned health clinic staff who were present during the
baseline unannounced visit, whether the health clinic had been inspected in the previous month by its health
inspector, whether the health clinic had been inspected in the previous month by its senior health official,
the number of antenatal visits recorded on the health clinic register in the previous month, the log of the



                                                      10
    Appendix Table A1 reports balance between clinics in treatment and control districts at
the baseline. The only measure showing imbalance is an indicator for doctor presence during
our unannounced visit.15 While stratifying on the share of staff present at baseline achieved
balance for five of the six categories of staff that are supposed to be present at health clinics,
it did not do so for doctors. We therefore use a difference-in-differences specification to
estimate impacts of the program on doctors.16



4     Results

We now present results from our experimental evaluation of the `Monitoring the Monitors'
program. We estimate treatment effects on health inspection rates and on health inspector
time use with the following specification:


                              Yitds =  + T reatmentd + t + s + itds ,                                       (1)

where Yitds is either a dummy equal to one for health clinics inspected in the previous month
or a measure of health inspector time use. i refers to the clinic, t to the survey wave, d refers
to the district, and s to the randomization stratum that the district was in. T reatmentd is
a dummy variable equal to 1 for treated districts, t are survey wave fixed effects, and s are
randomization strata fixed effects. These regressions use only post-treatment data (survey
waves 2 and 3). We cluster all standard errors at the district level.
    We estimate treatment effects on health clinic staff attendance and assignment using
three specifications, all meant to account for baseline imbalances in our primary outcomes
(which are only present and statistically significant for our measure of doctor absence). First,
number of polio vaccines administered at the health clinic in the previous month, whether the health clinic's
doctor claimed a connection to their local parliamentarian, the tenure of the health clinic's doctor, the log
of the population in the health clinic's catchment area, and the log of the distance of the health clinic to the
district's headquarters.
   15
      Treatment districts at baseline have 17.1 percentage point higher doctor attendance (p-value = 0.003).
   16
      While it would be ideal, we cannot check for balance in pre-trends in doctor attendance, a necessary as-
sumption for our difference-in-differences estimation to be unbiased, because we only have one pre-treatment
observation for each clinic.

                                                      11
we use a difference-in-differences specification:




          Yitds =  + 1 T reatmentd + 2 P ostt + 3 T reatd  P ostdt + t + s + i + itds ,    (2)


where Yitds is now either a dummy for whether a health clinic staff member is present during
our announced visits or a dummy for whether a staff member is currently assigned to work
at a health clinic at the point of our unannounced visits, and t are survey wave fixed effects,
s are randomization strata fixed effects and i are clinic fixed effects. Second, we use our
primary treatment effect specification, equation 1, with adding Yi0ds , the baseline level of
the outcome, to the set of covariates in the regression. Third, we estimate:


                                Yitds =  + Inspectedd + t + s + itds                       (3)


where we instrument for whether a facility was inspected in the prior month using our
treatment assignment.17
   For all of our primary treatment effects, we also present results from regressions with
additional controls and/or sample selection criteria as robustness checks. We point out any
cases where results are sensitive to such decisions.


4.1       Approach to Inference

With only 35 districts in our sample, the asymptotic reference distributions for our test
statistics may be invalid. We therefore report Fisher exact p-values (Fisher, 1935) which do
not require a limiting distribution (Gerber and Green, 2012). This test assumes a null of no
treatment effect for any unit. We perform this test by creating a set of artificial treatment
assignments that satisfy the balancing requirements of the assignment protocol for actual
treatment. For each treatment assignment, a corresponding artificial treatment effect is
  17
       Tables A4 and A5 therefore report the first stage of this regression.


                                                       12
generated. The effect estimated using the actual treatment assignment is then compared
against the 1,000 artificial treatment effect estimates. The p-value is the share of artificial
treatment effects that have a larger magnitude than the actual treatment effect.


4.2       Impact on Health Inspectors

Table 1 presents estimates of the program's impact on the rate of inspections. We find that
health clinics in treatment districts were 18.1 percentage points more likely to be inspected
in the previous month during the treatment period. This represents a 74 percent increase
in inspection rates in treatment districts relative to control districts. Breaking this up into
the two waves of post-treatment data collection, we find comparable effects, though there
is evidence that the effect of treatment had attenuated by October 2012, a year after the
introduction of the program.18 In Table 1 we report simple means to facilitate inference on
both means directly and on comparisons both between groups and across time. Appendix
Tables A4 and A5 report corresponding treatment effect estimates from a range of specifica-
tions (including with strata fixed effects) which are consistent with the raw means, except,
importantly, the wave three treatment effect is not significant at conventional levels with
both randomization strata and wave fixed effects included (exact test p-value of 0.19).
   We examine whether the additional time for inspections come at the costs of other tasks.
Appendix Table A3 reports the monitoring program's impact on the time use of health
inspectors. We do not find significant evidence that health inspectors in treatment districts
are spending less time on other tasks after treatment, while we do find significant increases
in time inspecting health clinics. However, we treat these results speculatively, as we only
have a sample of 117 inspectors and a noisy measure of time use. We do, for example, find a
negative but insignificant coefficient on time spent monitoring hospitals that could account
for 60 percent of the increased time monitoring clinics.
  18
       The p-value corresponding to the test of equal treatment effects in wave 2 and in wave 3 is 0.08.




                                                      13
             Table 1: The Effect of Smartphone Monitoring on the Rate of Inspections
                                                                                                                   P-value        P-value
                                                                        Treatment      Control     Difference     Mean Diff.     Exact Test
                                                                           (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)
        Facility Inspected in the Previous Month (=1)                      0.426        0.245         0.181          0.010          0.001
                                                                          (0.048)      (0.046)       (0.066)
             # of Observations                                              759          764
        Facility Inspected (=1), Wave 2 Only (June 2012)                   0.519        0.255         0.264          0.002          0.003
                                                                          (0.063)      (0.048)       (0.079)
             # of Observations                                              366          373
        Facility Inspected (=1), Wave 3 Only (October 2012)                0.338        0.235         0.103          0.200          0.065
                                                                          (0.053)      (0.059)       (0.079)
             # of Observations                                              393          391
     Notes : This table reports unconditional average treatment effects of the `Monitoring the Monitors' program on the rate of health clinic
    inspections. The unit of observation in is the health clinic. The data come from primary unannounced surveys after the treatment was
    launched (wave 2 and 3). The dependent variable is an indicator variable that equals 1 if an inspector visited a clinic within a month prior
    to the survey, and 0 otherwise. The regression reports differences between treatment and control clinics. P-values reported in column (4)
    are for the difference in mean between columns (1) and (2) (i.e. that the treatment had no impact). Column (5) reports the Fisher Exact
    p-values. Standard errors clustered at the district level are reported in parentheses. Results conditional on randomization strata fixed
    effects, using a difference-in-differences specification, with and without baseline controls, can be found in Appendix Tables A4 and A5.



4.3        The Impact on Health Clinic Staff

Our estimates indicate that the program increased health inspections; this could increase
health clinic staff attendance (an explicit goal of the program). We report estimates of
program impact on staff attendance in Table 2. Panels A and B report impacts using a
difference-in-differences specification. Panel C reports results using an average treatment
effects regression controlling for baseline attendance.19 Panel D reports a two-stage least
squares estimate of the impact of a health facility being inspected on staff attendance,
instrumenting for inspection with treatment.20 We find mixed results here--we find no
impacts of monitoring on staff assignment in Panels A and B and we find large, positive, and
significant impacts on doctor attendance in Panels C and D. These results are not robust
   19
       We do not present results not controlling for baseline attendance as we have a large imbalance in doctor
attendance between treatment and control districts at baseline, as reported in Appendix Table A1.
    20
       In this setting, inspections could impact staff attendance through the following channels. First, staff see
an inspection take place directly, and therefore shift their beliefs about the probability of an inspection in the
future. Second, they learn that an inspection took place through colleagues indirectly, and shift their beliefs.
Third, they learn that an inspection took place because they are contacted about their absence during the
inspection by a supervisor. There was no effort to publicize the reform to clinic staff and we expect that most
staff learned about the reform when the inspector arrived at their facility with a smartphone and compelled
all present staff to take a picture in front of the facility to confirm the attendance data. If the program
affects attendance through channels other than inspections, then the exclusion restriction is not satisfied.



                                                                        14
across specifications, and should be viewed accordingly.21
    In contrast to doctors, other staff do not appear to respond to treatment regardless
of specification. Speculatively, there are at least three reasons for this. First, attendance
rates for clinic staff who are not doctors, with the exception of school and health nutrition
supervisors, are substantially higher, and so there is less room for improvement. Second,
doctors are also in charge of facilities so might be more responsive to the changes in incentives
created by the program. Third, some staff, like the School Health and Nutrition Supervisor
and Lady Health Workers carry out most of their work outside of clinics, and so may be less
affected by these reports.
    Note our measures of staff attendance do not condition on staff assignment to facilities
as staff assignment itself could be impacted by treatment. We test for treatment effects
on doctor assignment directly in Appendix Table A8, with the same set of panels as our
attendance results. We again find mixed results, with weak evidence that doctor assignment
is indeed higher, and by a similar magnitude as the increase in doctor attendance, in treat-
ment districts. This would suggest that the mechanism for increased doctor attendance is
through senior health officials assigning more doctors to work in rural health clinics. This
is very plausible, possibly due to increased monitoring of senior health officials' district per-
formance through the web dashboard or simply due to these officials having easier access to
information about doctor assignment in their district.22
   21
      Appendix tables A6 and A7 present results on attendance by survey wave. While our results become
more imprecise, we do not see qualitatively different results across waves. This loss of precision also means
our first-stage becomes too weak to conduct IV analysis by wave.
   22
      We attempted to obtain detailed doctor assignment records from the Health Department on multiple
occasions and it was clear there was no regular system for keeping track of doctor assignment during the
period of our experiment. Hence, we are not able to conclusively identify what is driving the increased
assignment of doctors. It is possible that this increase is achieved by moving doctors from control to
treatment districts. However, as described in Appendix Section C, it is unlikely that doctors are moved
across districts under ordinary circumstances.




                                                     15
        Table 2: The Effect of Smartphone Monitoring on Clinic Staff Attendance
                                                             Lady Health       Health      School Health
                                    Doctor     Dispenser       Worker           Tech      Nutri. Supervisor       Midwife
                                     (1)          (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)                (6)
            Panel A: Difference in Differences with Survey Wave FE
            Monitoring        -0.021    -0.067      -0.080   0.032                               0.011             0.055
                             (0.043)   (0.061)     (0.053)  (0.058)                             (0.072)           (0.065)
                             [0.613]   [0.970]     [0.997]  [0.491]                             [0.522]           [0.446]
            Mean in Controls 0.227      0.736       0.594    0.413                               0.318             0.535
            # Districts         35        35          35      35                                   35                35
            # Observations     2422      2457        2457    2458                                2448              2448
            R-Squared          0.081    0.062       0.034    0.047                               0.040             0.052
            Panel B: Difference in Differences with Survey Wave + Facility FEs
            Monitoring        -0.010    -0.067      -0.075   0.028        0.013                                    0.055
                             (0.044)   (0.059)     (0.054)  (0.059)      (0.072)                                  (0.064)
                             [0.645]    [0.968]    [0.942]  [0.465]      [0.701]                                  [0.386]
            Mean in Controls 0.228       0.736      0.596    0.413        0.318                                    0.537
            # Districts         35         35         35      35            35                                       35
            # Observations     2408      2446        2446    2447         2437                                     2437
            R-Squared          0.533     0.464      0.447    0.552        0.398                                    0.512
            Panel C: Control for Baseline Attendance with Survey Wave                           FE
            Monitoring       0.102**    -0.010    -0.037    -0.006                               0.008             -0.040
                             (0.040)   (0.040)   (0.034)   (0.041)                              (0.046)           (0.067)
                             [0.096]   [0.837]   [0.871]   [0.743]                              [0.447]           [0.796]
            Mean in Controls 0.215       0.746    0.601      0.427                               0.301              0.533
            # Districts         35         35       35        35                                   35                 35
            # Observations    1548       1579      1579      1581                                1568               1566
            R-Squared         0.126     0.076     0.036      0.115                               0.073             0.114
            Panel D: IV with Control            for Baseline Attendance and Survey Wave FE
            Inspected        0.640**              -0.100      -0.310   -0.046      0.020                           -0.223
                             (0.256)             (0.251)     (0.205)  (0.258)    (0.283)                          (0.383)
                             [0.022]             [0.593]     [0.986]  [0.588]     [0.517]                         [0.706]
            Mean in Controls 0.275                0.765       0.571     0.422      0.304                            0.521
            # Districts         35                  35          35       35          35                               35
            # Observations    1437                 1468        1468     1470       1458                             1458
            Notes : This table reports average treatment effects of the `Monitoring the Monitors' program on the staff atten-
           dance. The unit of observation is the clinic, and data come from primary unannounced surveys after the treatment
           was launched. The dependent variable is an indicator for whether a doctor was present at the clinic during an
           announced visit. All models include randomization block fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the district
           level are in parentheses. Square brackets report the Fisher Exact p-values. *p < 0.1, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.



4.4    Do Policy Makers Use Data on Staff Attendance?

In the 18 districts of Punjab that received the `Monitoring the Monitors' treatment, the
system aggregated and presented inspection report data to senior health officials through an
online dashboard. This dashboard was also visible to the Health Secretary and the Director
General of Health for Punjab.
   To test whether senior health officials would act on these data, we introduced a manipula-
tion to the dashboard that made certain health clinic inspection reports salient. Specifically,

                                                                  16
we highlighted in red (hereon `flagged') inspection reports that reported three or more staff
(of seven generally) as absent during a health inspector's visit to the clinic.23 Figure 2 Panel
B provides an example of a dashboard view with some facilities flagged in red. We then test
for changes in senior health official action through subsequent staff attendance.
    The exact formula for this arbitrary threshold was not known to anyone but the research
team. This approach creates a sharp discontinuity and permits measurement of the impacts
on subsequent staff attendance. Our identifying assumption requires that facilities just below
the cutoff (those with two staff absent during a health inspector's visit) and facilities just
above the cutoff (those with three staff absent) share potential outcomes in the absence of
the flagging. There are several reasons that this identifying assumption may not hold. For
example, there could be mean reversion. If facilities with two staff absent revert to the
mean of having three staff absent, or if facilities having three staff absent revert to a mean
of having two staff absent (or both), our specification would pick this up as an effect of
flagging. In Section 4.4.1 we report four tests of this identifying assumption, all of which
are consistent with a causal interpretation of our estimates of the impact of flagging on
subsequent attendance.
    Our data have limitations, however, which we also acknowledge in Section 4.4.1. Perhaps
the greatest limitation is the fact that the data are limited to treatment districts and fur-
thermore to facilities that had a health inspection (and thus flagging or not flagging) within
a window before one of our survey visits to measure attendance. Thus, while we can conduct
some placebo tests to test whether our flagging was `as-if' random for those facilities right
below and above the cutoff, we are limited in how well we can verify parallel pre-trends and
control for facility absence history. Results should be interpreted accordingly.
    More specifically, we examine whether this manipulation within treated districts affected
  23
     We deliberately selected three as the cutoff for flagging as the majority of reports indicated that two or
three staff were absent, affording the greatest statistical power.




                                                      17
subsequent doctor absence in our primary data with the following specification:


                      P resent Surveyjt =  + 1 F laggedjt-1 + t + jt                         (4)


P resent Surveyjt is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the doctor j was absent during an
unannounced visit by our enumerator in wave t, F laggedit-1 is a dummy variable that equals
1 if the facility was flagged in red on the dashboard in a window of time prior to the primary
survey wave t. For our primary analysis, we restrict to those facilities with either two or three
staff absent, those on either side of the sharp discontinuity, though we report all possible
bandwidths in Appendix Table A9. The estimate of the flagging effect is not significant at
conventional levels for bandwidths that include data away from the discontinuity.
   Selecting the window for which F laggedit-1 is non-missing (i.e. 0 or 1) involves trade-offs
and provides us substantial discretion in the analysis. We expect it would take at least a
few days for senior officials to acknowledge and act on data from the dashboard. Practically,
they need to receive the report that a clinic is underperforming, and then communicate their
dissatisfaction to clinic personnel. Senior officials have a number of tools to reprimand clinic
staff, with verbal warnings being by far the most common. Staff then need to react and
change their behavior. This process will require at least a few days to play out, but should
not take more than a few weeks. Also, practically, if the window for which F laggedit-1 is
defined is too long, virtually every facility will become flagged, limiting the variation with
which to estimate effects. For transparency, we present estimates of the effect on doctor
attendance for a broad number of potential time windows.
   Specifically, we run the regression from equation (4) 750 times, varying the window for
which we define a clinic as flagged prior to a primary unannounced visit to a clinic along two
dimensions--we vary the length of the window being used along the x-axis and the delay
from when a clinic is highlighted in red to when the window begins along the y-axis (so for
example, a length of 25 and delay of 15 corresponds to considering a clinic as flagged if it



                                               18
                Table 3: Effect of Flagging Underperformance on the Dashboard
                                     Doctor Dispenser            LHW Health Tech              SHNS Midwife
                                       (1)     (2)                 (3)     (4)                  (5)     (6)
        Flagged                      0.177**  0.076              -0.115  -0.066               -0.037  -0.125
                                     (0.082) (0.083)            (0.090) (0.092)              (0.093) (0.091)
        Unflagged Mean                0.236   0.676               0.703  0.405                0.324   0.568
        # Clinics                      112     116                 116    116                  116     116
        # Reports                      130     136                 136    136                  136     136
        R-Squared                     0.298   0.258              0.190   0.264                0.176   0.242
        District Fixed Effects         Yes     Yes                 Yes    Yes                  Yes     Yes
        Notes : This table reports on the effect on subsequent doctor attendance of flagging on an online dashboard
       the fact that a clinic had three or more staff absent to a senior policymaker. Clinics were flagged in red on
       an online dashboard if three or more of the seven staff were absent in one or more health inspections of the
       clinic 11 to 25 days prior to an unannounced visit by our survey enumerators. The data sample limits to
       facility reports in which either two or three staff were absent (the threshold to trigger the underreporting
       red flag). In addition, the sample in all columns is limited to 'Monitoring the Monitors' treatment districts
       due to the necessity of the web dashboard for flagging clinics. All regressions include survey wave fixed
       effects. LHWs are Lady Health Workers and SHNS are School Health and Nutrition Supervisors. Standard
       errors clustered at the clinic level are reported in parentheses. *p < 0.1, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.


was highlighted in red anytime 15 to 40 days prior to an unannounced visit).24
    We observe a positive, robust, and significant treatment effect of flagging on doctor
attendance across a wide range of windows, depicted in the top left panel of Appendix
Figure A1. At our preferred window,25 reported in Table 3, doctor attendance subsequent
to flagging on the dashboard increases by 17.7 percentage points or about 75 percent.26
Conversations with government partners suggest that the most likely driver of this effect is
verbal reprimands from senior health officials to doctors in charge of clinics.
    Like our primary treatment results on staff attendance, attendance for other staff does not
respond to dashboard flagging. This is likely due to the same reasons cited above: attendance
for other staff is much higher at baseline compared to doctors; doctors are also in charge of
  24
      This analysis necessarily involves testing the same null of 1 = 0 in many closely related specifications.
We do not adjust inference for multiple tests.
   25
      We chose this window to allow for the interpretation of a specific point estimate. It is a window we find
plausible and it has a coefficient and significance level that is in the middle of those reported in Appendix
Figure A1.
   26
      Note that this positive result cannot be directly compared to the estimated average treatment effect of
`Monitoring the Monitors' on doctor attendance. To detect the effect of flagging we are limiting our sample
to treatment facilities only (those that could be flagged on the dashboard) that were right below or above
the staff absence cutoff for flagging.



                                                           19
the facilities so it makes sense that they are the ones to respond to facility monitoring; and
some staff, like the School Health and Nutrition Supervisor and Lady Health Workers, have
their primary job outside of the specific facility where attendance was audited.


4.4.1   Validity Tests for `Flagging' Results

This section presents four validity tests for the flagging results. First, an alternative expla-
nation for the effect of the dashboard could be simple mean reversion. If absence is unusually
high in one month, it might drop in the next month because of mean reversion, whether or
not it was flagged. We check this in Appendix Figure A2 where we use placebo thresholds
between one and two and three and four absences. We find no evidence of mean reversion
at placebo thresholds. Note that the first placebo test compares facilities recording two
absences (the actual control group) against the group recording one absence (who are also
not flagged on the dashboard). The second placebo test involves comparing facilities record-
ing three absences (the actual `treatment' group) against those with four recorded absences
(who are also flagged on the dashboard). If a tendency for facilities with either two or three
absences to revert to the mean were driving the results, with no role for flagging, we would
expect the first placebo test to yield a negative estimate, and the second placebo test to
yield a positive estimate. In the small number of cases where our placebo regressions find
significance, the signs are the opposite of what mean reversion would predict (and consistent
with a true positive effect at the 2/3 cutoff).
   Second, we present in Appendix Figure A3 a placebo test in which we test whether
flagging on the dashboard predicts increases in attendance recorded in survey visits prior
to the flag. That is, we define a facility as flagged if it was highlighted red on the online
dashboard in varying windows after our survey visits. It is not possible for dashboard flags to
causally impact outcomes in the past. This exercise therefore tests for a time series process
whereby either facilities with three absences tend toward a mean of having only two absences,
or for a process whereby facilities with two absences tend toward a mean of having three


                                              20
absences (or both). Again, we find no clear evidence of this pattern of mean reversion. An
important caveat, however, is that these tests have low power. Using the analogous placebo
window to our preferred specification above, for example, while the coefficient on the flagging
placebo is -0.004, its 95% confidence interval is from -0.25 to 0.25.
    Third, Appendix Table A10 presents two results controlling for the possible time dynam-
ics of inspections, flaggings, and doctor attendance. For example, we might think a facility
that is flagged multiple times in a row sees different outcomes than one that is flagged and
then not flagged or flagged and then not inspected. Column 1 repeats our main flagging re-
sult. Then, in column 2, we restrict the sample to cases in which the flagging that occurred
prior to our survey visit was the first time a facility was ever flagged. Treatment in this
sample is straightforward to interpret since it does not require accounting for prior flags.27
Taking this approach shrinks the sample as it removes facilities that were flagged multiple
times before our survey visit. Estimates in this much smaller sample comprising only 130
reports are similar in magnitude to our result in column 1, suggesting doctors respond to
flagging even when it is the first time. To additionally control for dynamic effects, in column
3, we add fixed effects for the number of prior inspections in our treatment period (all of
which must have been cases where two or less staff was absence for the flagging visit to be
the first). Results are again similar. While this does not rule out dynamic effects, it suggests
flagging can have an effect for facilities with a range of inspection histories.
    Fourth, a standard practice to check the validity of regression discontinuity designs is
to examine whether fixed or predetermined variables are smooth across the discontinuity
(Calonico et al., 2014). The analogue here is to check for balance on predetermined variables
between facilities with either three absences or two absences. Appendix Table A11 presents
balance across facilities in our main specification in Table 3 coded as flagged versus facilities
  27
     In general, at any given point in time, different facilities will have been flagged different numbers of
times. With sufficient data, flexibly controlling for the comprehensive treatment history would allow recovery
of the causal (and recovery of heterogeneous treatment effects given different histories). With only three
survey visits and being restricted to the smartphone monitoring districts, we lack to the data to pursue this
approach.



                                                     21
coded as unflagged. We do find imbalance on four of 18 variables at the 10% level, though
not in baseline doctor attendance, our primary outcome variable.28 Finally, in Appendix
Table A12 we re-run our primary flagging result controlling for all variables for which there
is baseline imbalance, and find that results are similar.
    Fifth, it is worth noting that flagging effects materialize approximately 10-20 days after
the reports are first filed on the online dashboard. Throughout the project, we interacted
with bureaucrats using the dashboard. They indicated very consistently that they would
review the dashboard approximately once a week. A 10 day response is consistent with a
manager checking about once a week and then demanding action from their subordinates.
We therefore did not expect that attendance would respond immediately. That we only find
effects in an intermediate window of a reasonable length is consistent with our explanation of
how the dashboard was used: actions by senior officials and subsequent responses by doctors
require time rather than through simple mean reversion. These results can be found on the
top left panel of Appendix Figure A1.


4.5      Heterogeneity of Results

Whether increased monitoring and data affect service delivery reasonably depends not only
on the abilities of government personnel but also on the broader political environment. We
now examine two sources of heterogeneity, taking advantage of the scale of our experiment.
    First, a growing literature documents the role of individuals in public service delivery
across the developing world, summarized in Finan et al. (2017). We examine whether per-
sonality characteristics of the health workers in our study predict their response to monitoring
and to information. To do this, we measured personality characteristics--the Big Five Per-
sonality Index and the Perry Public Service Motivation Index--of all of the doctors in our
sample clinics and the universe of health inspectors and senior health officials in Punjab.
   28
      Identification, in this case, only requires parallel trends prior to flagging. If we had reliable time series
data on attendance prior to flagging, we could test this directly. Unfortunately, we only have at most two
pre-flagging survey audits.



                                                        22
In Callen et al. (2017a) we explore this dimension of heterogeneity in great detail. As an
example of the role of personality characteristics in this setting, we present heterogeneity of
our flaggings results in Table A13. We find that personality characteristics systematically
predict responses by senior health officials to our dashboard experiment, as measured by
future doctor attendance in flagged facilities: a one standard deviation increase in the Big
5 Personality Index of senior bureaucrats increases the effect of flagging on the likelihood
that doctor is present at the clinic during a subsequent unannounced visit by 28 percentage
points. We see a similar, though smaller and statistically insignificant, point estimate for the
interaction with Public Service Motivation. Of course, these results are merely predictive as
we do not have identifying variation in personality traits.
   Second, we explore whether measures of political competition predict flagging effects. The
bureaucrats we worked with to create the program felt strongly that the program would break
down when politicians interfered with senior officials' attempts to sanction their subordinates.
Indeed, in our surveys, senior health officials report that politicians routinely interfere in this
way.29 In Callen et al. (2017b) we match each clinic in our sample to a provincial assembly
constituency and examine in detail the extent to which these political moderators affect
the efficacy of the Monitoring the Monitors program. As an example, we find that the
treatment effect of flagging on doctor attendance varies by the degree of competitiveness in
the previous election. Table A14 presents the results. We find that while flagging increases
subsequent attendance by 35.9 percentage points in the most politically competitive third
of constituencies, flagging has no apparent effect in the least competitive third. In addition,
flagging works better on doctors who do not report a direct connection with a local politician.
Indeed, the point estimates, though noisy, suggest the program may have negatively affected
attendance of connected doctors.
  29
     Based on interviews with all senior health officials in Punjab, we find that 44% report a politician
interfering in their decision to sanction an underperforming employee during the previous year.




                                                   23
5        Discussion and Conclusion

A fundamental objective of policy research is to convey facts and data to policy makers. We
find that providing senior health officials with information on low staff attendance causes
them to take corrective action, indicating that data can change how policy makers behave,
even in settings with weak institutions. This suggests two additional general lines of inquiry.
     First, our test of whether information affects policy decisions is direct. For our senior
officials, who are tasked with responsibilities that affect millions, ensuring the functioning
of frontline service facilities is a priority. A natural question is whether we would see the
same response to a more complicated object, like causal estimates of program effect, cost-
benefit analyses, or more general forms of research evidence.30 The `Monitoring the Monitors'
program provides proof-of-concept that technology can mobilize data to real effect. This also
suggests, but by no means proves conclusively, that the massive investments being made by
governments, technologists, researchers, philanthropists, and aid organizations to promote
evidence-based policy can make a difference in developing countries.
     Second, whether data and evidence impact policy likely depends on the characteristics of
policy makers, and the political and institutional environment in which they operate. The
scale of our experiment provides enough variation to examine preliminarily whether these
factors matter. We find some evidence, albeit highly speculative, that these considerations
are relevant. The personalities of both inspectors and senior health officials predict how the
`Monitoring the Monitors' program impacted them. Similarly, the degree of local political
competition predicts where the program will work best. These results are correlational, and
should be treated with appropriate skepticism, but do suggest that the effect of data on
policy decision might depend critically on context.
     The `Monitoring the Monitors' program cost 17,800 USD to set up and 510 USD per
month to operate.31 While the results of the program are mixed, given this low cost, we
    30
     Recent research finds that providing information to politicians can similarly impact their decisions
(Hjort et al., 2019).
  31
     The set up costs included 4,470 USD to develop the app and 13,330 USD for smartphones.


                                                   24
would expect it to pass a cost-effectiveness test. The government of Punjab scaled the
program up to cover the entire province at the conclusion of the study. This investment by
Punjab and others like it have driven a revolution in the amount of data that can quickly
and cheaply be accessed for policy decisions. This trend is only likely to accelerate with
the rise of remote sensing, digital trace (e.g., cell phone call and mobile money transaction
records), smartphones, and other research innovations. A key lesson from this exercise is
that, appropriately channeled, these data streams can improve policy outcomes.




                                             25
References

Ashraf, Nava, Oriana Bandiera, and Kelsey Jack, "No Margin, No Mission? A Field
  Experiment on Incentives for Public Services Delivery," Journal of Public Economics,
  2014, 120, 1­17.

  ,   , and Scott Lee, "Do-gooders and Go-getters: Career Incentives, Selection, and
  Performance in Public Service Delivery.," Working Paper, 2015.

Banerjee, Abhijit and Esther Duflo, "Addressing Absence," The Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 2006, 20 (1), 117­132.

Banerjee, Abhijit V., Esther Duflo, and Rachel Glennerster, "Putting a Band-Aid
  on a Corpse: Incentives for Nurses in the Indian Public Health Care System," Journal of
  the European Economic Association, 04-05 2008, 6 (2-3), 487­500.

Bertrand, Marianne, Robin Burgess, Arunish Chawla, and Guo Xu, "The Glitter-
  ing Prizes: Career Incentives and Bureaucratic Performance," Working Paper, 2017.

Blum, Florian and Rohini Pande, "Data poverty makes it harder to fix real poverty.
  That's why the UN should push countries to gather and share data.," July 2015.

Callen, Michael and James D Long, "Institutional Corruption and Election Fraud:
  Evidence From a Field Experiment in Afghanistan," The American Economic Review,
  2015, 105 (1), 354­381.

  , Clark Gibson, Danielle Jung, and James Long, "Improving Electoral Integrity with
  Information and Communications Technology," Journal of Experimental Political Science,
  2016, 3 (1), 4­17.

  , Saad Gulzar, Ali Hasanain, Yasir Khan, and Arman Rezaee, "Personalities
  and Public Sector Performance: Evidence from a Health Experiment in Pakistan," NBER
  Working Paper #21180, 2017.

                                           26
  ,   ,   ,   , and   , "The Political Economy of Public Sector Absence," NBER Working
  Paper #22340, 2017.

Calonico, Sebastian, Matias D Cattaneo, and Rocio Titiunik, "Robust data-driven
  inference in the regression-discontinuity design," The Stata Journal, 2014, 14 (4), 909­946.

Chaudhury, Nazmul, Jeffrey Hammer, Michael Kremer, Karthik Muralidharan,
  and F. Halsey Rogers, "Missing in Action: Teacher and Health Worker Absence in
  Developing Countries," Journal of Economic Perspectives, Winter 2006, 20 (1).

Dal B´
     o, Ernesto, Frederico Finan, and Mart´
                                          in A. Rossi, "Strengthening State Ca-
  pabilities: The Role of Financial Strengthening State Capabilities: The Role of Financial
  Incentives in the Call to Public Service," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 128 (3),
  1169 ­ 1218.

Deserranno, Erika, "Financial Incentives as Signals: Experimental Evidence from the
  Recruitment of Village Promoters in Uganda," 2017.

Dhaliwal, Iqbal and Rema Hanna, "Deal with the Devil: The Successes and Limitations
  of Bureaucratic Reform in India," Journal of Development Economics, 2017.

Duflo, Esther, Rema Hanna, and Stephen P. Ryan, "Incentives Work: Getting Teach-
  ers to Come to School," The American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (4), 1241­1278.

Finan, Frederico, Benjamin A Olken, and Rohini Pande, The Personnel Economics
  of the State, North Holland, 2017.

Fisher, Ronald, The Design of Experiments, Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd, 1935.

Gerber, Alan S. and Donald P. Green, Field Experiments: Design, Analysis, and
  Interpretation, New York, NY: Norton New York, 2012.

Gulzar, Saad and Benjamin J. Pasquale, "Politicians, Bureaucrats, and Development:
  Evidence from India," American Political Science Review, 2017, 111 (1), 162­183.

                                             27
Habyarimana, James, Stuti Khemani, and Thiago Scot, "The Importance of Political
  Selection in the Performance of Government Bureaucracies," Technical Report 2020.

Hjort, Jonas, Diana Moreira, Gautam Rao, and Juan Francisco Santini, "How
  Research Affects Policy: Experimental Evidence from 2,150 Brazilian Municipalities,"
  Technical Report 2019.

Khan, Adnan, Asim Ijaz Khwaja, and Benjamin A. Olken, "Tax Farming Redux:
  Experimental Evidence on Performance Pay for Tax Collectors," Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2016, 131 (1), 219­271.

Khan, Muhammad Yasir, "Organizational Mission, Financial Rewoards, and the Perfor-
  mace of Public Sector Personnel," Technical Report, UC Berkeley 2020.

Muralidharan, Karthik and Paul Niehaus, "Experimentation at Scale," 11 2017, 31,
  103­124.

  ,   , and Sandip Sukhtankar, "Building state capacity: Evidence from biometric smart-
  cards in India," The American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (10), 2895­2929.

  ,   , and     , "Identity verification standards in welfare programs: experimental evidence
  from India," Technical Report, UC San Diego 2020.

  ,   ,      , and Jeff Weaver, "Improving last-mile service delivery using phone-based
  monitoring," Technical Report, UC San Diego June 2019.

Nealer, Erin, Charles Rice, and Erol Yayboke, "Harnessing the Data Revolution to
  Achieve the Sustainable Development Goals: Enabling Frogs to Leap," Center for Stategic
  and International Studies, 2017.

Rogger, Daniel and Imran Rasul, "Management of Bureaucrats and Public Service
  Delivery: Evidence from the Nigerian Civil Service," Economic Journal, forthcoming.



                                             28
Xu, Guo, "The Costs of Patronage: Evidence from the British Empire," Working Paper,
  2017.




                                        29
                 APPENDIX: FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION ONLY


A           Additional Tables and Figures

A.1           Tables

                                                   Table A1: Randomization Verification


                                                                           Conventional           Smartphone           Difference     P-value      Control           Treatment
                                                                          Monitoring (=1)        Monitoring (=1)                                 Observations       Observations
 Health clinic open during visit (=1)                                            0.926                  0.930              -0.004      0.911           420               428
                                                                                [0.262]                [0.256]            (0.033)
 Number of Staff Assigned to the Health Clinic                                   5.121                  5.285              -0.164      0.185           420               428
                                                                                [0.925]                [0.940]            (0.121)
 Number of Staff Present                                                         2.719                   2.883             -0.164      0.370           420               428
                                                                                [1.514]                [1.637]            (0.181)
 Doctor Present (=1)                                                             0.237                  0.408              -0.171      0.003           409               414
                                                                                [0.426]                [0.492]            (0.054)
 Health/Medical Technician Present (=1)                                          0.396                  0.349               0.047      0.392           409               413
                                                                                [0.490]                [0.477]            (0.055)
 Dispenser Present (=1)                                                          0.706                  0.777              -0.071      0.259           408               413
                                                                                [0.456]                [0.417]            (0.062)
 School Health and Nutrition Supervisor Present (=1)                             0.347                   0.341              0.006      0.922           406               413
                                                                                [0.477]                [0.475]            (0.060)
 Lady Health Worker Present (=1)                                                 0.581                   0.634             -0.054      0.298           408               413
                                                                                [0.494]                [0.482]            (0.051)
 Midwife Present (=1)                                                            0.536                   0.478              0.058      0.206           405               412
                                                                                [0.499]                [0.500]            (0.045)
 Health Inspector Has Visited in the Last Month (=1)                             0.229                  0.219              0.010       0.855           332               320
                                                                                [0.421]                [0.414]            (0.055)
 Enumerator Could Not Verify Last Health Inspection (=1)                         0.210                  0.252              -0.043      0.467           420               428
                                                                                [0.407]                [0.435]            (0.058)
 Senior Health Official Has Visited in the Last Month (=1)                       0.041                   0.038              0.003      0.883           246               290
                                                                                [0.198]                [0.191]            (0.018)
 Number of Antenatal Visits in the Last Month                                   54.255                 59.115              -4.859      0.601           274               288
                                                                               [54.344]               [49.144]            (9.217)
 Number of Polio Vaccinations in the Last Month                                480.226                 649.748           -169.522      0.542           305               326
                                                                              [1130.822]             [1665.478]         (274.994)
 Doctor Connected to Local Parliamentarian (=1)                                  0.330                  0.273              0.057       0.542            91               176
                                                                                [0.473]                [0.447]            (0.092)
 Doctor's Tenure (in months)                                                   111.732                 106.025              5.707      0.779            82               161
                                                                               [98.782]               [90.214]           (20.156)
 Population of Health Clinic's Catchment Area                                   22.159                  24.243             -2.084      0.187           416               426
                                                                                [6.934]                [8.161]            (1.546)
 Distance of the Health Clinic to the District's HQ (kms)                       49.521                  49.464              0.058      0.992           420               401
                                                                               [29.334]               [30.817]            (5.563)
 Notes : This table checks balance between treatment and control clinics. The unit of observation is the clinic (basic health unit). The first ten rows report data from the baseline
survey of health facilities which involved making unannounced visits to facilities in November, 2011. The last four rows report data based on the February 2008 parliamentary
election. The political competition index is a Herfindahl index computed as the sum of squared candidate vote shares in each provincial assembly constituency. Variable standard
deviations are reported in brackets. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.




                                                                                       30
                                    Table A2: Health Inspection Measurement Attrition


                                                                           Conventional          Smartphone           Difference     P-value      Control          Treatment
                                                                          Monitoring (=1)       Monitoring (=1)                                 Observations      Observations
 Enumerator could not verify last health inspection (Wave 1)                     0.210                 0.252             -0.043       0.467           420               428
                                                                                [0.407]               [0.435]           (0.058)
 Enumerator could not verify last health inspection (Wave 2)                     0.116                 0.145             -0.029       0.518           422               428
                                                                                [0.321]               [0.352]           (0.044)
 Enumerator could not verify last health inspection (Wave 3)                     0.078                 0.082             -0.004       0.908           424               428
                                                                                [0.268]               [0.274]           (0.034)
 Notes : This table checks balance between in our enumerators' ability to verify the last health inspection between treatment and control clinics, survey wave by wave. The unit of
observation is the clinic (basic health unit). Variable standard deviations are reported in brackets. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.




                                                                                     31
                                         Table A3: The Effect of Smartphone Monitoring on Inspector Time Use
                                                Inspecting                Management in Head Office                              Other Work                               Total
                                                               Total                         Total            Immunization       Official  Other           Total          Work
                                     Clinics     Hospitals    (1)+(2)     Clinics Hospitals (4)+(5)            Campaigns         Meetings  Work           (8)+(9)     (3)+(6)+(10)      Breaks
                                      (1)          (2)          (3)        (4)      (5)       (6)                 (7)              (8)      (9)             (10)          (11)           (12)
      Smartphone Monitoring         23.668**      -13.616      10.052      -8.025      6.495       -1.530          3.367         36.679*       -4.297      35.749         44.271         -2.821
                                     (9.562)     (11.618)     (11.419)    (8.810)     (9.823)     (12.257)       (24.837)        (20.898)     (33.460)    (33.915)       (30.900)       (5.554)
      Exact p-value                  [0.034]      [0.891]      [0.251]    [0.482]     [0.324]      [0.261]        [0.489]         [0.194]      [0.685]     [0.302]        [0.197]       [0.379]
      Control Mean                   49.444       47.963       97.407     37.500      40.417       77.917         96.713          66.944       62.500     226.157        401.481        24.444
      # Districts                       35          35            35         35          35           35             35              35           35         35              35            35
      # Observations                   117          117          117        117         117          117            117             117          117         117            117           117
      Notes : This table reports average treatment effects of the `Monitoring the Monitors' program on the time use of inspectors. The unit of observation is the inspector, and data comes from
     surveys of inspectors. The dependent variable in each column is the reported number of minutes spent on the category listed in the column header. All regressions include randomization block
     FEs. Standard errors clustered at the district level are in parentheses. Square brackets report the Fisher Exact p-values. *p < 0.1, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.




32
                    Table A4: The Effect of Smartphone Monitoring on Inspections
                                 Wave2+3         Wave 2      Wave 3      Wave2+3        Wave 2       Wave 3      Diff-in-Diff      Diff-in-Diff
                                   (1)            (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)            (7)               (8)
  Smartphone Monitoring           0.181***      0.264***       0.103      0.161***      0.261***      0.058       0.181***         0.210***
                                   (0.066)       (0.079)      (0.079)      (0.056)       (0.063)     (0.073)       (0.066)          (0.065)
  Exact p-value                    [0.002]       [0.004]      [0.066]      [0.009]       [0.014]     [0.191]       [0.002]          [0.000]
  Control Mean                      0.245         0.255        0.235        0.245         0.255       0.235         0.240            0.239
  # Districts                        35             35           35           35            35          35            35               35
  # Observations                    1523           739          784         1523           739         784          2175             2117
  Fixed Effects                      No            No           No          Block         Block       Block         Wave         Wave+Facility
  Notes : This table reports average treatment effects of the `Monitoring the Monitors' program on the probability of a clinic being inspected.
 The unit of observation is the clinic, and data come from primary unannounced surveys after the treatment was launched. The dependent
 variable is an indicator for whether an inspector visited the facility visit. Standard errors clustered at the district level are in parentheses.
 Square brackets report the Fisher Exact p-values. *p < 0.1, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.




Table A5: The Effect of Smartphone Monitoring on Inspections (controlling for baseline
level)
                                           Wave2+3         Wave 2       Wave 3     Wave2+3         Wave 2      Wave 3       Wave2+3
                                             (1)            (2)          (3)         (4)            (5)         (6)           (7)
          Smartphone Monitoring             0.207***      0.290***       0.129     0.184***      0.304***       0.060      0.183***
                                             (0.062)       (0.077)      (0.077)     (0.054)       (0.064)      (0.072)      (0.055)
          Exact p-value                      [0.002]       [0.004]      [0.027]     [0.008]       [0.012]      [0.155]      [0.008]
          Control Mean                        0.249         0.261        0.238       0.249         0.261        0.238        0.249
          # Districts                           35            35           35         35             35           35           35
          # Observations                      1192           580          612        1192           580          612         1192
          Fixed Effects                        No            No           No         Block         Block        Block     Wave+Block
          Control for baseline level           Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
          Notes : This table reports average treatment effects of the `Monitoring the Monitors' program on the probability of a clinic
         being inspected while controlling for baseline inspection levels. The unit of observation is the clinic, and data come from primary
         unannounced surveys after the treatment was launched. The dependent variable is an indicator for whether an inspector visited
         the facility visit. Standard errors clustered at the district level are in parentheses. Square brackets report the Fisher Exact
         p-values. *p < 0.1, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.




                                                                        33
Table A6: The Effect of Smartphone Monitoring on Clinic Staff Attendance - Wave 2
                                                          Lady Health       Health     School Health
                                Doctor      Dispenser       Worker           Tech     Nutri. Supervisor       Midwife
                                 (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)                (6)
        Panel A: Difference in Differences
        Monitoring        -0.044     -0.082                  -0.102*        -0.037            0.034            0.014
                         (0.058)    (0.060)                  (0.056)       (0.063)           (0.086)          (0.067)
                          [0.807]   [0.961]                  [0.996]       [0.863]           [0.385]          [0.634]
        Mean in Controls   0.247     0.735                    0.614         0.439             0.333            0.554
        # Districts          35        35                       35            35               35                35
        # Observations     1596       1632                    1632           1633             1628             1624
        R-Squared          0.090      0.062                   0.038         0.044             0.034            0.048
        Panel B: Difference in Differences with Facility FEs
        Monitoring         -0.035    -0.087     -0.103*     -0.037                            0.031            0.009
                          (0.060)   (0.057)     (0.057)    (0.064)                           (0.083)          (0.068)
                          [0.704]    [0.991]    [0.957]    [0.843]                           [0.582]          [0.663]
        Mean in Controls    0.242     0.737      0.615      0.447                             0.334            0.559
        # Districts           35        35         35         35                               35                35
        # Observations      1498      1566       1566        1568                             1558             1550
        R-Squared           0.639     0.556      0.552      0.646                             0.538            0.641
        Panel C: Control for Baseline Attendance
        Monitoring       0.114***    -0.023    -0.035                       -0.063            0.015            -0.073
                          (0.037)   (0.039)   (0.032)                      (0.044)           (0.073)          (0.068)
                          [0.059]   [0.860]   [0.761]                      [0.943]           [0.423]          [0.864]
        Mean in Controls   0.250     0.764      0.648                       0.486             0.319            0.572
        # Districts          35        35         35                           35              35                35
        # Observations      749       783        783                          784              779               775
        R-Squared          0.179     0.062      0.037                        0.134            0.061             0.138
        Notes : This table reports average treatment effects of the `Monitoring the Monitors' program on the staff atten-
       dance in survey wave 2. The unit of observation is the clinic, and data come from primary unannounced surveys
       after the treatment was launched. The dependent variable is an indicator for whether a doctor was present at
       the clinic during an announced visit. All regressions include randomization strata FEs. Standard errors clustered
       at the district level are in parentheses. Square brackets report the Fisher Exact p-values. *p < 0.1, **p < 0.05,
       ***p < 0.01.




                                                              34
Table A7: The Effect of Smartphone Monitoring on Clinic Staff Attendance - Wave 3
                                                         Lady Health       Health      School Health
                                Doctor     Dispenser       Worker           Tech      Nutri. Supervisor       Midwife
                                 (1)          (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)                (6)
        Panel A: Difference in Differences
        Monitoring        -0.001    -0.055                   -0.058         0.098            -0.012            0.095
                         (0.055)   (0.070)                  (0.062)        (0.063)          (0.082)           (0.068)
                         [0.493]   [0.880]                  [0.961]        [0.097]          [0.693]           [0.308]
        Mean in Controls 0.212      0.722                     0.568         0.379            0.318             0.517
        # Districts         35        35                       35             35               35               35
        # Observations     1649      1646                     1646          1647              1639             1641
        R-Squared          0.088     0.076                    0.048         0.050            0.054             0.048
        Panel B: Difference in Differences with Facility FEs
        Monitoring        0.008     -0.045     -0.054      0.090                             0.001             0.088
                         (0.055)   (0.069)    (0.064)     (0.065)                           (0.086)           (0.067)
                         [0.546]   [0.859]     [0.894]    [0.210]                           [0.737]           [0.280]
        Mean in Controls 0.211       0.720      0.570      0.381                             0.320             0.515
        # Districts        35         35         35          35                                35               35
        # Observations    1598       1592       1592       1594                              1578              1582
        R-Squared         0.625      0.560      0.557      0.618                             0.533             0.593
        Panel C: Control for Baseline Attendance
        Monitoring       0.094*    0.002      -0.040                        0.052            0.000             -0.007
                         (0.053)  (0.055)    (0.043)                       (0.050)          (0.050)           (0.073)
                         [0.134]  [0.667]    [0.854]                       [0.460]          [0.524]           [0.719]
        Mean in Controls 0.182     0.729      0.554                         0.369            0.284              0.495
        # Districts         35      35          35                            35               35                35
        # Observations     799      796        796                           797              789                791
        R-Squared         0.146    0.102      0.054                         0.118            0.126              0.108
        Notes : This table reports average treatment effects of the `Monitoring the Monitors' program on the staff
       attendance in survey wave 3. The unit of observation is the clinic, and data come from primary unannounced
       surveys after the treatment was launched. The dependent variable is an indicator for whether a doctor was
       present at the clinic during an announced visit. All regressions include randomization strata FEs. Standard errors
       clustered at the district level are in parentheses. Square brackets report the Fisher Exact p-values. *p < 0.1,
       **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.




                                                              35
Table A8: The Effect of Smartphone Monitoring on Clinic Staff Assignment
                                                     Lady Health       Health      School Health
                           Doctor      Dispenser       Worker           Tech      Nutri. Supervisor       Midwife
                            (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)                (6)
   Panel A: Survey Wave FE
   Monitoring        0.007   -0.022                       -0.036        -0.055           -0.012            -0.060
                    (0.048) (0.016)                      (0.024)       (0.052)          (0.117)           (0.068)
                    [0.400] [0.877]                      [0.976]       [0.875]          [0.326]           [0.761]
   Mean in Controls  0.532    0.979                        0.938        0.749             0.876            0.855
   # Districts         35       35                          35            35               35                35
   # Observations    2422     2457                         2457          2458             2479              2483
   R-Squared         0.141    0.029                        0.038        0.090            0.208              0.142
   Panel B: Survey Wave + Facility FEs
   Monitoring        0.023   -0.024     -0.033                          -0.051           -0.010            -0.061
                    (0.048) (0.016)    (0.024)                         (0.053)          (0.118)           (0.068)
                    [0.441] [0.878]    [0.952]                         [0.965]          [0.380]           [0.840]
   Mean in Controls  0.533    0.979      0.937                          0.748             0.876            0.854
   # Districts         35       35        35                              35               35                35
   # Observations    2408     2446       2446                            2447             2473              2477
   R-Squared         0.677    0.521      0.551                          0.648            0.558              0.504
   Panel C: Baseline Control with Survey                 Wave FE
   Monitoring       0.091***   -0.016                     -0.015  -0.067                 0.019             -0.057
                     (0.031)  (0.013)                    (0.011) (0.054)                (0.071)           (0.058)
                     [0.084]  [0.788]                    [0.761] [0.908]                [0.182]           [0.722]
   Mean in Controls   0.517    0.987                       0.942  0.738                  0.811             0.782
   # Districts          35       35                         35       35                   35                 35
   # Observations     1548      1579                       1579    1581                  1623               1627
   R-Squared          0.310    0.078                       0.094   0.193                 0.217              0.063
   Panel D: IV with Baseline Controls and Survey Wave FE
                      (1)        (2)        (3)      (4)                                  (5)                (6)
   Inspected        0.626**    -0.088     -0.084   -0.424                                0.148             -0.326
                    (0.294)   (0.079)    (0.077)  (0.284)                               (0.378)           (0.354)
                    [0.463]   [0.336]    [0.520]  [0.520]                               [0.551]           [0.600]
   Mean in Controls  0.597     0.979      0.938    0.701                                 0.792             0.746
   # Districts         35        35         35       35                                   35                 35
   # Observations    1437       1468       1468     1470                                 1509               1513
   Notes : This table reports average treatment effects of the `Monitoring the Monitors' program on the staff assign-
  ment. The unit of observation is the clinic, and data come from primary unannounced surveys after the treatment
  was launched. The dependent variable is an indicator for whether a staff member was assigned at the clinic during
  an unannounced visit. All regressions include randomization strata FEs. Standard errors clustered at the district
  level are in parentheses. Square brackets report the Fisher Exact p-values. *p < 0.1, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.




                                                         36
            Table A9: Flagging Alternative Bandwidths
                          Doctor Present in Unannounced Visit (=1)
                            (1)         (2)         (3)             (4)
 Flagged           0.177**             0.098      0.075            0.079
                   (0.082)            (0.062)    (0.054)          (0.054)
 Unflagged Mean     0.236              0.238      0.281            0.281
 # Clinics           112                199        266              268
 # Reports           130                241        373              376
 R-Squared          0.298              0.218      0.160            0.156
 # of Staff Absent 2 or 3              1 to 4     0 to 5           0 to 7
  Notes : This table reports on the effect on subsequent doctor attendance of
flagging on an online dashboard. Clinics were flagged in red on an online
dashboard if three or more of the seven staff were absent in one or more
health inspections of the clinic 11 to 25 days prior to an unannounced visit
by our survey enumerators. Column 1 restricts to the Discontinuity sample,
or facilities with reports in which either two or three staff were absent (the
threshold to trigger the underreporting red flag). Column 2 restricts to reports
with one to four staff absent. Column 3 restricts to reports with zero to
five staff absent. Column 4 does not restrict by the number of staff absent.
In addition, the sample in all columns is limited to Monitoring the Monitor
treatment districts due to the necessity of the web dashboard for flagging
clinics. All regressions include district and survey wave fixed effects. Standard
errors clustered at the clinic level reported in parentheses. p < 0.1, *p < 0.05,
***p < 0.01.




                                       37
                               Table A10: First Flagging Effects
                                                 Doctor Present in Unannounced Visit (=1)
                                                       (1)               (2)                (3)
 Flagged                                           0.177**            0.224*             0.273*
                                                   (0.082)            (0.118)            (0.148)
 Unflagged Mean                                     0.236              0.208              0.208
 # Clinics                                           112                 66                 66
 # Reports                                           130                 72                 72
 R-Squared                                          0.298              0.229              0.372
 District Fixed Effects                              Yes                Yes                Yes
 Restricted to First Flagging                        No                 Yes                Yes
 Number of previous inspections FEs                  No                 No                 Yes
 Sample                                         Discontinuity      Discontinuity      Discontinuity
  Notes : This table reports on the effect on subsequent doctor attendance of flagging on an online
dashboard the fact that a clinic had three or more staff absent to a senior health official. Clinics
were flagged in red on an online dashboard if three or more of the seven staff were absent in one
or more health inspections of the clinic 11 to 25 days prior to an unannounced visit by our survey
enumerators. All columns restrict to the Discontinuity sample, or facilities with reports in which
either two or three staff were absent (the threshold to trigger the underreporting red flag). Column
1 reports results identical to Table 3 column 1. Column 2 restricts the sample to cases in which the
flagging that occurred prior to our survey visit was the first time a facility was ever flagged. Column
3 further includes fixed effects for the number of previous health inspections recorded in the online
dashboard for a facility before the beginning of the flagging window. In addition, the sample in all
columns is limited to Monitoring the Monitor treatment districts due to the necessity of the web
dashboard for flagging clinics. All regressions include district and survey wave fixed effects. Standard
errors clustered at the clinic level reported in parentheses. *p < 0.1, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.




                                                  38
                                                     Table A11: Flagging Balance

                                                                          Not flagged       Flagged      Difference     P-value    Not flagged          Flagged
                                                                                                                                   Observations       Observations
 Health clinic open during visit (=1)                                         0.980           0.903           0.077      0.084            50                62
                                                                             [0.141]         [0.298]        (0.047)
 Number of Staff Assigned to the Health Clinic                                5.340           5.000           0.340      0.045            50                62
                                                                             [0.798]         [1.024]        (0.191)
 Number of Staff Present                                                      3.400           2.694           0.706      0.047            50                62
                                                                             [1.245]         [1.500]        (0.340)
 Doctor Present (=1)                                                          0.408           0.379           0.029      0.674            49                58
                                                                             [0.497]         [0.489]        (0.091)
 Health/Medical Technician Present (=1)                                       0.347           0.345           0.002      0.984            49                58
                                                                             [0.481]         [0.479]        (0.132)
 Dispenser Present (=1)                                                       0.796           0.828          -0.032      0.725            49                58
                                                                             [0.407]         [0.381]        (0.107)
 School Health and Nutrition Supervisor Present (=1)                          0.531           0.362           0.169      0.196            49                58
                                                                             [0.504]         [0.485]        (0.131)
 Lady Health Worker Present (=1)                                              0.755           0.586           0.169      0.102            49                58
                                                                             [0.434]         [0.497]        (0.106)
 Midwife Present (=1)                                                         0.633           0.379           0.253      0.016            49                58
                                                                             [0.487]         [0.489]        (0.084)
 Health Inspector Has Visited in the Last Month (=1)                          0.250           0.333          -0.083      0.450            40                54
                                                                             [0.439]         [0.476]        (0.131)
 Enumerator Could Not Verify Last Health Inspection (=1)                      0.200           0.129           0.071      0.417            50                62
                                                                             [0.404]         [0.338]        (0.082)
 Senior Health Official Has Visited in the Last Month (=1)                    0.026           0.022           0.005      0.904            38                46
                                                                             [0.162]         [0.147]        (0.035)
 Number of Antenatal Visits in the Last Month                                59.308          55.275           4.033      0.699            39                40
                                                                            [45.801]        [44.848]       (11.894)
 Number of Polio Vaccinations in the Last Month                             649.632         555.170         94.461       0.840            38                47
                                                                           [1689.583]      [1493.729]     (486.732)
 Doctor Connected to Local Parliamentarian (=1)                               0.211           0.227          -0.017      0.901            19                22
                                                                             [0.419]         [0.429]        (0.140)
 Doctor's Tenure (in months)                                                 106.786         99.000           7.786      0.783            14                20
                                                                            [77.134]        [89.016]       (34.294)
 Population of Health Clinic's Catchment Area                                 24.815         24.385           0.429      0.763            50                62
                                                                             [8.249]         [8.702]        (1.824)
 Distance of the Health Clinic to the District's HQ (kms)                    51.571          54.800          -3.229      0.476            49                60
                                                                            [33.125]        [27.417]        (7.628)
 Notes : This table checks balance between flagged and not flagged clinics considering those that were inspected for the online dashboard 11-25 days prior to one of
our survey visit (the same sample as the primary flagging results in Table 3). The unit of observation is the clinic (basic health unit). All data is from the baseline
survey of health facilities which involved making unannounced visits to facilities in November, 2011. Variable standard deviations are reported in brackets. Standard
errors are reported in parentheses.




                                                                                 39
         Table A12: Flagging Effects Controlling for Baseline Imbalances
                                            Doctor Present in Unannounced Visit (=1)
                                                     (1)                      (2)
 Flagged                                       0.177**                     0.175**
                                               (0.082)                     (0.082)
 Unflagged Mean                                 0.236                       0.246
 # Clinics                                       112                         107
 # Reports                                       130                         124
 R-Squared                                      0.298                       0.358
 District Fixed Effects                          Yes                         Yes
 Controls for Baseline Imbalances                No                          Yes
 Sample                                     Discontinuity               Discontinuity
  Notes : This table reports on the effect on subsequent doctor attendance of flagging on an online
dashboard the fact that a clinic had three or more staff absent to a senior policymaker. Clinics
were flagged in red on an online dashboard if three or more of the seven staff were absent in
one or more health inspections of the clinic 11 to 25 days prior to an unannounced visit by
our survey enumerators. The Discontinuity sample limits to facility reports in which either two
or three staff were absent (the threshold to trigger the underreporting red flag). In addition,
the sample in all columns is limited to Monitoring the Monitor treatment districts due to the
necessity of the web dashboard for flagging clinics. Controls for Baseline Imbalances include:
Health clinic open during visit (=1), Number of Staff Assigned to the Health Clinic, Number
of Staff Present, and Midwife Present (=1). All regressions include district and survey wave
fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the clinic level reported in parentheses. *p < 0.1,
**p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.




                                                40
Table A13: Heterogeneous Flagging Effects by Senior Health Official Personality
                                                                     Doctor Present in Unannounced Visit (=1)
                                                                          (1)                (2)                (3)
       Flagged                                                         0.177**             0.156*            0.210**
                                                                       (0.082)             (0.084)           (0.090)
       Flagged x Senior Health Official Big Five Index                                     0.282*
                                                                                           (0.150)
       Flagged x Senior Health Official PSM Index                                                             0.165
                                                                                                             (0.126)
       Mean of dependent variable                                       0.308              0.267              0.267
       # Observations                                                    130                120                120
       # Clinics                                                         112                103                103
       R-Squared                                                        0.298              0.265              0.255
       District Fixed Effects                                            Yes                Yes                Yes
       Sample                                                       Discontinuity      Discontinuity      Discontinuity
       Notes : This table reports on the effect on subsequent doctor attendance of flagging on an online dashboard the
      fact that a clinic had three or more staff absent to a senior policymaker. Clinics were flagged in red on an online
      dashboard if three or more of the seven staff were absent in one or more health inspections of the clinic 11 to 25
      days prior to an unannounced visit by our survey enumerators. The Discontinuity sample limits to facility reports
      in which either two or three staff were absent (the threshold to trigger the underreporting red flag). In addition,
      the sample in all columns is limited to Monitoring the Monitor treatment districts due to the necessity of the web
      dashboard for flagging clinics.The Big Five and PSM indices. The Big Five and PSM indices are z-score averages
      of the five and six traits within the Big Five and PSM respectively, elicited through responses to statements that
      represent the trait on a five point Likert scale, in which 1 corresponds to disagree strongly, 2 to disagree a little,
      3 to neutral, 4 to agree a little, and 5 to agree strongly. Likert responses are given the same direction. Standard
      errors clustered at the clinic level reported in parentheses. All regressions include district and survey wave fixed
      effects and condition on a doctor being posted. All regressions include survey wave fixed effects. Standard errors
      clustered at the clinic level reported in parentheses. *p < 0.1, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01.




                                                               41
             Table A14: Heterogeneous Flagging Effects by Political Competition
                                                                                           Doctor Present in Unannounced Visit (=1)
                                                                                                 (1)               (2)                (3)
 Flagged                                                                                      0.177**
                                                                                              (0.082)
 Flagged x Doctor Does Not Know Politician                                                                                          0.201*
                                                                                                                                    (0.109)
 Flagged x Doctor Knows Politician                                                                                                   -0.250
                                                                                                                                    (0.249)
 Flagged x High Competition                                                                                     0.359***
                                                                                                                 (0.118)
 Flagged x Med Competition                                                                                        0.004
                                                                                                                 (0.165)
 Flagged x Low Competition                                                                                        -0.087
                                                                                                                 (0.134)
 Constant                                                                                    0.191***            0.209*             0.588**
                                                                                              (0.061)            (0.117)            (0.233)
 Flagged x High Comp = Flagged x Med Comp (p-value)                                                                0.090
 Flagged x High Comp = Flagged x Low Comp (p-value)                                                                0.014
 Flagged x Doctor Does Not Know = Flagged x Doctor Knows (p-value)                                                                  0.072
 # Clinics                                                                                     112                112                 80
 # Reports                                                                                     130                130                 91
 R-Squared                                                                                    0.298              0.352              0.347
 District Fixed Effects                                                                        Yes                Yes                Yes
 Sample                                                                                   Discontinuity      Discontinuity      Discontinuity
 Notes : This table reports on the effect on subsequent doctor attendance of flagging on an online dashboard the fact that a clinic had three or
more staff absent to a senior policymaker. Clinics were flagged in red on an online dashboard if three or more of the seven staff were absent in
one or more health inspections of the clinic 11 to 25 days prior to an unannounced visit by our survey enumerators. The Discontinuity sample
limits to facility reports in which either two or three staff were absent (the threshold to trigger the underreporting red flag). In addition, the
sample in all columns is limited to Monitoring the Monitor treatment districts due to the necessity of the web dashboard for flagging clinics.
All regressions include survey wave fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the clinic level reported in parentheses. *p < 0.1, **p < 0.05,
***p < 0.01.




                                                                       42
A.2   Figures




                43
                                                 Doctor                                                     Dispenser
                                       +25




                                                                                                 +25
                                       +20
                                                                                t-stats                                      t-stats




                                                                                                 +20
                                       +15




                                                                                                 +15
                                                                                 2.58                                         2.58
                                                                                 1.96                                         1.96
                                                                                 1.65                                         1.65
                                       +10




                                                                                                 +10
                                                                                 0                                            0
                                       +5




                                                                                                 +5
                                                                                 -1.65                                        -1.65
                                                                                 -1.96                                        -1.96
                                                                                 -2.58                                        -2.58
  Length of analysis window (days)
                                       +0




                                                                                                 +0
                                             0   10    20        30                                    0      10   20   30




                                        Lady Health Visitor                                                Health Tech.
                                       +25




                                                                                                 +25
                                                                                 t-stats                                     t-stats
                                       +20




                                                                                     2.58        +20                          2.58
                                       +15




                                                                                                 +15
                                                                                     1.96
                                                                                     1.65                                     1.96
                                                                                                                              1.65
                                       +10




                                                                                                 +10



                                                                                     0                                        0

                                                                                     -1.65
                                                                                     -1.96                                    -1.65
                                                                                                                              -1.96
                                       +5




                                                                                                 +5




                                                                                     -2.58                                    -2.58
                                       +0




                                                                                                 +0




                                             0   10     20            30                               0      10   20   30




                                     School Health Nutri. Sup.                                               Midwife
                                      +25




                                                                                                 +25




                                                                                     t-stats                                 t-stats
                                      +20




                                                                                                 +20




                                                                                                                              2.58
                                      +15




                                                                                                 +15




                                                                                         2.58                                 1.96
                                                                                         1.96                                 1.65
                                                                                         1.65
                                      +10




                                                                                                 +10




                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                              -1.65
                                                                                                                              -1.96
                                      +5




                                                                                                 +5




                                                                                         -1.65                                -2.58
                                                                                         -1.96
                                                                                         -2.58
                                      +0




                                                                                                 +0




                                             0    10        20             30                          0      10   20   30



                                                            Days since dashboard report

                                                                           Figure A1: Absence after Flagging
Notes: This figure presents robustness of flagging results in Table 3 to the window of time prior to an
unannounced visit that a clinic being highlighted in red on the dashboard is considered flagged. Each figure
reports t-stats from 1300 hypothesis tests analogous to that conducted in Table 3 column (3) that Flagged
= 0, varying the window for which we define a clinic as flagged prior to a primary unannounced visit to a
clinic along two dimensions--we vary the length of the window being used along the x-axis and the delay
from when a clinic is highlighted in red to when the window begins along the y-axis (so for example, a length
of 30 and delay of 15 corresponds to considering a clinic as flagged if it was highlighted in red anytime 15 to
45 days prior to an unannounced visit).


                                                                                                       44
                                                1/2 Cutoff Placebo
                                     +25
                                                                                       t-stats
                                     +20




                                                                                        2.58
                                     +15




                                                                                        1.96
                                                                                        1.65
  Length of analysis window (days)
                                     +10




                                                                                        0
                                     +5




                                                                                        -1.65
                                                                                        -1.96

                                                                                        -2.58
                                     +0




                                           0      10             20              30




                                                3/4 Cutoff Placebo
                                     +25




                                                                                       t-stats
                                     +20




                                                                                        2.58
                                     +15




                                                                                        1.96
                                                                                        1.65
                                     +10




                                                                                        0
                                     +5




                                                                                        -1.65
                                                                                        -1.96

                                                                                        -2.58
                                     +0




                                           0      10             20              30



                                               Days since dashboard report

                                                Figure A2: Absence after Flagging Placebos
Notes: This figure presents placebo tests for the flagging results in Table 3, coding the data as if the cutoff
for a health clinic being highlighted in red was for more than 1 staff absent or more than 3 staff absent,
rather than the true cutoff that was used (more than 2 staff absent). Each figure reports t-stats from
1300 hypothesis tests analogous to that conducted in Table 3 column (3) that Flagged = 0, with these
placebo definitions of flagging, varying the window for which we define a clinic as flagged prior to a primary
unannounced visit to a clinic along two dimensions--we vary the length of the window being used along the
x-axis and the delay from when a clinic is highlighted in red to when the window begins along the y-axis (so
for example, a length of 30 and delay of 15 corresponds to considering a clinic as flagged if it was highlighted
in red anytime 15 to 45 days prior to an unannounced visit).
                                                                      45
                                     +25




                                                                                         t-stats
                                                                                             2.58
                                     +20
  Length of analysis window (days)




                                                                                             1.96

                                                                                             1.65
                                     +15




                                                                                             0
                                     +10
                                     +5




                                                                                             -1.65

                                                                                             -1.96



                                                                                             -2.58
                                     +0




                                           0      10                 20             30
                                               Days since dashboard report


                                                 Figure A3: Survey Before Flagging Placebo
Notes: This figure presents placebo tests for the flagging results in Table 3, reversing the flagging window
to be after our independent survey. Each figure reports t-stats from 750 hypothesis tests analogous to that
conducted in Table 3 column (3) that Flagged = 0, with these placebo definitions of flagging, varying the
window for which we define a clinic as flagged after a primary unannounced visit to a clinic along two
dimensions--we vary the length of the window being used along the x-axis and the delay from when a clinic
is highlighted in red to when the window begins along the y-axis (so for example, a length of 30 and delay
of 15 corresponds to considering a clinic as flagged if it was highlighted in red anytime 15 to 45 days after
an unannounced visit).




                                                                          46
B      Duties of Health Inspectors

Health inspectors' primary duty is to directly monitor health service delivery across their
sub-district. This monitoring takes three official forms: (i) inspection of health facilities, (ii)
management of facilities and staff, and (iii) supervising immunization campaigns (such as
Polio vaccination campaigns).
    Health inspectors are nominally required to inspect all health facilities in their sub-district
once per month. These facilities include Basic Health Units (2,496 clinics in this study
spread across 123 health inspectors), Rural Health Centers (293 RHCs), Tehsil Headquarter
Hospitals (88 THQs), and District Headquarter Hospitals (34 DHQs). The average health
inspector is thus responsible for roughly 24 inspections per month. We have provided the
inspection form for BHUs in Appendix Section E. The inspection forms for these other
facilities are similar in nature. In control districts, health inspectors report spending an
average of 97 minutes per day on inspections, roughly split between BHUs and other facilities
(see Appendix Table A3).
    Health inspectors report spending an average of 78 minutes per day on management tasks,
which typically take place at the office (health inspectors' offices are in their sub-district's
THQ). These management tasks are mainly planning in nature--monitoring medicine and
supply usage and potential stock-outs, conducting other needs assessments, and planning
for special interventions (such as special programs for treating Tuberculosis). Management
tasks also include preparing paperwork related to health inspectors' monitoring activities.
    Health inspectors report spending an average of 97 minutes per day supervising immu-
nization campaigns. This requires the supervision and monitoring of frontline health workers
such as Lady Health Workers as they rove around the sub-district conducting door-to-door
vaccinations. These campaigns are not constant ­ they tend to run for one to two weeks
every few months ­ but when they are running they require the near full attention of health
inspectors.
    Besides these three official streams of duties, health inspectors are expected to perform

                                                47
any task assigned to them by more senior health officials as they are the individual most
responsible for health at the sub-district level. The most common task in this category is
attending "official meetings" (an average of 67 minutes per week), which generally entails
health inspectors being called into their DHQ to provide comments at a meeting between a
senior health official and someone visiting the district.



C     Hiring and Assignment Process for Medical Officers

      (Doctors)

There are two different hiring processes for Medical Officers. They are either hired centrally
through through the Punjab Provincial Service Commission (PPSC) or locally at the dis-
trict level. If hired through the PPSC, a Medical Officer becomes part of the provincial
bureaucracy. The PPSC is tasked with the hiring of human resources for several arms of the
provincial government. The commission floats an advertisement with details of the hiring
process. Individuals who have passed the doctor certifications (M.B.B.S.) and are registered
with Pakistan Medical and Dental Council are eligible to apply to these positions. The top
candidates are called in for a test and further shortlisted candidates are interviewed by a
selection committee. The committee consists of senior officials from the PPSC, the Health
Department, the Director General Health Services office, and a senior medical expert. Merit
lists generated based on performance in the interview are then communicated to the Health
Department by the PPSC.
    The provincial Health Department decides on assignment of these Medical Officers to
facilities across the province. They can be assigned to any district and the senior health
official of that district can assign them to any facility within that district. That means,
at least theoretically, these Medical Officers can be moved across district lines any time.
However, in practice it is rare for a Medical Officer to be moved across district lines after
their first assignment, unless they specifically request it.


                                               48
    The second route of hiring Medical Officers runs through the Executive District Officers
(EDO), or senior health officials, at the district level. The Office of the EDO Health advertises
vacant positions locally, and shortlisted applicants are interviewed by the EDO personally.
Recommendations of the EDO are conveyed to the Health Department, which then issues
offer letters to the successful applicants for assignment in that particular district. However,
these Medical Officers are hired for a fixed term and are not considered permanent employees.
This route exists so that the EDOs can swiftly respond to any surge in demand for health
services at the local level. The time required for hiring through this route is much shorter
than the hiring process through the PPSC.
    Medical Officers that are hired by the EDO of a district can only be assigned to a health
facility within that district. This means such officers cannot be moved to a facility outside
their own district.



D      Details on data collection

Our survey protocol was as follows: First, our survey teams were trained by senior enumera-
tors and our team members at four regional hubs. Following these trainings, the teams made
visits to health clinics in their assigned districts and remained in regular contact with their
team leaders and our research team. Data collection and entry then followed back-checks
and other validation processes consistent with academic best practice. Surveys took three
weeks to field in each wave.
    When verifying whether health inspections had occurred, enumerators' process was as
follows: First, they checked a facility's physical register for the last recorded inspection.
Second, they verified what they found in the register with whichever health staff was currently
in charge of the facility. In some cases, enumerators were unable to confidently verify whether
or not an inspection had occurred in the prior month. We treat such cases as missing data
for analysis and verify in Appendix Table A1 that such cases do not correlate with treatment



                                               49
assignment at baseline and in Appendix Table A2 that we do not have treatment-related
attrition across waves.
   During time use surveys, inspectors listed the time they spent on a variety of tasks during
the two working days prior to our survey. Inspectors picked up to three out of 10 possible
categories of work to account for each hour between 8am and 6pm. In addition, they were
asked to identify when they arrived at and left from work. We also collected additional
information from health inspectors during these interviews, and we also interviewed doctors
and senior health officials across our sample through similar face-to-face interviews. We
briefly discuss some of the other data collected through these interviews in Section 4.5.




                                             50
51
     E              Paper Inspection Form

                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                             PARAMEDICS INCLUDES:                       Medical Assistant, Medical Technician, Health Technician, Dispenser, Other 
                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sr. No    Staff Category                                                           Sanctioned            Filled Posts         Present 
                                                                       INSPECTION FORM OF BASIC HEALTH UNIT                                                                                  1         Paramedical Staff                                                                                                    
                                                               HEALTH DEPARTMENT (GOVERNMENT OF THE PUNJAB) 
                                                                          A  BASIC HEALTH UNIT INFORMATION                                                                                                        Details regarding absence of Paramedics. (Do not write anything if staff is present.) 
         HMIS Code:                                                               Name of BHU: ______________________________________________                                                                                                               
         Managed by: i)  PRSP                                  ii) Dist. Govt.          (please tick only one option)                                                                                                                                             Type of Absence on the monitoring day.    Days of absence during last 
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sr. No 
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Designation                Name of Paramedic                          (tick only one box)            three calendar months 
                                                                                                                                                                                              
         Mauza: __________________________ UC  Name: _______________________________  UC No.  ___________________                                                                                                                                                 UA      SL        OD      St. L  LC       UA            Other Types 
                                                                                                                                                                                             1                                                                                                               
         NA No. _________ PP. No. _________ District: _________________________ Tehsil: _____________________________ 
                                                                                                                                                                                             2                                                                                                               
         Name  of  incharge  of  the  facility:  __________________________________  Designation:  ______________________ 
                                                                                                                                                                                             3                                                                                                               
         Mobile  No.:  _______________________  BHU's  Phone  (with  code):  _______________________________________ 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
         Name  of  DDOH:  _____________________________________________  Reference  No.  ___________________________ 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  K  PREVENTIVE / OUTREACH STAFF 
         Date & Time of arrival for inspection: _____/_______/______  Time: Hours __________ Minutes _______       am    / pm   
                                                                                                                                                                                              
                              B  CLEANLINESS AND GENERAL  
                                                                                                                                         C  DISPLAYS                                         PREVENTIVE  /  OUTREACH  STAFF  LHV,  RHI,  Midwife,  Dai,  Vaccinator  CDC  Supervisor,  Sanitary  Inspector  Sanitary  Worker, 
                                OUTLOOK OF THE FACILITY 
                                                                                                                                   (tick relevant column)                                    INCLUDES.                        School Health & Nutrition Supervisor 
                                   (tick relevant column) 
         Sr. No          Location                         Good        Average       Poor                                      ITEMS                                      Yes           No     
         1               Boundary Wall                                                                 Signboards/Direction Board displayed                                                                              Sanctioned Posts          Filled Posts              Present 
         2               Lawns                                                                                           1) Organogram                                                                                                                                   
         3               Waiting Area                                                                  Display in        2)  Map  of  Union  council  showing  all                            
         4               Building                                                                      the MO/           localities                                                     
                                                                                                       Incharge                                                                                            Details regarding absence of Preventive / outreach staff. (Do not write anything if staff is present.) 
         5               Labour Room                                                                                     3)  Statistics  of  the  Union  Council  and                   
         6               Wards                                                                         office:           the BHU                                                                                                                             
         7               Toilets                                                                                         4) Tour Programme of `outreach team'                                                                                                     Type of Absence on the monitoring day.    Days of absence during last 
          
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sr. No 
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Designation                  Name of Staff                            (tick only one box)            three calendar months 
                                   D  AVAILBILITY OF UTILITIES                                                                       E  DISPOSAL OF HOSPITAL WASTE                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  UA      SL        OD      St. L  LC       UA            Other Types 
                                      (tick relevant column)                                                                               (tick relevant column)                            1                                                                                                               




52
         Sr.  No  Name of Utility                 Not                             Available                    Sr. No      Mode                                              Yes       No 
                                                  Available               Functional  Non                      1           Hospital  Waste  Segregated  as  per                              2                                                                                                               
                                                                                        Functional                         guidelines 
                                                                                                                                                                                             3                                                                                                               
         1           Electricity                                                                               2           Hospital Waste Lying Open                                    
         2           Telephone                                                                                 3                          (a) Incinerator                                     
         3           Water supply System                                                                                   Burnt by:      (b) Other means                               
         4           Sui Gas                                                                                   4           Buried                                                                                                                    L  ADMIN / SUPPORT STAFF 
         5           Sewerage System                                                                           5           Carried away by municipality                                 
         6           Other                                                                                     6           Any other (Please state)                                           
          
                                                                                                                                                                                             ADMIN / SUPPORT STAFF INCLUDES:  Computer Operator, Naib Qasid, Chowkidar, Mali, Sweeper 
                                                            F  PURCHI FEES (give amount) 
                                                                                                                                                                                              
         Fee  Deposited  during  the  current  financial  year  till  the  last  calendar  month:  (Rs.)  ________________________________ 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sanctioned Posts            Filled Posts                 Present 
         Purchi fee being charged @ Rs. ____________________________ per patient.  
                                       G  PATIENTS TREATED IN LAST CALENDAR MONTH (give numbers)                                                                                                                                                                                      
         Sr. No                           Cases                            Numbers          Sr. No.                              Cases                                           Numbers      
         1               OPD Cases                                                          7            Children vaccinated outside BHU                                                                     Details regarding absence of Admin/Support  staff. (Do not write anything if staff is present.) 
         2               Percentage  of  pervious  day  OPD                                 8            TB Patients under Treatment                                                                                                                       
                         Cases registered with NIC No.                                                                                                                                                                                                            Type of Absence on the monitoring day.    Days of absence during last 
         3               Deliveries at BHU                                                  9            Hepatitis "B" Vaccination Done                                                      Sr. No 
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Designation                  Name of Staff                            (tick only one box)            three calendar months 
         4               No. of PCD slides prepared                                         10           Antenatal Cases Checked                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  UA      SL        OD      St. L  LC       UA            Other Types 
         5               No. of referrals to other hospitals                                11           Family Planning Visits                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                             1                                                                                                               
         6               Children vaccinated at BHU                                         12           No. of referrals by LHW                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                             2                                                                                                               
                                                                                H SCHOOL HEALTH PROGRAM 
                                                                                                                                                                                             3                                                                                                               
          
               S. No.                                            Indicator                                                                                Numbers                             
         1                   Total Number of Students referred by SH&NS during previous month                                         
         2                   Total Numbers of student treated at BHU referred by SH&NS                                                                                                                                                M VACANT POSTS (please write full name of posts) 
         3.                  Total Numbers of School visited during previous month                                                    
         4.                  Tour program approved and displayed in DHQ                                                                                    Yes / No                           
                                                                                                                                                                                             Sr. No    Name of Post                           Number of Vacant          Sr. No.  Name of Post                         Number of Vacant 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Post                                                                    Posts 
                                                                                  I  DOCTORS (give numbers) 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                              Sanctioned Posts                    Filled Posts                   Present 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                            
                                          This doctor is posted in this BHU but is not present during the visit                                                                                                                                
                                    Details regarding absence of doctors. (Do not write anything if a doctor is present.)                                                                                                                      
         Sr. No          Designation                          Name of Doctors                       Type of Absence on the monitoring day.           Days of absence during last 
                                                                                                               (tick only one box)                   three calendar months                                                                     
                                                                                                   UA       SL        OD      St. L  LC              UA            Other Types 
         1               MO  WMO                                                                                                                                    
          
                 Unauthorized absence (UA), Sanctioned leave (SL), On official duty outside the BHY (OD), Short leave (St.L), Late Comer (LC).
          
                                                                          J PARAMEDICS (OTHER THAN DOCTORS) 
      
      
      
      
                                                           U  MONTHLY PERFORMANCE 
      
     Sr. No                                                                                                  Monthly Target        Performance 
     1         No of children given full immunization coverage                                                                  
     2         Daily OPD attendance                                                                                             
     3         Delivery coverage at facility                                                                                    
      
      

      
                                                                  V­ GENERAL REMARKS 
      
      




      
      
                      Time of Departure from the facility: Hours ________ Minutes ________      am      /      pm 
      
      
     Certified that this basic Health Unit was inspected today by the undersigned and the information stated above is as 
     per facts and record. 
                                                                    
      
      
      
      
     ______________                        ________________________________                                _________________ 
     Signature of DDOH/MEA                Signatures & Stamp of MO/Incharge                                         Signatures of DMO/EDOH 




53
F           Training Manual For Smartphone Application Use

                                                                                                              Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab



                                                                                                                                          CONTENTS




                         Manual
                           for                                                                          1.     Introduction ..................................................... 1
                Health Facility Information
                   Aggregation System                                                                   2.     About the phone .............................................. 3
                                                                                                        3.     About the application ...................................... 4
                                                                                                        3.1. How to update forms if notified ........................ 7
                                                                                                        3.2. How to fill a form ............................................ 10
                                                                                                        3.2.1.         How to fill a BHU form ........................... 11
                                                                                                        3.2.2.         How to fill an RHC form ......................... 20
                                                                                                        3.2.3.         How to fill a THQ form ........................... 30
                                                                                                        3.2.4.         How to fill a DHQ form ........................... 39
                      Directorate General Health Services

                                                                                                        3.3. How to submit completed forms ..................... 48
                                 Supported By

                    Punjab Health Sector Reforms Program




           Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab                    Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab

                                                      officers, such as Executive District Health       as details of how to submit data and deal
       1. INTRODUCTION                                Officers (EDOs), District Health Officers         with some problems that may arise.
                                                      (DOs), and Deputy District Health
                                                      Officers (DDOs), who have been tasked
                                                      with the collection of performance related
    The Health Department of Government of            data from Basic Health Units (BHUs),
    the Punjab is committed to adopting state-        Rural Health Centers (RHCs) and Tehsil
    of-the-art technology to strengthen               and District Headquarters (THQs and
    governance and improve service delivery           DHQs).
    for all citizens.
                                                      The report submitted by these officers
    For this purpose, the Punjab Health Sector        through the phone will be recorded on a
    Reforms Program (PHSRP), with                     website and automatically analyzed for
    technical assistance from International           use by managers at various levels. It is
    Growth Centre (IGC) Team, is supporting           expected that this information will
    DGHS and district health managers in              become a powerful tool for management
    strengthening the internal monitoring             both for district and central level officials.
    system of the Health Department. This is          This is expected to bring about marked
    being done by introducing a mobile phone          improvement in health service delivery
    based information management system               management, particularly at primary and
    that is being rolled out across different         secondary levels of healthcare, leading to
    districts of the province.                        better health outcomes for the poor and
                                                      disadvantaged in the province.
    This initiative will improve the internal
    information transmission within the               At Directorate General Health Services,
    Health Department and will ensure that            Director, District Health Information
    timely, authentic and actionable                  System (DHIS), supported by the PHSRP
    information is sent quickly from                  and IGC team, is the focal person for
    individual facilities to district and             implementation of the program at the
    provincial health managers on such                provincial level. Overall responsibility for
    crucially important issues as absenteeism,        the program at the district level lies with
    medicine stock outs, availability and             EDOs, and Statistical Officers (SOs) are
    functionality of equipment etc.                   the designated focal persons for managing
                                                      the system at the district level.
    Android-based smartphones have been
                                                      This manual contains basic information
    provided to those district supervisory
                                                      about the program and the phone, as well
                                                  1                                                                                                   2




                                                                                                       54
               Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab                     Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab



                2. ABOUT THE                               With a 600 MHz processor based on the                     3. ABOUT THE
                                                           latest mobile technology, 512 MB of
                PHONE                                      RAM and a 2 GB SD card, the phone is                      APPLICATION
                                                           well equipped to deal with advanced
                                                           tasks associated with smart-phones
                                                           today.
                                                                                                             The Android application is very intuitive
                                                           The phone can be used for                         and simple to use. Before running the
                                                           browsing the internet using either                application, you must ensure that you are
                                                           GPRS or WIFI. It is also equipped                 connected to the internet and the GPS is
                                                           with a GPS device and a 3 MP                      switched on. To confirm that you are
                                                           camera which can capture high-                    connected to the internet, tap the
                                                           resolution images and videos.                     `Internet' icon on the home screen to
                                                                                                             launch the phone browser and try opening
                                                                                                             any webpage (e.g. yahoo.com); if the               Choose `Wireless & networks' from the
        The HTC Explorer runs on Android 2.3.5             For detailed instructions regarding               webpage opens up, it means you are                 list of settings that appear on the screen.
        with HTC's latest custom interface -               how to undertake different tasks                  connected to the internet. In this case, tap
        Sense 3.0, and is equipped with a 3.2 inch         on the phone and a comprehensive                  the phone's `HOME' capacitive touch
        capacitive touch screen.                           guide to unlocking the full                       button to return to the home screen. To
                                                           potential of the device, please visit             confirm if GPRS (internet) is enabled or
                                                           the following website:                            not, tap the phone's `MENU' capacitive
        The phone has 4 capacitive touch buttons                                                             touch button while on the home screen
        on the front- HOME, MENU, BACK and                 http://www.htc.com/uk/help/htc-                   and select `Settings' tab that pops on the
        SEARCH.                                            explorer/#overview                                bottom right of the screen, as shown
                                                                                                             below:

                                                           If you encounter any further
                                                           problems while using the phone,
                                                           please contact the helpline given
                                                           at the end of this document.

                                                                                                                                                                Then scroll down the page to check
                                                                                                                                                                whether the option of `Mobile network' is
                                                                                                                                                                selected or not.




                                                       3                                                                                                    4




       Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab                    Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab

                                                                                                    In order to start making entries, the
                                                                                                    application needs to first download the
                                                                                                    relevant forms. There are four forms for
                                                                                                    each district; one for each type of facility-
                                                                                                    BHU, RHC, THQ and DHQ. For the case
                                                                                                    of the phones handed out, the relevant
                                                                                                    forms have already been downloaded.
                                                                                                    However, in case there are any revisions
                                                                                                    made, all concerned officials will be
                                                                                                    notified that the forms will have to be
                                                                                                    updated. Do not delete the forms unless
                                                                                                    you are formally notified to do so.



If it is selected, as shown, then the GPRS        Once it is confirmed that the phone is
is switched on. If not, switch it on by           connected to the internet and the GPS is
checking this option. Confirm again by            switched on, tap the PHSRP icon on the
returning to the home screen by tapping           home screen to start the application.
"HOME" and opening any webpage using
the phone's browser. If it still does not         The application main screen has three
open, report the issue on the helpline            buttons- `Start New Form', `Send
given at the bottom of this document. If          Finished Forms' and `Manage
the website opens, go back to the home            Application'- as shown below:
screen.

To check if the GPS is on or off, check
the power control widget on the main
screen (the dark grey bar at the top with
five large symbols); if the GPS symbol is
highlighted, as shown below, the GPS is
on. If not, tap the GPS symbol to toggle it
on, before starting the application.




                                              5                                                                                                     6




                                                                                                   55
                Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab                         Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab


            3.1. How to update
                 forms if notified

         To update the forms on the application if
         you are notified to do so, tap the
         `Manage Application' button.
         Considering Pakpattan as an example, the
         following screen will be displayed:




                                                           Tap `Delete Items' to confirm and the                  If you encounter an error at this point, it         Then, tap `Get Selected' to download the
                                                           selected forms will be deleted. If all the             means you are not connected to the                  updated forms of your district. Once the
                                                           forms are deleted, the following screen                internet. Ensure that you are connected to          forms are successfully downloaded, the
                                                           will be displayed:                                     the internet by following the instructions          following screen will be displayed:
                                                                                                                  given previously and try again. If you
                                                                                                                  encounter an error again, report the issue
                                                                                                                  immediately on the helpline given at the
                                                                                                                  end of this document. If there is no error
                                                                                                                  and the above screen is displayed, scroll
                                                                                                                  vertically to find the forms of your district
                                                                                                                  and select them all by tapping the
         Select all the forms, or just the ones that                                                              checkboxes on their right as shown:
         you need to update as notified, by tapping
         on the checkboxes on the right, and tap
         the `Delete Selected' button at the bottom
         right. A confirmation will be displayed as
         follows:


                                                           Now, tap `Get New Forms', to retrieve                                                                      If there is some sort of error at this point,
                                                           the updated forms. The application will                                                                    try downloading the forms again. If you
                                                           use the internet to list the updated forms                                                                 are still unsuccessful, report the issue on
                                                           of all districts for download as follows:                                                                  the helpline to get an immediate solution.

                                                       7                                                                                                          8




       Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab                         Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab

If all forms are successfully downloaded
and the above screen is displayed, tap
                                                                                                             3.2. How to fill a
`OK' and the following screen will be                                                                             form
displayed:



                                                                                                         At this point, it is important to note that
                                                                                                         completing a form and submitting a form
                                                                                                         are two different tasks that are performed
                                                                                                         separately. Filling a form does not require
                                                                                                         an internet connection, so you can enter
                                                                                                         data from your inspection visits and save
                                                                                                         the completed forms regardless of
                                                                                                         whether the internet is working or not.
                                                                                                         However, submitting the forms requires              Before moving on, it is important to note
                                                                                                         an internet connection.                             that if you want to close or discard the
                                                                                                                                                             entry at any point before saving and
                                                                                                         To start filling a form, tap the `Start New
                                                                                                                                                             exiting, tap the BACK capacitive button
                                                                                                         Form' button from the main screen of the
                                                                                                                                                             on the phone and choose `discard entry'.
                                                                                                         application.
                                                                                                                                                             If you tap BACK by mistake, simply tap
Tap the phone's `BACK' capacitive touch                                                                                                                      `Cancel' on the dialogue box that pops
button at the bottom of the screen to get to                                                                                                                 up.
the main screen of the application again.                                                                                                                    Furthermore, if you accidentally tap the
You are all set to continue to making and                                                                                                                    phone's `HOME' capacitive touch button
submitting entries now.                                                                                                                                      and end up at the home screen while
                                                                                                                                                             filling in the form, simply tap the PHSRP
                                                                                                                                                             application icon again to load the
                                                                                                                                                             application again and it will return you to
                                                                                                                                                             the screen you were previously at in the
                                                                                                                                                             form with all previous entries made on the
                                                                                                                                                             form intact.




                                                                                                         The following screen will be displayed,
                                                                                                         prompting you to choose the type of
                                                                                                         facility:
                                               9                                                                                                        10




                                                                                                        56
                Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab                          Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab


             3.2.1. How to fill a                             Scroll laterally, as instructed, to start                                                               Scroll vertically to find and choose the
                                                              filling in the form. The next screen will                                                               specific facility you are visiting, and
                  BHU form                                    allow you to choose the Tehsil in which                                                                 scroll laterally to move to the next screen:
                                                              the BHU is located, as shown below:


         To fill a BHU form, choose the BHU
         form from the list shown above and the
         following screen will be displayed,
         instructing how to navigate through the
         form:




                                                                                                                   You will have to select one of the options
                                                                                                                   and then scroll laterally to move to the
                                                                                                                   next screen. The next screen will require
                                                                                                                   you to choose the BHU you are visiting
                                                                                                                   from a list of all the BHUs present in that        This screen relates to the availability
                                                              It is important to note at this time that            Tehsil. For demonstration, we select the           status of the Medical Officer at the
                                                              some screens require at least one entry by           Tehsil of Arifwala and scroll to the next          facility. An important thing to note here is
                                                              the user, and you will not be able to move           screen. The following list is displayed:           that for all non-PRSP districts, the last
                                                              forward in the form unless it is made. To                                                               option will not be shown on this screen as
                                                              demonstrate, if you attempt to move                                                                     it does not apply to them. As Pakpattan is
                                                              forward in the form by scrolling laterally                                                              a PRSP district, the `Gone to other BHU'
                                                              when it prompts you to enter the Tehsil in                                                              option is available on the form.
         It is important to note here that you will           which the facility is located, the following
         be able to scroll back and forth within the          message will appear on the screen:                                                                      Another important thing to note here is
         form to check or change your entries                                                                                                                         that all officers are required to make these
         before you complete the form, by                                                                                                                             entries from the perspective of a citizen
         scrolling laterally in one direction or the                                                                                                                  visiting the facility- so even if the MO is
         other, but whenever you scroll to a screen                                                                                                                   on official leave or out on some official
         that requires numerical input from the                                                                                                                       business at the time of the inspection
         keypad that pops up (as explained later),                                                                                                                    visit, he/she would be marked absent.
         all numerical entries will be cleared and                                                                                                                    However, officers would also be required
         you will have to re-enter them.                                                                                                                              to take a note regarding the reason for
                                                                                                                                                                      absence of the MO in their diaries for
                                                                                                                                                                      such exceptional cases.
                                                         11                                                                                                      12




       Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab                           Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab

For demonstration, we choose Present and
scroll laterally to the next screen:




                                                     Scroll vertically and mark all the tablets                                                              The next screen will require you to mark
                                                     that are out of stock at the BHU. If all                                                                all equipment that is not functional.
                                                     tablets are present, scroll laterally to the                                                            Unavailable equipment will also be
                                                     next screen without marking any                                                                         marked as non-functional:
This screen requires you to check all the            checkbox.
people not present at the BHU. As                    Repeat the same procedure for
mentioned for the case of the MO, the                `Injections', `Syrups' and `Other
officer will mark people absent based on             Medicines' in the subsequent screens as
the perspective of a visiting citizen- if            shown:
someone is out on official business or on
official leave or even if the position is not
filled etc., the position holder will be
marked as absent, and a note will be made
in the officer's diary about the reason for
absence for these exceptional cases.

If all the staff is present, you can scroll
laterally to move to the next screen
without marking any checkbox on this
screen. The next screen requires you to                                                                                                                      Leave the screen unmarked if all
mark tablets not available at the facility,                                                                                                                  equipment is available and functional, and
as shown:                                                                                                                                                    scroll laterally to the next screen.


                                                13                                                                                                      14




                                                                                                             57
                Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab                            Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab

         The next screen will require you to tap in          The next screen will require you to enter
         numerical values for the number of OPD              the mobile numbers of any two
         cases last month, number of deliveries last         randomly selected delivery patients from
         month and number of Antenatal cases last            the BHU records from last month. The
         month. A keypad will pop up at the                  entry fields are designed to detect invalid
         bottom automatically so that you can                numbers, and the application will not let
         enter the numbers. Tap on the entry bar of          you move to the next screen unless you
         the next field to enter its number after you        enter two valid mobile numbers.
         are done with the first one, and then move
         on to the third one after you are done with
         the second one. All three fields must be
         filled in order to move to the next screen.
         To get to the third field, you will have to
         scroll vertically lower down the page.
         While scrolling, ensure that you are                                                                        Once the numbers are entered, scroll                This screen will require you to mark
         avoiding the keypad, as scrolling over the
                                                                                                                     laterally to move to the next screen:               which information was displayed in the
         keypad will not work.                                                                                                                                           BHU. Leave the screen unmarked and
                                                                                                                                                                         scroll laterally to the next screen if none
                                                                                                                                                                         of these were displayed at the facility.




                                                             Once the two mobile numbers are entered,
                                                             scroll laterally to move to the next screen.

                                                             The next screen will require you to enter
                                                             mobile numbers of any two randomly
                                                             selected ANC patients from last month.
                                                             The entry fields on this page are also
                                                             designed to detect invalid numbers, and
                                                             the application will not let you move to
                                                             the next screen unless you enter two valid              Choose the most appropriate option and
         Once all three entries are filled, scroll                                                                   scroll laterally to move to the next screen.
         laterally to move to the next screen. Once          mobile numbers.
         again, ensure that you avoid the keypad as                                                                                                                      Mark the options appropriately and scroll
         scrolling laterally over the keypad will not                                                                                                                    laterally to move to the next screen.
         work.

                                                        15                                                                                                          16




       Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab                             Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab

The next screen will require you to take a                                                                                                                      previous screen. Once there, scroll
clear picture of yourself with the essential                                                                                                                    laterally again to move to the next screen:
staff present at the BHU, as shown below:




                                                    When the picture is taken, you will be                   Scroll laterally to move forward. If,
                                                    given the option of retaking it if you are               instead, you want to view the picture in
                                                    not satisfied with it. Tap the camera icon               full screen again, tap the picture preview
                                                    on the right to load the camera again and                box at the bottom, and you will be able to
Tap the `Take Picture' button to load the           take a better picture, as shown below:                   view it in full screen:
camera. For better picture quality, it is                                                                                                                       Tap `Record Location' and the phone will
advisable to take the picture indoors and                                                                                                                       record its location using GPS, network
have someone take it for you. To take the                                                                                                                       information and GPRS. It is advisable to
picture, have that person tap the silver                                                                                                                        move outdoors to record location as GPS
button in the centre-bottom of the screen,                                                                                                                      signals are stronger outdoors. While you
as shown below:                                                                                                                                                 wait for the location to be recorded, you
                                                                                                                                                                might see the accuracy radius values
                                                                                                                                                                decreasing gradually:




                                                    Once you are satisfied with the picture,                 Tap the phone's `BACK' capacitive touch
                                                    tap the `Done' button on the left, and you               button at the bottom to return to the
                                                    will be taken to the following screen:

                                               17                                                                                                          18




                                                                                                            58
       Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab                     Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab

                                                   again. If, still, the phone is unable to
                                                   record its location, contact the helpline
                                                                                                        3.3. How to submit
                                                   immediately for quick resolution. Once                    completed forms
                                                   the location is recorded, the above screen
                                                   will be displayed. To move forward,
                                                   scroll laterally again to get to the
                                                   following screen:                                 Once you have completed the form (after
                                                                                                     pressing the `Save Form and Exit'
                                                                                                     button), it needs to be submitted. After
                                                                                                     completing the form, tap the `Send
                                                                                                     Finished Forms' button on the application
                                                                                                     main screen:



When accuracy radius falls to 5 m, the                                                                                                                 If the submission was successful, a
following screen will be displayed:                                                                                                                    message will appear saying so, and the
                                                                                                                                                       respective completed forms will vanish
                                                                                                                                                       from this list. If all were selected and
                                                                                                                                                       successfully sent, all will disappear. Tap
                                                                                                                                                       the phone's `BACK' capacitive button to
                                                                                                                                                       return to the application's main screen.

                                                   Tap `Save Form and Exit' to complete the                                                            If there is any error in submission, it can
                                                   entry. A message will be displayed                                                                  be because of the internet not working. In
                                                   notifying you that the form was saved                                                               that case, confirm if the internet is
                                                   successfully and you will be taken back to                                                          working and try submitting the form/s
                                                   the main screen of the application.                                                                 again. If you are still unsuccessful, report
                                                                                                     This will take you to a screen where all          your issue on the helpline given at the end
                                                                                                     your completed and un-submitted forms             of this document.
                                                                                                     are listed. Select the one you would like         Tap the phone's `HOME' capacitive
                                                                                                     to submit or select all if you want to            touch button to exit the application and
GPS satellites are not always in range                                                               submit all, and tap the `Send Selected'           return to the home screen of the phone
hence it might take some time for the                                                                button on the bottom right of the screen.         once you have successfully submitted the
phone to narrow down its location. If,                                                                                                                 forms.
even after waiting for five to ten minutes,
the phone is unable to record its location,
ensure that the GPS is toggled on and try
                                                                                                                                                       Helpline: 0308 4091080
                                              19                                                                                                  48




                                                                                                59
G     Training Manuals For Dashboard Use

                                                                                               Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab


                                                                                                                                 CONTENTS




                                                                                                   1. Introduction.......................................................................... 1
                                       Manual
                                        For                                                        2. The Dashboard ..................................................................... 3
                Health Facility Information
                                                                                                   2.1.          The District Level ...................................................... 5
                   Management System
                   (Online Dashboard)                                                              2.1.1.           Compliance Status ................................................. 5

                                                                                                   2.1.2.           Facility Status ........................................................ 8

                                                                                                   2.1.3.           Recent Visits ........................................................ 11

                                                                                                   2.1.4.           Indicators ............................................................. 12

                                                                                                   2.1.5.           Time Trend Charts ............................................... 14

                                                                                                   2.1.6.           Photo Verification ............................................... 16

                                                                                                   2.1.7.           Map ...................................................................... 17

                                                                                                   2.2.          The Provincial Level ............................................... 20

                                                                                                   2.2.1.           Compliance Status ............................................... 20

                                                                                                   2.2.2.           Facility Status ...................................................... 22

                       Directorate General Health Services                                         2.2.3.           Indicators ............................................................. 23
                                  Supported By
                                                                                                   2.2.4.           Time Trend Charts ............................................... 24
              Punjab Health Sector Reforms Program (PHSRP)                                         Appendix ................................................................................. 26
                    International Growth Centre (IGC)
             Lahore University of Management Sciences (LUMS)




       Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab           Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab


                                                                                               At Directorate General Health Services, Director, District Health Information
       1. Introduction                                                                         System (DHIS), supported by the PHSRP and IGC team, is the focal person
                                                                                               for implementation of the program at the provincial level. Overall
                                                                                               responsibility for the program at the district level lies with EDOs, and
    The Health Department of Government of the Punjab is committed to                          Statistical Officers (SOs) are the designated focal persons for managing the
    adopting state-of-the-art technology to strengthen governance and improve                  system at the district level.
    service delivery for all citizens.
                                                                                               This manual explains what information is available on the online dashboard
    For this purpose, the Punjab Health Sector Reforms Program (PHSRP), with                   and how it is displayed, to help managers at different levels to utilize this
    technical assistance from International Growth Centre (IGC) Team, is                       powerful tool to its full potential in order to improve health care in the
    supporting DGHS and district health managers in strengthening the internal                 province.
    monitoring system of the Health Department. This is being done by
    introducing a mobile phone based, online information management system.

    This initiative will improve the internal information transmission within the
    Health Department and will ensure that timely, authentic and actionable
    information is sent quickly from individual facilities to district and provincial
    health managers on such crucially important issues as absenteeism, medicine
    stock outs, availability and functionality of equipment etc.

    Android-based smartphones have been provided to those district supervisory
    officers, such as Executive District Health Officers (EDOs), District Health
    Officers (DOs), and Deputy District Health Officers (DDOs), who have been
    tasked with the collection of performance related data from Basic Health
    Units (BHUs), Rural Health Centers (RHCs) and Tehsil and District
    Headquarters (THQs and DHQs).

    The report submitted by these officers through the phone will be recorded on
    a website, known as the `Dashboard', and automatically analyzed for use by
    managers at various levels. It is expected that this information will become a
    powerful tool for management both for district and central level officials.
    This is expected to bring about marked improvement in health service
    delivery management, particularly at primary and secondary levels of
    healthcare, leading to better health outcomes for the poor and disadvantaged
    in the province.



                                              1                                                                                               2




                                                                                          60
            Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab                   Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab


                                                                                                            As shown in Figure 2, the blue bar near the top of the page contains all the
             2. The Dashboard                                                                               major sections of the dashboard, allowing you to effortlessly navigate from
                                                                                                            one part of the online tool to another.

                                                                                                            One major feature of this tool is the `Print' button/icon which is located to
         The online dashboard can be accessed any time over the internet through the                        the right, just below the blue bar. Clicking this allows you to take a snapshot
         following link:                                                                                    of whatever is currently being displayed on the dashboard and print it out.

         punjabmodel.gov.pk/phsrp/dashboard                                                                 It is important to note that there are two levels of access for the dashboard-
                                                                                                            the district level and the provincial level. All DCOs, EDOs, DOs and DDOs
         When you open the link, the following page will be displayed, prompting
                                                                                                            have access to the district level but not the provincial level, ergo when they
         you to enter your username and password, and giving you the option of
                                                                                                            log in, they are shown the district level by default. The relevant higher up
         saving these credentials for automatic login the next time you open the link,
                                                                                                            senior officers, however, have access to the district level as well as the
         as shown in Figure 1.
                                                                                                            provincial level, so when they log in, their default view is the provincial
         Figure 1                                                                                           level, but they can also choose to access the district level by choosing from a
                                                                                                            drop down list of districts near the top of the webpage.




         To access the dashboard, you have to enter the unique username and
         password already communicated to you and click on `Login'. Once
         successfully logged in, you can also change your password for the dashboard
         by accessing the Change Password section in the blue bar. When you are
         done using the dashboard, you can click on `Logout' to end the session.

         Figure 2




                                                    3                                                                                                  4




   Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab                   Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab



   2.1. The District Level                                                                          Figure 3




   2.1.1. Compliance Status



The first page that is displayed when you log in the dashboard is the
Compliance Status section. Officers can use this section to track their
compliance performance for the current month as well the months before.
They can also gauge their current standing compared to fellow health
officers in the district with respect to compliance.

The most prominent characteristics of this page are the 2 bar charts and the
table below them.

The first bar chart represents the percentage compliance of all the health
officers in the district for the last calendar month, disaggregated by facility
type. This is calculated as follows:

Percentage compliance= (total visits performed last month / visits assigned
last month) x 100

The bars are color coded by facility type, as explained by the legend
displayed on the page. Compliance is 100% if the officer performed 100% of
the visits assigned to him or more.

The second bar chart represents the percentage coverage of all health officers
in the district for the last calendar month, disaggregated by facility type.
This is calculated as follows:

Percentage coverage= (1 ­ (no. of assigned facilities not visited by any
officer last month/ facility count)) x 100

Once again, the bars are color coded by facility type, as explained by the
legend displayed on the page, as shown in Figure 3.




                                          5                                                                                                  6




                                                                                               61
            Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab                    Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab


         The distinction between what the two charts convey is important and is                              If you are interested to see compliance figures for months before the last
         easily explainable using an example. Suppose there are 10 facilities in an                          calendar month, you can click on the `View Detailed Report' hyperlinked
         officer's jurisdiction and he is assigned a total of 10 visits. If he visits every                  text located near the top of the page.
         single facility once, his compliance as well as his coverage will be 100%. If
         he visits only 1 facility 10 times during the month, his compliance will still                      Note: Should you find that a visit to a particular facility is not being
         be 100% but his coverage will be 10%. Similarly, suppose if the assigned                            displayed on the dashboard despite being successfully submitted from the
         visits are 20 and the facility count is still 10; if he visits each facility once                   Android smart phone allotted to you, please convey it immediately at the
         (leading to a total of 10 visits), his compliance will be 50% but his coverage                      helpline given at the end of this document.
         will be 100%. Officers should strive for 100% compliance as well as the
         maximum possible coverage (which can be less than 100% only in cases
         where facility count exceeds the number of assigned visits).                                            2.1.2. Facility Status

         The table below the charts gives detailed information regarding compliance
         figures. The `+' icon before every officer's designation in the `Supervisory
                                                                                                             The Facility Status section gives you a list of all the facilities in the district,
         Officer' column can be clicked to expand the table to show information
                                                                                                             arranged by the date of last visit with the oldest visited at the top. It is
         disaggregated by facility type. The information displayed in the table
                                                                                                             designed to enable you to keep track of facilities that are being neglected.
         includes the facility count, monthly assigned visits, unique and total visits
                                                                                                             The facilities are color coded, according to the legend displayed on the page,
         performed during the current month, unique and total visits performed last
                                                                                                             as shown in Figure 5.
         month, and the percentage compliance for last month, for every officer in the
         district, disaggregated by facility type as well as in total.                                       Figure 5
         For cases in which compliance in the last calendar month is low, the table is
         highlighted red, as shown in Figure 4.

         Figure 4




         The last column provides hyper links, allowing you to jump directly to the
         relevant entries in the `Recent Visits' section. The Recent Visits section will
         be explained in detail later on.




                                                    7                                                                                                   8




   Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab                    Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab


The page has different tabs for the different facility types. Each tab displays                     Clicking on the icon in the Recent Visits column for any facility, instead,
a table which displays the facility name, the Tehsil/Town it is located in, the                     will take you to the Recent Visits section showing you a list of all entries
designation of the officer who last visited the facility, the date of the last visit                made for that facility, as shown in Figure 7.
and the number of days since the last visit. The corresponding columns also
have filters in-built that allow you to view selective information if you                           Figure 7
choose to.

The table also contains a column for Summary Report. Clicking the icon in
this column for any row will take you to a page displaying details regarding
the last visit to the facility as well as the second last visit, in addition to
Tehsil variable averages (from 30 days from the last visit). Figure 6 shows a
cropped screenshot of the page.

Figure 6




                                                                                                    Officers should ensure that all the facilities listed in the Facility Status
                                                                                                    section are green- some can be blue for cases in which the facility count is
                                                                                                    more than the assigned visits. Orange or red rows represent neglected
                                                                                                    facilities and they should be visited as soon as possible.




                                          9                                                                                                  10




                                                                                               62
            Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab                    Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab


             2.1.3. Recent Visits                                                                            Some of the entries in the table might be highlighted red, as shown in the
                                                                                                             above screenshot. These represent facilities where significant staff absence
                                                                                                             was reported. The table also allows you to display only the highlighted
         The Recent Visits section lists all entries as they come in, with the latest                        entries or the non-highlighted entries separately, in addition to displaying
         submitted on top. There are different tabs for different facility types. Each                       them all together. The drop down filter for the column labeled `Absence' can
         facility type tab contains a date filter, which allows you to view entries                          be used to toggle between the selections.
         submitted during a particular time period, and a table consisting of entries, as                    The table also contains information that includes the facility name, the
         shown:                                                                                              Tehsil/Town it is located in, the visiting officer, the date of visit, the
         Figure 8                                                                                            availability status of the MO and the availability status of other staff. It also
                                                                                                             provides filters for all these categories for selective searches.

                                                                                                             The Summary Report icon at the end of every entry in the table can lead you
                                                                                                             to a page displaying details regarding the last visit to the facility as well as
                                                                                                             the second last visit, in addition to Tehsil/Town variable averages (from 30
                                                                                                             days from the last visit) as already depicted in Figure 6.

                                                                                                             As already mentioned, should you find that a visit to a particular facility is
                                                                                                             not being displayed on the dashboard despite being successfully submitted
                                                                                                             from the Android smart phone allotted to you, please convey it immediately
                                                                                                             at the helpline given at the end of this document.



                                                                                                                 2.1.4. Indicators



                                                                                                             The Indicators section displays charts comparing performance of the
                                                                                                             different Tehsils/Towns based on the various indicators reported during
                                                                                                             facility visits. Once again, there are different tabs for different facility types,
                                                                                                             and different indicators, in some cases, for different tabs. The following
                                                                                                             screenshot should give you an idea of what the page looks like:



         To view entries submitted between certain dates, choose the start and end
         dates from the drop down calendars displayed by clicking on the two white
         text boxes immediately below the facility type tabs respectively, and click
         the `Filter by Period' button.

                                                   11                                                                                                  12




   Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab                    Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab


Figure 9                                                                                            menu, click `Done', and then click the `Update' button located to the
                                                                                                    immediate right.

                                                                                                    Most indicators in the list have multiple charts that are displayed when you
                                                                                                    click on any one of them. All charts have descriptive labels that clearly
                                                                                                    indicate what they represent. Tables 1 through 4 in the appendix show how
                                                                                                    the charts are arranged for each facility type.

                                                                                                    These charts can prove to be a very powerful tool for Tehsil-wise
                                                                                                    comparison based on the different performance related indicators. However,
                                                                                                    if taken in isolation, interpretations derived from them may be misleading.
                                                                                                    For example, if Tehsil `A' shows 0% MO absence while Tehsil `B' shows
                                                                                                    20% MO absence, it doesn't necessarily imply that Tehsil `A' is better in
                                                                                                    MO attendance than Tehsil `B'. It is possible that only a single visit was
                                                                                                    performed in Tehsil `A' in the entire month- during which the MO was
                                                                                                    present- while, out of the 10 visits performed in Tehsil `B', the MO was
                                                                                                    absent in only 2. Ergo, the information displayed in the charts should always
                                                                                                    be interpreted while considering compliance figures.



                                                                                                       2.1.5. Time Trend Charts

It is important to note that while there are multiple BHUs, RHCs and THQs
in each district, the number of DHQs is one or zero. Hence, instead of a
comparison across Tehsils/Towns as for the case of BHUs, RHCs and THQs,                             The Time Trend Charts section contains line graphs representing the change
the DHQ section compares DHQs across districts. Furthermore, all                                    over time in all the indicators of the different facility types present in the
indicator charts that display data expressed in percentages in the DHQ                              Indicators section as shown in Tables 1, 2, 3 and 4 in the appendix. The
section have an additional red bar which reflects percentage compliance in                          general layout of this section is very similar to that of the Indicators section,
every district. The compliance bars are intended to be a gauge of how many                          with the same indicator tabs and option to select a different month for all
visits' data is used to derive the charts- ergo, the higher the compliance, the                     facility types. However, there is one key difference; the charts contain two
more reflective is the value of the variable of the actual situation in the                         lines- a thin one representing the district average and a thick one representing
corresponding district.                                                                             the provincial average- allowing you to compare the average district
                                                                                                    performance on each indicator to the provincial average, over time, instead
For all tabs, there is a text box allowing you to choose which month you                            of comparing across Tehsils/Towns of the same district. Figure 10 shows
want to see the data for. The page displays charts for the last calendar month                      how the webpage might look.
by default. If you want to access charts for some previous month, you need
to click on the white text box, select the month and year from the drop down


                                         13                                                                                                  14




                                                                                               63
            Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab                    Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab


         Figure 10                                                                                               2.1.6. Photo Verification



                                                                                                             To verify staff presence, the smart-phone Performa requires officers to take
                                                                                                             pictures of the essential staff present at the facility they are visiting. The
                                                                                                             Photo Verification section displays all these, sorted by the most recent visit,
                                                                                                             by officer designation. Figure 11 shows the layout of the page.

                                                                                                             Figure 11




         You can also compare the performance of any Tehsil/Town compared to the
         district average over time. This can be done by clicking the drop down
         button near the top of the page and selecting the Tehsil/Town you want to
         compare with the district average. In the charts that will be displayed as a
         result, the thick line would represent the district's average and the thin line
         would represent the Tehsil/Town average.                                                            You can view the full size version of any picture by clicking on it. Health
                                                                                                             officers responsible for supervision of BHUs, RHCs, THQs and DHQs are
         These charts can prove to be very useful in observing and comparing trends
                                                                                                             advised that the pictures submitted should not be blurry or unclear in any
         in different indicators over time, at the provincial, district, as well as the
                                                                                                             way for the convenience and effectiveness of photo verification.
         Tehsil/Town level.




                                                   15                                                                                                  16




   Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab                    Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab


   2.1.7. Map                                                                                       Figure 13

When you click on the tab for the Map section, a separate window (or tab,
depending on your browser) will open, displaying a map of Pakistan and its
surrounding areas as shown in Figure 12.

Figure 12




                                                                                                    You can zoom further in or out using the zooming tool in the upper left
                                                                                                    corner of the map. The map also allows you to show or hide District and
                                                                                                    Tehsil boundaries, and even switch between Map and Satellite view.
                                                                                                    Furthermore, the date filter allows you to see only those entries submitted
                                                                                                    during a certain time period.
For completing an entry for a facility visit, the smart-phone Performa
                                                                                                    Clicking on any place-mark reveals a few details regarding the entry that
requires the supervisory officer to record the location of the facility using the
                                                                                                    include the supervisory officer's designation, the date the entry was made,
phone's GPS. All successfully submitted entries show up on this map when
                                                                                                    the start and end time of the visit and a link to the picture taken for the entry,
you zoom down to individual district.
                                                                                                    as shown in Figure 14.
In order to view entries for any district, you need to click on the relevant
district tab from the list on the left. Once you zoom in, all the relevant entries
will show up as place-marks color-coded with respect to the facility type, as
shown in Figure 13.




                                         17                                                                                                  18




                                                                                               64
            Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab                    Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab


        Figure 14                                                                                                2.2. The Provincial Level


                                                                                                             As already mentioned, when you log in to the dashboard with an account that
                                                                                                             has provincial level access as well as district level access, your default view
                                                                                                             of the dashboard is the provincial level view. However you can access the
                                                                                                             district level view for any district by choosing it from the drop down list that
                                                                                                             appears when you click the `Punjab' button, which is right below the blue
                                                                                                             bar near the top of the page.

                                                                                                             The Recent Visits and Photo Verification sections in the provincial level
                                                                                                             view are blank as the usefulness of a combined list of entries or verification
                                                                                                             pictures coming in from all districts is very limited.

                                                                                                             Apart from that, the Map section for both the levels is exactly the same.



                                                                                                                 2.2.1. Compliance Status

        The map allows for spatial review of the coverage and compliance in the
        District or Tehsil/Town, which can prove to be very useful for circumstances
                                                                                                             Once again, the first page displayed after a successful login is the
        in which information regarding the location and spread of the facilities is
                                                                                                             Compliance Status section. This is just like the Compliance Status section in
        crucial.
                                                                                                             the district level view except that instead of a comparison across
                                                                                                             Tehsils/Towns in a district, you have a comparison of compliance across
                                                                                                             districts.

                                                                                                             The bars in the two charts are color-coded in the same way as in the district
                                                                                                             level view, and the table below the charts gives detailed information
                                                                                                             regarding compliance figures for districts, rather than supervisory officer.
                                                                                                             Again, the `+' icon can be clicked to expand the table to show information
                                                                                                             disaggregated by facility type. The information displayed in the table
                                                                                                             includes the facility count, monthly assigned visits, unique and total visits
                                                                                                             performed during the current month, unique and total visits performed last
                                                                                                             month, and the percentage compliance for last month, for every district,
                                                                                                             disaggregated by facility type as well as in total.

                                                                                                             Figure 15 shows how the page might look like.

                                                  19                                                                                                   20




  Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab                     Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab


Figure 15                                                                                           Districts with low compliance in the last calendar month will be highlighted
                                                                                                    in red. The last column provides hyperlinks, allowing you to jump directly to
                                                                                                    the relevant entries in the `Recent Visits' section, as in the district level view.

                                                                                                    Moreover, if you are interested to see compliance figures for months before
                                                                                                    the last calendar month, you can click on the `View Detailed Report'
                                                                                                    hyperlinked text located near the top of the page, in same way.

                                                                                                    This section is very useful for senior officials to track the compliance and
                                                                                                    coverage status of all districts and compare them if need be.



                                                                                                        2.2.2. Facility Status



                                                                                                    The Facility Status section in the provincial level view is radically different
                                                                                                    from that in the district level view, as apparent from Figure 16.

                                                                                                    Figure 16




                                        21                                                                                                   22




                                                                                               65
            Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab           Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab


         The page displays a single bar chart representing the percentage of facilities             Figure 17
         that are being neglected in each district. The bars are color-coded based on
         the facility type.

         The criterion for a facility to be considered neglected is that it is not visited
         by any supervisory officer in the current month as well as the last two
         calendar months. Senior officials can easily identify which district has the
         highest percentage and take appropriate measures to rectify the situation.



             2.2.3. Indicators



         The Indicators section in the province level view is very similar to that in the
         district level view in terms of layout and structure. The variables are exactly
         the same as those in the district level view, as detailed in Tables 1, 2, 3 and 4
         in the appendix.

         One major difference between the two views, however, is that instead of a
         comparison across Tehsils /Towns in a district, the provincial level charts
         compare performance across districts for all the indicators.

         Also, indicator charts in the province level view contain extra red bars
         representing compliance for the BHUs, RHCs and THQs as well as the                         This section can prove very useful to track performance of and across
         DHQs, whereas this is only true for DHQs in the district level view of the                 districts in terms of various indicators.
         Indicators section. As previously explained, the compliance bars serve as a
         gauge of how many visits' data is used to derive the charts- meaning that the
         higher the compliance, the more the value of the variable is reflective of the                 2.2.4. Time Trend Charts
         actual situation in the corresponding district

         Figure 17 depicts a screenshot of the section.
                                                                                                    The Time Trend Charts section in the province level view is exactly the
                                                                                                    same as that in the district level view, except that there isn't an extra line for
                                                                                                    any district on any of the charts; just a thick line representing the trend of
                                                                                                    provincial averages for the same indicators over time, as depicted in Figure
                                                                                                    18.



                                                   23                                                                                        24




   Directorate General Health Services, Health Department, Government of the Punjab


Figure 18




As already mentioned, you can move to the district level view if you want a
comparison of the provincial average with a district's average, or even to the
Tehsil/Town level view if you want a comparison of the district average with
a Tehsil/Town's average, over time.




                                                               Helpline: 0321-4525808




                                         25




                                                                                               66
