                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   A QUANTITATIVE THEORY OF THE CREDIT SCORE

                                        Satyajit Chatterjee
                                          Dean Corbae
                                        Kyle P. Dempsey
                                      José-Víctor Ríos-Rull

                                       Working Paper 27671
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27671


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020




This project has been a long time in the making. An earlier version circulated under the title
"Credit Scoring and the Competitive Pricing of Default Risk". We thank all the economists who
have had an important input into the final product: Murat Tasci, Pablo D'Erasmo, Daphne Chen,
Jake Zhao, and Kuan Liu. We thank Hongchao Zhang for kindly sharing with us his DFBOLS
fortran code. We thank Cole Drier and Michael Slonkosky for research assistance. We also thank
the many seminar and conference participants who commented on earlier versions of the paper.
Finally, Corbae and Ríos-Rull wish to thank the National Science Foundation for support under
grants SES-0751380 and SES-0351451. The views expressed in this paper are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia or of the
Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27671.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Satyajit Chatterjee, Dean Corbae, Kyle P. Dempsey, and José-Víctor Ríos-Rull. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Quantitative Theory of the Credit Score
Satyajit Chatterjee, Dean Corbae, Kyle P. Dempsey, and José-Víctor Ríos-Rull
NBER Working Paper No. 27671
August 2020
JEL No. D82,E21,G51

                                         ABSTRACT

What is the role of credit scores in credit markets? We argue that it is a stand in for a market
assessment of a person's unobservable type (which here we take to be patience). We pose a
model of persistent hidden types where observable actions shape the public assessment of a
person's type via Bayesian updating. We show how dynamic reputation can incentivize
repayment without monetary costs of default beyond the administrative cost of filing for
bankruptcy. Importantly we show how an economy with credit scores implements the same
equilibrium allocation. We estimate the model using both credit market data and the evolution of
individual's credit scores. We find a 3% difference in patience in almost equally sized groups in
the population with significant turnover and a shift towards becoming more patient with age. If
tracking of individual credit actions is outlawed, the benefits of bankruptcy forgiveness are
outweighed by the higher interest rates associated with lower incentives to repay.

Satyajit Chatterjee                             Kyle P. Dempsey
Research Department                             Ohio State University
Federal Reserve Bank                            1945 N High Street
10 Independence Mall                            Columbus, OH 43210
Philadelphia, PA 19106                          dempsey.164@osu.edu
chatterjee.satyajit@gmail.com
                                                José-Víctor Ríos-Rull
Dean Corbae                                     The Ronald O. Perelman Center for
Department of Economics                         Political Science and Economics
University of Wisconsin, Madison                University of Pennsylvania
1180 Observatory Drive                          133 South 36th Street
Madison, WI 53706                               Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER                                        and NBER
corbae@ssc.wisc.edu                             vr0j@upenn.edu
1    Introduction

     Credit scores are a fundamental ingredient of a borrower's access to credit. In the United States,
credit bureaus and credit rating agencies serve this function for individual and business credit by creating
and maintaining credit scores for individual borrowers. Similar agencies exist in many other countries.
Credit scores affect borrowing terms and change with credit use and repayments. Despite the widespread
use of credit scores in actual credit markets, they are conspicuously absent from standard quantitative
models of consumer default which are typically more concerned with allocations than the contractual
arrangements that generate them.

     In this paper we provide a theory of the joint behavior of unsecured credit and credit scores, that
is, both allocations and arrangements, over the lifetime that is based on hidden information about
some persistent, credit-relevant individual characteristic ­ which we take to be patience ­ and where
maintaining a good reputation plays a central role.

     Our theory is founded on the premise that an individual's true propensity to repay -- i.e., the
individual's true type -- is hidden from her creditors, and it is the presence of this persistent hidden
information that makes an individual's history of actions relevant for lenders. Our theory is dynamic: at
any point in time, lenders use a person's observable history of actions to perform a Bayesian update of
her type; individuals understand this and choose actions mindful of the consequence any action has on
the future beliefs of lenders. A loss of reputation, rather than stigma or exogenous exclusion from future
borrowing, is the only dynamic punishment from default. Specifically, an individual's credit score falls
upon default and she subsequently faces worse borrowing terms. Our theory is competitive: information
available to any lender is assumed to be available to all lenders and there is free entry into the business
of lending. Finally, our theory respects a key feature of the institutional arrangement under which
unsecured consumer credit is extended in the United States: at some monetary cost, individuals can
choose to have their debts discharged via Chapter 7 bankruptcy.

     We make several contributions. First, we extend the theory of unsecured credit to accommodate
persistent hidden information about individual types. Our model environment is rich enough to cover four
of the five characteristics lenders use to assess creditworthiness: character (reflected in credit history),
capacity (reflected in debt-to-income ratio), capital (wealth), and conditions (amount of the loan).1
Competition drives lending contracts to be indexed by all observable borrower and loan characteristics
relevant for predicting the probability of default on a loan. When there is hidden information, a new
individual characteristic becomes relevant: a Bayesian update of the borrower's type probability -- in
    1 The   fifth, collateral, is not relevant for unsecured credit. See, for instance, Investopedia.


                                                                  1
the terminology of this paper, the borrower's type score -- indicating the probability that a person is of
each of the different types existing in the economy. The update conditions on all relevant observables:
the individual's current type score, their current net wealth, all the relevant information to forecast
future earnings, and, of course, their current action, be that to save, borrow or default. One way to
interpret the large number of conditioning variables is that the lender is using "big data." Our framework
easily encompasses "small data" cases in which lenders observe only some strict subset of actions.

    Second, after proving an equilibrium with type scores exists, we show that a market arrangement
which uses credit scores as in modern societies replicates the same equilibrium allocation without any
reference to type scores. Specifically, we use the type score to define a credit score ­ an object that
yields a ranking of individuals with regard to their probability of default on a particular contract. Such
an ordinal ranking is widely used by credit bureaus. We provide a sufficient condition such that the
equilibrium of the arrangement that uses credit scores to index contracts has the same allocation as the
equilibrium of our baseline economy with type scores. Just as agents take prices as given in standard
competitive equilibrium models, in our equilibrium with credit scores individuals and lenders take credit-
score-dependent prices and the distribution of future credit scores conditional on their actions as given;
they do not need to know what is behind such functions, just that they exist. In doing so, we provide
a theory of the credit score itself and of how it evolves over time in response to fundamentals of the
economy. In this context, we take to heart that the actual market arrangement is a form of data and
our equivalence result allows for the use of such data for empirical purposes.

    Third, we take our model to the data, estimating preference parameters from the joint behavior
of credit scores over an individual's lifetime and aggregate credit market moments. It is here that our
decision to model age variation in the evolution of earnings and hidden characteristics pays off. For
these estimates, we verify that the sufficient condition which guarantees equivalence between the type
score economy and credit score economy holds. We find what we believe are important properties of
the U.S. population with regard to (hidden) patience as revealed by the properties of the credit market:
the difference between patient and impatient people are 3% annually, slightly less than three quarters
of people are born impatient while slowly tilting towards patience (by age 60 slightly less than half of
them have become patient), and patience is highly persistent. Nevertheless, these infrequent changes in
type, along with the estimated small variation in extreme value shocks, prevent excessively fast learning
about an individual's type.2

    Fourth, we use our estimates to explore the role of hidden information in the U.S. unsecured credit
   2 An  empirical literature that finds evidence of adverse selection in credit markets includes Ausubel (1999), Agarwal
et al. (2010), Hertzberg et al. (2018), and Einav et al. (2013).



                                                           2
market. We start by considering a policy counterfactual in which lenders are prohibited from keeping
track of the history of an individual's asset market actions but can condition on the observable length
of an individual's credit history (effectively their age). In this case, impatient types are pooled with
patient types without having to bear the costs of imitating them in order to obtain better borrowing
terms. Since young adults wish to borrow against their higher expected future income, and most start
their adult life impatient, the policy has the possibility of improving the welfare of those young adults.
However, the policy removes the incentives to maintain a good reputation which leads to individuals
facing higher interest rate offerings. We find the negative incentive effects offset the potential pooling
benefits for impatient young adults such that all young adults are made worse off.

    Our second counterfactual considers an economy where one's type is perfectly observable. The
findings are intuitive. Since the impatient are now known, they face a more adverse situation; their
interest rates are higher and they borrow less. The contrary is true for the patient. As people age, this
knowledge becomes less relevant because people accumulate precautionary balances and rarely borrow.
We also find that whatever changes do occur at the individual level roughly offset each other at the
aggregate level so that the aggregate differences between the hidden and full information worlds are
minor.

    Fifth, we make a couple of methodological contributions. First, we combine both screening and
dynamic signalling where these screening and signalling opportunities are constrained by noise which we
introduce via extreme value shocks.3 The shocks ensure that beliefs held by lenders following any feasible
action are determined in equilibrium (reminiscent of Selten (1975) and Myerson (1978)).4 Second, we
extend quantitative theory models of default to include hidden information which requires us to index
    3 The microeconomic literature classifies hidden knowledge/adverse selection models as "screening" or "signaling" models
(Riley (2001)). As in screening models, in our paper lenders offer loans distinguished by loan characteristics (size of the
loan) and observable personal characteristics (income, previous history) that give ample scope for separation (if such
separation is desirable from an individual point of view and can be sustained in equilibrium). And, as in signaling models,
there are actions that an individual can take that have no effect on the payoff to any creditor but which convey valuable
information to them. For instance, when an individual who has no debt (and therefore is not interacting with any creditors)
takes an action that reveals information about her true type (such as increasing her savings), that action has signaling
value for creditors in the event she were to borrow from them in some future period. Thus there is also ample scope for
individuals to signal their type for use in some future contract via an update on their type score.
    4 Even if there was no hidden information and no Bayesian updating of beliefs, a continuous support of shocks would be
needed to ensure the existence of a pure strategy equilibrium; otherwise existence would require that people be allowed to
play mixed strategies. Despite individuals playing pure strategies, the shocks ensure different types may choose the same
action analogous to a "semi-separating" equilibrium. Further, the assumption that the shocks are drawn from a Type 1
extreme value distribution delivers the tractability as in McFadden (1974) and Rust (1987).




                                                             3
the pricing of credit to the market assessment of individual types.5,6,7 While previous quantitative theory
models imposed exogenous punishment, we incorporate dynamic reputation as a means of disciplining
borrowers.8

     The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our baseline economy with private information.
Section 3 describes the equilibrium problems faced by our agents. Section 4 studies the properties of
the baseline model. Section 5 describes how we map the model to the data. Section 6 compares our
baseline economy to alternative economies with different information structures. Section 7 concludes.
There is an accompanying online appendix where we provide additional theoretical, computational, and
data results.9


2     Environment

     Time is discrete and infinite. At each point in time, there is a unit measure of individuals. An
individual dies with probability 1 -  at the end of the period and individuals who die are replaced
by newborns. An individual's earnings class, denoted et  E = {e1 , e2 , ..., eE }                      ++ ,   is exogenously
drawn from a stationary finite state Markov process Q e ( et +1 | et ) . In addition, there is a purely transitory
component to an individual's earnings, denoted zt  Z = {z1 , z2 , ... , zZ }                  ++ ,   which is exogenously
drawn from a stationary probability distribution H ( zt ) . All earnings draws are independent across
individuals.
    5 Gale (1992) and Dubey and Geanokoplos (2002) prove existence of competitive equilibrium in environments with
hidden information. In contrast to us, they adopt the anonymous markets assumption of classical GE theory which does
not permit prices to depend on personal characteristics of buyers or sellers (such as a credit score). Prescott and Townsend
(1984) characterize constrained efficient allocation in an adverse selection environment but show that there is no natural
decentralization of it via a price system. Guerreri et al. (2010) prove existence and uniqueness of separating equilibria
in static adverse selection models by expanding the contract space to include competitive search over submarkets which
helps sustain separation. Our framework expands the contract space to include dynamic type scores which are used to help
separate borrowers.
    6 The observation that the competitive pricing of defaultable debt requires indexing the price of the loan to some
observable characteristics like its size appeared in a clear form in Jaffee and Russell (1976) and Eaton and Gersovitz
(1981). In full information environments, a natural extension of this approach is to index the loan price by characteristics
of the borrower as in Livshits et al. (2007b) and Chatterjee et al. (2007). A large literature on quantitative models of
defaultable consumer and sovereign debt now exists (see Exler and Tertilt (2020) and Aguiar et al. (2016) for recent
surveys).
    7 Other related papers which include an information problem include D'erasmo (2011), Narajabad (2012), Athreya et al.
(2012), Livshits et al. (2016), Drozd and Serrano-Padial (2017), Luo (2017), Sanchez (2018), and Nelson (2020).
   In the use of history to condition prices, our extension shares a strong connection to the developing microeconomic
literature that studies the conditioning of prices on customers' purchase histories (see, for instance, Acquisti and Varian
(2005)).
    8 Our reputational environment, where everyone optimizes but people have hidden knowledge about their preferences is
closely linked to the literature on repeated games with incomplete information (see Peski (2014) for a discussion of this
literature). Reputation in debt markets in which one player is a commitment type have been studied by Diamond (1989),
Elul and Gottardi (2015), and Amador and Phelan (2018). The fact that reputation in one market may discipline behavior
in another market has been considered in Cole and Kehoe (1998), Chatterjee et al. (2008), Corbae and Glover (2018), and
Carter et al. (2019).
    9 https://sites.google.com/a/wisc.edu/deancorbae/research/Appendix_theory_of_credit_scores.pdf




                                                             4
    At time t individuals can choose at +1  A = {a1 , a2 , ..., aN }                        at discount price qt determined in
a competitive market. We assume the finite set A includes 0 with a1 < 0 and aN > 0. If an agent holds
debt (i.e. at < 0), she (or he) can choose whether or not to default dt  {0, 1}. If she defaults (i.e.
dt = 1), then in the period of default only she cannot borrow or save (i.e. at +1 = 0) and her earnings
become et + zt -  where  > 0 is the static cost of default (e.g. bankruptcy filing fees). Therefore, the
set of all possible choices is a discrete set of size N + 1.

    In each period t , the individual values consumption ct using a utility function u ( ct ) :                      ++   
which is is continuous, increasing, and concave. At time t , an individual discounts her future utility at
rate  t  B = { 1 ,  2 , ...,  B } if she survives. Her discount factors varies stochastically over time drawn
from a finite state Markov process Q  (  t +1 |  t ) . The  t are drawn independently across individuals and
are unobservable to others. We will call  t  [0, 1) a household's type.

    In addition, households receive a vector


                                           t    = ( ( 0, a1 ) , ..., ( 0, aN ) , ( 1, 0))


of action-specific, additively separable preference shocks each period. These preference shocks follow a
generalized extreme value distribution whose cumulative is given by

                                                                                  
                                                        ( 0, at +1 ) - µ                     ( 1, 0) - µ 
                                                                                                         
                    F ( t ) = exp -               exp -                              - exp -                              (1)
                                                                                                         
                                 
                                        at +1   A
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                         

where  > 0 is a parameter governing the variance of the shocks and   [0, 1] is a parameter related to
the correlation of shocks associated with non-default actions.10 We set µ = -E to make the shocks
mean zero in expectation where E = 0.56767 ... is Euler's constant.

    Intermediaries can observe individuals' earnings class (i.e. et ) and asset market behavior (i.e. at , dt ,
and at +1 ), but cannot observe their preferences (i.e.               t   and  t ) nor the transitory component of earnings
(i.e. zt ). Since   t   and zt are i.i.d. over time and individuals, there is nothing to be learned about their
future values from their current values. However, since  t is drawn from a persistent Markov process,
there is something to be learned. We denote the creditor's probability assessment that an individual is
of type  i at the beginning of period t before any actions are taken as st (  i ) = Pr (  t =  i ) . We call
  10 A nested formulation allows us to address the well-known issue of independence of irrelevant alternatives (IIA) in logit
models. In our context, this means that one's probability of default depends on (i) the value of defaulting and (ii) the
"inclusive" value of not defaulting (as opposed to the value of each non-default action). This latter term is negligibly
affected by changes in the exact location and number of points on the asset grid, a property we view as desirable in our
economic context.




                                                                  5
st = ( st (  1 ) , ..., st (  B )) an individual's type score with       B
                                                                         i =1 st (  i )   = 1.11 In what follows we assume
st  S , a finite subset of [ 0, 1] B . This assumption makes it possible to apply standard methods to prove
existence of equilibrium.

    Given an individual's observable characteristics t = ( et , at , st ) as well as their credit market actions
( dt , at +1 ) , the financial intermediary revises its assessment of an individual's type from st via Bayes'
rule. We denote this update as t( dt ,at +1 ) ( t )  [ 0, 1] B . Finally, since the posterior t may not lie on
one of the finite points in S , we assign it randomly to nearby points in S . Specifically, We denote
the probability mass function implied by our random assignment rule given in equation (20) in Online
Appendix A.1 as Q s ( st +1 |t ) .12 There we prove:

Lemma 1. There exists an assignment rule satisfying: (i) ¾st +1 S [ Q s ( st +1 |t )] = t (i.e. consistency),
(ii) the variance of the approximation error (i.e. of st +1 from t ) is arbitrarily small, and (iii) Q s ( st +1 |t )
is continuous in t .


Importantly, note that there is no further punishment to default except possibly loss of reputation since
an individual's credit market behavior affects the intermediary's assessment of her unobservable type.

    As a result of this assessment, the prices faced by an individual in the credit market will also depend
on her observable state and her credit market actions. Thus, we denote the price function for an
individual with observable characteristics t who chooses assets at +1 by qt( 0,at +1 ) ( t ) .13 Note that in
the absence of private information regarding type, the pricing function would be independent of at (as
in fact is the case in Chatterjee et al. (2007)). These values influence prices directly because they affect
the likelihood of default next period on a loan conditional on type (as in standard debt and default
models) and they do so indirectly by revealing information about the individual's current type (this is
encoded in the update t( 0,at +1 ) ( t ) ).

Definition 1. The timing in any given period is as follows:


   1. Individuals begin period t with the vector (  t , et , at , st ) and receive a transitory earnings shock
       zt .

   2. An individual receives a random utility vector                 t   and chooses a feasible action given prices
       qt( 0,at +1 ) ( t ) .
  11 Of course the framework is rich enough to add more unobservables. For instance, if the persistent component of
earnings are unobservable, then st = ( st (  1 , e1 ) , ..., st (  B , eE )) .
  12 There is nothing of substance in this lottery over contiguous elements of S since we use a very fine grid when we
estimate the model.
  13 The "0" reminds us that the price schedule is only relevant for individuals who have not defaulted.



                                                            6
    3. Based on each individual's actions ( dt , at +1 ) and observable characteristics t , intermediaries
        revise their assessments of an individual's type via Bayes' rule, updating st to t .

    4. (a) Individuals who survive draw beginning-of-next-period realizations of  t +1 and et +1 from the
             exogenous transition functions Q  (·|  t ) and Q e (·| et ) . The beginning of next period type
             score st +1 is drawn from the probability mass function Q s (·|t ) .

         (b) Newborns begin life with  t +1 drawn from initial distribution G , earnings class et +1 drawn
             from initial distribution Ge , zero assets, and a type score st +1 equal to G for consistency.
             We assume G  S .


3     Equilibrium

3.1     Individuals' problem

      Let a current value xt be denoted x and next period's variable xt +1 be denoted x . Denote the part
of the state space observable to creditors by  = {E × A × S} with typical element  .

      An individual who considers whether to default dt or choose asset at +1 in state ( ,  , z ,  ) takes as
given


    · the price function q ( 0,a ) (  ) : A ×   [0, 1]

    · the type scoring functions  ( 0,a ) (  ) : A ×   [ 0, 1] B and  ( 1,0) (  ) :   [ 0, 1] B which
        perform Bayesian updating of an individual's type based on all observables following asset choice
        and default, respectively.


For ease of notation, we will denote the triplet of functions {q ( 0,a ) (  ) ,  ( 0,a ) (  ) ,  ( 1,0) (  )} by f  F ,
where F = {( f1 , f2 , f3 )| f1 : A ×   [0, 1] , f2 : A ×   [0, 1] B and f3 :   [0, 1] B }.

Definition 2. Given (z ,  ) and f  F , the set of feasible actions is a finite set F ( z ,  | f ) that contains
all actions ( d , a ) such that consumption c ( d ,a ) ( z ,  | f ) is strictly positive where:


                                              e + z + a - q ( 0,a ) (  ) · a
                                             
                                                                               if ( d , a ) = ( 0, a ) ,
                                             
                 c ( d ,a ) ( z ,  | f ) =                                                                          (2)
                                             

                                             e + z -                           if a < 0 and ( d , a ) = ( 1, 0) .
                                             
                                             

      We make the following assumption:

Assumption 1. e1 + z1 + min{- , a1 } > 0.

                                                                    7
This assumption ensures that it is always feasible to default and always feasible to pay back one's debt.

    Given an individual's state and the functions f , we denote by V ( ,  , z ,  | f ) :                                                       ( N +1) ×B×Z×   
the value function of an individual in state ( ,  , z ,  ) . An individual's recursive decision problem is
given by
                             V ( ,  , z ,  |f ) =                     max               v ( d ,a ) (  , z ,  | f ) + ( d , a ) .                               (3)
                                                             ( d ,a )  F ( z , | f )

Here, for ( d , a )  F ( z ,  | f ) ,


     v ( d ,a ) (  , z ,  | f ) = ( 1 -   ) u c ( d ,a ) ( z ,  | f )                                                                                          (4)

                                      +  ·                       Q  (  |  ) Q e ( e | e ) H ( z ) Q s ( s | ( d ,a ) (  )) W (  , z ,  | f )
                                               (  ,z ,e ,s )


is the conditional value function and the expected value function W integrates the value function over
transitory preference shocks given by
                                                                             
                                             W ( , z ,  |f ) =                    V ( ,  , z ,  | f ) dF ( ) .                                                 (5)


    Let  ( d ,a ) (  , z ,  | f ) be the probability that the individual in state (  , z ,  ) chooses action ( d , a ) 
F ( z ,  | f ) . Given the form of the extreme value distribution, the probability of default for a < 0 has the
following well-known form (see, for instance, Rust (1987)) is

                                                                            exp { v ( 1,0) (  ,z , | f )/ }
                                                                                                                                                  for a < 0
                                                                                                                                               
           ( 1,0) (  , z ,  | f ) =          {v (1,0) (  ,z , |f )/ }+ [                                   exp { v ( 0,a ) (  ,z , | f )/ }]
                                                                                                                                                               (6)
                                       exp
                                                                                   ( 0,a ) F ( z , | f )

                                       0 for a  0.
                                      
                                      

Conditional on not defaulting, the choice probabilities are given by

                                                           exp v ( 0,a ) (  ,z , | f )/
                                                                                                                   for ( 0, a )  F ( z ,  | f )
                                             
                                                                          exp { v ( 0,a
                                                                                      ^ ) (  ,z , | f )/
               ~ ( 0,a ) (  , z ,  | f ) =                                                               }                                                     (7)
                                             
                                                  ( 0,a
                                                      ^ ) F ( z , | f )

                                              0 for ( 0, a )                  F (z ,  |f ).
                                             
                                             

Note that infeasible actions are assigned zero probability. Hence, the unconditional probability of
choosing a  A is


                             ( 0,a ) (  , z ,  | f ) = ~ ( 0,a ) (  , z ,  | f ) 1 -  ( 1,0) (  , z ,  | f ) .                                                 (8)




                                                                                   8
Given this expression, the expected value of not defaulting is given by


                      WND (  , z ,  | f ) =  ln                                       exp v ( d ,a ) (  , z ,  | f )/               (9)
                                                             ( 0,a )  F ( z , | f )


and the expected value function is


                             ln exp v ( 1,0) (  , z ,  | f )/ + exp { WND (  , z ,  | f )/ }
                           
                                                                                                                        if a < 0
                           
       W ( , z ,  |f ) =                                                                                                           (10)
                           

                             ln ( exp { WND (  , z ,  | f )/ })                                                         if a  0.
                           
                           

      In Online Appendix A.2 we prove:

Theorem 1. Given f , there exists a unique solution W (  , z ,  | f ) to theproblem in (3) - (5).


3.2      Intermediaries' problem

      Competitive intermediaries with deep pockets have access to an international credit market where
they can borrow or lend at the risk-free interest rate r  0.

      Any given intermediary takes prices q and scoring function  (i.e. f ) as given. We assume that
both losses and gains resulting from an individual's death accrue to the financial intermediary.14

      The profit  ( 0,a ) (  | f ) on contract of type ( 0, a ) with agents with observables  is:


                                                      p ( 0,a ) (  | f ) ·(-a )
                                                                                  - q ( 0,a ) (  ) · (-a )
                                                 
                                                  ·                                                          if a < 0
                                                 
                           ( 0,a )                               1+r
                                     ( | f ) =                                                                                     (11)
                                                 
                       
                                                  q ( 0,a ) · a -  ·         a
                                                                                                             if a  0
                                                 
                                                                            1+r
                                                 
                                                 
where the probability of repayment on a financial contract of type ( 0, a ) made to individuals with
observable characteristics  is denoted p ( 0,a ) (  | f ) : (                          A) ×   [ 0, 1] . Given perfect competition
in financial intermediation and constant returns to scale in the lending technology, if a solution to
the intermediary's problem exists, then optimization by the intermediary implies zero profits for strictly
positive measures of contracts issued or

                                                                      ( 0,a )
                                                                    ·p 1+r( |f )
                                                                  
                                                                                            if a < 0
                                                                  
                                           q ( 0,a ) (  | f ) =                                         .                          (12)
                                                                  
                                                                    
                                                                                            if a  0.
                                                                  
                                                                   1+r
                                                                  
                                                                  
  14 Thatis, an individual who borrows honors her obligation only if she survives and does not declare bankruptcy and,
symmetrically, an intermediary that accepts a deposit is released from its obligation if the depositor does not survive to
collect.


                                                                           9
      To assess an individual's probability p ( 0,a ) (  | f ) of repaying a debt next period given their current
observable characteristics  given unobservable ( , , z ), takes two steps:


    1. Assess the probability that an individual in state  who takes action ( d , a ) will be of unobservable
                                                                    ( d ,a )
        type  next period via Bayes rule (the type scoring function          (  ) ).

    2. For each possible future unobservable type  , compute the individual's probability of future
        repayment conditional on being that type and transitions over observable characteristics and then
        compute the weighted sum over future types to obtain p .


      Starting with step 1, an individual's probability of being type (  1 , ...,  B ) next period is given by the
                                       ( d ,a )             ( d ,a )
type scoring function  ( d ,a ) (  ) =          (  ) , ...,          (  ) , where
                                                        1                         B



                                                                    ( d ,a ) (  ,z , | f ) ·H ( z ) ·s (  )
                                              Q  ( | ) ·                                                         for ( d , a )  F ( z ,  | f )
                                                                z
                                                                                 ^ ,z , | f ) ·H ( z ) ·s ( ^)
                                                                      ( d ,a ) ( 
               ( d ,a )                                        ^ ,z 
                                    =                                                                                                            (13)
                                        
                        ( | f )                                

                                              Q  (  |  ) · s (  ) for ( d , a )                F (z ,  |f ).
                                        
                                           


Note that in (13), the assessment uses Bayes' rule to assign the probability of an individual in observable
state  taking a feasible action ( d , a ) being of type  next period. By (6) and (7), the probability of
                                                                                ( d ,a )
choosing any ( d , a )  F ( z ,  | f ) is strictly positive for every  . Hence,          (  | f ) is well-defined in
(13) for all feasible actions. Thus, since every feasible action is chosen with some probability due to the
presence of extreme value shocks, we avoid having to assign off-the-equilibrium path beliefs for feasible
actions. For completeness, without loss of generality, (13) also handles the case of infeasible actions.

      Turning to step 2, given observable state  , we obtain the probability of repayment the intermediary
uses for pricing debt (i.e. for a < 0) via:

                                                                          ( 0,a )
p ( 0,a ) (  | f ) =               H ( z ) · Q e ( e | e ) · Q s ( s (  )|        (  | f )) · s (  ) · 1 -  ( 1,0) (  , z , e , a , s | f ) .
                        ,z ,e ,s
                                                                                                                                                 (14)


3.3      Evolution

      Let µ (  , z ,  | f ) denote the beginning-of-period measure of individuals in state (  , z ,  ) for a given
f . Then, the cross-sectional distribution evolves according to


                                   µ ( , z ,  |f ) =                T ( , z ,  | , z , ; f ) · µ ( , z ,  |f ),                                  (15)
                                                             ,z ,




                                                                             10
where


                T ( , z ,  ;  , z ,  |f ) =                                                                                  (16)
                                                                                                      ( d ,a )
                    · Q  (  |  ) · H ( z ) · Q e ( e | e ) ·  ( d ,a ) (  , z ,  | f ) · Q s ( s (  )|         (  | f ))

                        + ( 1 -  ) · G (  ) · H ( z ) · Ge ( e ) · 1 {a =0 } · 1 {s =G } .


The second line in equation (16) is the probability of a survivor transiting to (  , z , e , a , s ) while the
third line is the probability that a newborn arrives in state (  , z , e , a , s ) .

      An invariant distribution is a fixed point µ (·| f ) = T µ (·| f ) . In Online Appendix A.3 we prove:

                                                                                            ¯ (·| f ) at a
Lemma 2. There exists a unique invariant distribution µ (·| f ) and {µ 0 T n } converges to µ
geometric rate for any initial distribution µ 0 .


      Note that although the invariant distribution is critical for computing cross-sectional moments used
to map the model to the data, none of the other equilibrium objects (i.e. the set of functions f , the
value function V or the decision rule  take µ as an argument. This simplifies the model and eases the
computational burden, but is not necessary. Other specifications in which knowledge of the distribution
is required are possible, but we do not consider these in the baseline model.


3.4      Existence

      We can now give the definition of a stationary recursive competitive equilibrium.

Definition 3. A stationary Recursive Competitive Equilibrium (RCE) is a pricing function q  , a type
scoring function   , a choice probability function   , and a steady state distribution µ  such that:


 (i). Optimality:  ( d ,a ) (  , z ,  | f  ) satisfies (6) and (7) for all (  , z ,  )  B × Z ×  and ( d , a ) 
        F (z ,  |f ),

 (ii). Zero Profits: q ( 0,a ) (  | f  ) satisfies (12) with equality for all    and ( d , a )  F ( z ,  | f  ) with
        p ( 0,a ) (  | f  ) satisfying (14) for all    and ( d , a < 0)  F ( z ,  | f  ) ,

                          ( d ,a )
(iii). Bayesian Updating:          (  | f  ) satisfies (13) for all (  ,  )  B × , and

(iv). Stationary Distribution: µ  (  , z ,  | f  ) solves (15) for T (  , z ,  ;  , z ,  | f  ) .


      The fact that there are zero profits in equilibrium implies q ( 0,a ) (  | f ) =               
                                                                                                    1+r   for a  0 (i.e. the price


                                                                 11
on savings is a function only of parameters). In what follows we take F   F to contain only those f1
                             
for which f1 ( a ,  ) =     1+r   for a  0.

      The key step in proving the existence of a competitive equilibrium is proving that the value function
W (  , z ,  | f ) is continuous in f . In Online Appendix A.4 we prove:

Lemma 3. W (  , z ,  | f ) is continuous in f and for any ( d , a )  F ( z ,  | f ) ,  ( d ,a ) (  , z ,  | f ) is
continuous in f .


      Using these results, we prove in Online Appendix A.5:

Theorem 2. A stationary recursive competitive equilibrium exists.


3.5     Equivalence to an Economy with Credit Scores

      In the economy described thus far, an individual's reputation is her type score. In U.S. credit
markets, one critical measure of a person's reputation is her credit score. A credit score is an index that
is inversely related to the likelihood of serious delinquency. This index, typically ranging from around 300
to 850, provides an ordinal ranking across individuals of creditworthiness.15 The goal of this subsection
is to show that under certain conditions, the equilibrium described in the previous subsections can be
implemented via an arrangement in which lenders use a model equivalent of a credit score. Lenders
need only know how credit scores and loan sizes translate into default probabilities, not why.

      We formalize the vague notion that a credit score depicts a consumer's creditworthiness, by defining
it to be the probability of repayment on a loan of some standard size a = a
                                                                          ¯ < 0. According to the timing
in Definition 1 part 4(a), since ( e , a, s ) is known at the end of t - 1, an individual's credit score can be
calculated at the end of period t - 1 to be m  p ( 0,a
                                                     ¯ ) ( e , a , s ) given in equation (14). Newborns in period

t - 1 are assigned m  p ( 0,a
                            ¯ ) ( e , 0, G ) . Intuitively speaking, an equivalence between the type-scoring and
                                          

credit-scoring environments will exist if there is a one-to-one mapping between s and m, holding fixed
all other factors that affect credit scores (i.e., e and a). Then, wherever s appears in the theoretical
model, it can be replaced by m.

      An individual in state ^ = ( e , a, m) of the financial arrangement with credit scores takes as given
a pricing function q ( 0,a ) ( ^ ) and a credit-score transition function Q m ( m |( d , a ) , e , ^ ) which tells her
the likelihood of her future credit score conditional on her actions. Intermediaries take as given the
pricing function (which must satisfy the zero profit condition) and the probability of repayment function
p ( 0,a ) ( ^ ) (which must be consistent with the individuals objective likelihood of repayment). This
  15 See,   for example, Investopedia.


                                                         12
repayment function makes use of a one-to-one and onto mapping between s and m which we denote
M (^ ) .16 Specifically, M ( ^ ) is given by the inverse mapping defined by m = p ( 0,a
                                                                                      ¯ ) ( e , a , M ( e , a , m)) .

These functions can be defined to exactly replicate the RCE with type scores.

     In Online Appendix A.6, we restate the household and financial intermediary problems using this
definition of a credit score. We then provide a definition of a recursive competitive equilibrium with
credit scores (RCECS) and prove:

Theorem 3. Suppose an RCE exists and let m = p ( 0,a
                                                   ¯ ) ( e , a , s ) .                              Suppose M  ( ^ ) given by the
inverse function m = p ( 0,a
                           ¯ ) ( e , a , M  ( e , a , m)) exists. Then an RCECS also exists in which the choice

probabilities  ( d ,a ) (  , z , e , a, m) =  ( d ,a ) (  , z , e , a, s ) .


     As noted above, a credit score is an ordinal measure of creditworthiness, not a direct estimate of the
probability of repayment. To close this gap, we associate with p ( 0,a
                                                                     ¯ ) (  ) a number in the unit interval

that gives p ( 0,a
                 ¯ ) (  ) 's position (i.e. ranking) in the overall distribution of p ( 0,a
                                                                                          ¯ ) (  ) in the model economy.



Definition 4. An individual's credit ranking in state  is given by


                                                    ( 0,a
                                                        ¯)
                                                           ( ) =                    µ (~)                                   (17)
                                                                   ~ J ( 0,a
                                                                           ¯ ) ()




where J ( 0,a
            ¯ ) (  ) = {~ : p ( 0,a
                                  ¯ ) (~ )  p ( 0,a
                                                  ¯ ) (  )} and µ (  ) =
                                                                                     ,z   µ ( , z , ).


Clearly,  ( 0,a
              ¯ ) (  )  [ 0, 1] .


     Furthermore, real-world credit scores do not mention any specific level of borrowing. One way to
interpret this fact is to think that the ranking of individuals with respect to probability of repayment
holds for any level of debt. For this to be true, we need the following property:


Definition 5. Let a  ¯ < 0. Then, p ( 0,a ) (  ) preserves order with respect to a if p ( 0,a
                  ^ <a                                                                      ¯ ) (  )  p ( 0,a
                                                                                                            ¯ ) (~)
if and only if p ( 0,a
                     ^ ) (  )  p ( 0,a
                                     ^ ) (~ ).


If p ( 0,a ) (  ) preserves order, then J ( 0,a
                                              ^ ) (  ) = J ( 0,a
                                                               ¯ ) (  ) and  ( 0,a
                                                                                 ¯ ) (  ) becomes invariant to the choice

of a
   ¯ . This order preserving property holds for a wide range of debt levels for our estimated model in
Section 5.
  16 Ifnot one-to-one, then two individuals with the same e , a, and m choosing the same amount of debt, could face
different prices (because their s 's are different).




                                                                   13
             Figure 1: Likelihood Ratios of Default and Borrowing/Saving Decisions




4   Model Mechanics

    The workings of our model depend on differences in patience among types. The differences could
be so small as to be close to irrelevant or so large as to make types reveal themselves immediately
by their actions. We are interested here in the sweet spot between where the differences are large
enough to affect behavior but at the same time small enough to prevent complete learning because
there are incentives for less creditworthy types to partially emulate more creditworthy types. Because
our estimates in Section 5 indeed yield this sweet spot, we hereafter discuss the workings of our model
for the particular parameterization in which there are only two levels of impatience.

    The fact that patience matters in the simple sense that agents of different types take different
actions is illustrated by means of choice probabilities and likelihood ratios in Figure 1. The top panel
shows those objects for default for agents with the same type score and earnings as a function of debt,
indicating that it is always more likely for the low type to default (right graph) implying a likelihood ratio
above one (left graph). The bottom panel shows similar objects; a particular type's choice probabilities
over assets chosen (right graph) and its associated likelihood ratio (left graph). To summarize, low
types tend to borrow more frequently, to borrow more, and once in debt they default more frequently.

    It is also true that an individual's earnings class matters for the probability of default as depicted in


                                                     14
                             Figure 2: Default Probability by Earnings and Type




Notes: This figure plots  ( 1,0) (  , e , z = 0, a, s = 0.5) over a range of debt levels. Solid (dashed) lines indicate high (low)
beta, and black / blue / red indicate low / medium / high earnings.


Figure 2. Specifically, individuals with higher earnings are less likely to default. A crucial implication of
this is that the realization of earnings levels at the start of the period changes the credit score but not
the type score, which highlights the composite notion of the credit score.

    While age is not a state variable in the decision problems of individuals and lenders, demographics
play a role through how we model the arrival of newborns and the Markov process for hidden type.
Specifically, since all newborns begin with the lowest earnings class, our Markov process for earnings
implies that earnings are expected to rise through an individual's life as shown in the top left panel
of Figure 3. The earnings profile induces an increasing wealth profile in the top right panel. Using
our estimates from Section 5 of G and Q  where the fraction of type H newborns is lower than
the long run fraction of type H , there is upward drift in the average type score with age given by
s = s · Q  ( H | H ) + ( 1 - s ) · Q  ( H | L) evident in the bottom left panel of Figure 3. Finally, the bottom
right panel shows that the "within-group" variance of consumption is higher for type L than type H ,
consistent with more precautionary saving by type H as well as greater credit access via higher type
scores in our baseline model.17 A notable feature of the bottom right panel of Figure 3 is that the
cross-sectional variance of consumption is growing across the early part of the life cycle consistent with
the empirical evidence in Figure 14 of Heathcote et al. (2010).
  17 Krueger and Perri (2006) term "across-group" variation owing to observable differences like education and "within-
group" variation the residual which includes idiosyncratic income. Here we are grouping people on observables like age and
also unobservables like type.



                                                               15
                              Figure 3: Moments by Age in Baseline Model




Notes: In each panel, each line corresponds to the average moment indicated at the specified age in the baseline model.
For the type-specific measures, the average is computed conditional on type.


      Since actions are partially revealing of type, we decompose the consequence of actions into static
consequences ­ which only occur when borrowing as they are immediately incorporated into the price
of credit (Section 4.1) ­ and the dynamic consequences that go beyond the current price through the
dynamic update of type scores (Section 4.2). The static cost for an impatient type to imitate a patient
type in order to build a better reputation for even small differences in patience is assessed in Section
(4.3).


4.1      Static Selection Effects of Asset Choice

      If an individual of observable type  = ( e , a, s ) were to borrow a she would be facing a price that
depends on the default probabilities of her expected type tomorrow  = ( e , a , s ) . Since earnings
class levels evolve exogenously and are publicly observed, there is no interaction between a and e . The
evolution of type score s , however, is affected both by the known exogenous type evolution given by
Q  but also by the Bayesian update of the individual's type score conditional on the choice of a given
by Q s ( s | ( d ,a ) ) . To isolate the contribution of the latter, we compare the baseline equilibrium price



                                                          16
                                         Figure 4: Static Effect of Borrowing Choice




with a price schedule that results from excluding a from the Bayesian updating formula. This price
schedule is given by q ( 0,a ) ( a, s , e ) =  p ( 0,a ) ( a, s , e )/( 1 + r ) where


            p ( 0,a ) ( a, s , e ) =            H (z ) Q  ( | ) Q e (e |e ) s ( )   1 -  ( 1,0) (  , e , z , a , s ) .   (18)
                                        ,e ,z


In (18), recall s = s · Q  ( H | H ) + ( 1 - s ) · Q  ( H | L) updates the prior using only Q  and ignores the
borrowing choice a . For the estimated economy, Figure 4 shows the ratio of q to the baseline equilibrium
price q . We can see that for a high enough probability of being patient (i.e. s = 0.9), the effect is small
and the equilibrium price imputes the choice mostly to the noise of the extreme value shocks. For a
more agnostic prior (i.e. s = 0.5), the effect is larger. In our baseline economy, the more borrowing an
individual undertakes the more likely she is imputed to be a low type and hence faces a more adverse
price. In the counterfactual world, lenders are not taking into account that as the level of debt rises,
the proportion of low  (less creditworthy) types in the pool of people who borrow that amount also
rises. Thus, ignoring adverse selection effects induces q to be higher than the equilibrium zero profit
price q . If we were to assume the same s updating but require lenders to use the information revealed
by an individual's a choice when pricing debt, that price would be lower than q . It could potentially
even be lower than q because the discipline from the dynamic reputation effects of asset choice would
be absent.




                                                                   17
                                     Figure 5: Reputation and Prices




4.2     Dynamic Reputation Effects of Asset Choice

      In addition to those static effects discussed in the previous section, asset market choice can also
have long lasting effects. This requires two conditions to hold: (i) prices depend on an individual's
current reputation (i.e. type score) independent of her current action and (ii) her choice today affects
her future reputation (and hence future prices). Both requirements hold.

      Figure 5 establishes the first requirement. It plots the ratio of debt prices that an individual with
current type score s  1 can obtain relative to a person with an impeccable s = 1 score for two different
debt choices. The fact that both lines are downward sloping establishes that type scores matter; for a
given debt choice, a higher s fetches a higher price. The reason is simple; since the high  type repays
with higher probability than the low  type, there is information about the probability of repayment in
the current type score (which, in turn, reflects the history of the individual's past actions). The fact
that the line is steeper for the larger debt level arises from adverse selection (as in Figure 4).

      Figure 6 establishes the second requirement. It plots the change in the public assessment of an
individual's type resulting from Bayesian updating as a function of her current type score and her
current actions (i.e.  ( d ,a ) ( e , a, s ) ). The left plot shows the differential update for defaulters and non
defaulters (the latter integrated over all asset choices). At the extremes, (s = 0 or s = 1), where the
priors are very strong, there is no update and hence actions are not relevant, but for other values the
posterior is clearly affected and shows the impact of choice. Note, however, that if Q  has positive

                                                       18
                                    Figure 6: Type Score Responses




off-diagonal elements, which we find in our estimation, an individual's type can change from one period
to the next. This means that even if an individual's asset market actions are not observed, her posterior
would change over time as it converges to the mean type score implied by Q  alone. This mean reversion
in type score is shown by the blue dashed line and accounts for why a person's type score falls upon
repayment if the current score is sufficiently high or rises upon default if it is sufficiently low. Still, it
remains true that repaying leads to a higher type score than defaulting for all interior values of s .

      The center and right plots of Figure 6 show the net change in reputation that result from different
actions taken by an individual either already in debt (center) or with zero assets (right). For an individual
already in debt, staying in debt leaves the assessment mostly unchanged, but sizeable savings gives a
boost to the probability of being a high type. For an agent with no assets the opposite is true: borrowing
lowers the imputation of being a high type, while sizeable savings keeps the assessment unchanged.


4.3     Signalling Costs

      In models with hidden types, the "bad" types have an incentive to imitate the "good" types in
order to pool with them and obtain better terms of trade, while the "good" types have an incentive to
separate themselves from the "bad" types to get even better terms. As we discussed at the beginning
of this section, the hidden type difference (i.e.  H -  L ) could be so small that adverse selection is
virtually irrelevant or so large as to induce near perfect separation of type from observable actions. Here
we assess the costliness for an impatient type L to imitate the actions of a patient type H for even small
differences in patience in the "sweet spot."



                                                     19
                                           Table 1: Signalling Costs and Benefits

                                                                         % Average Gain in:
                                               Consumption (C )                    Wealth (A)                   Reputation ( )

                         All                             -3.78                              6.09                           5.10
                         Newborns                        -0.84                             15.87                           3.73

Notes: The first column measure is defined as

                           z ,   µ (L , z , )      ( d ,a ) F ( z , )    ( d ,a ) (  H , z ,  ) -  ( d ,a ) (  L , z ,  ) c ( d ,a ) ( z ,  )
                   ^ =
                   C
                                         z ,    µ (L , z , )       ( d ,a ) F ( z , )    ( d ,a ) (  L , z ,  ) c ( d ,a ) ( z ,  )

while the second and third columns substitute a ( z ,  ) and  ( d ,a ) (  ) for c ( d ,a ) ( z ,  ) .


     Changing one's action has three effects: (i) a change in today's consumption; (ii) a change in
tomorrow's net wealth; and (iii) a change in tomorrow's reputation. To explore these three effects for
a type L to imitate a type H , we conduct the following experiment. To imitate a type H individual,
we assume the type L follows the choice probability function  (  H , z ,  ) instead of  (  L , z ,  ) . One
measure of the consumption cost from a type L individual mimicking a type H is the average difference
in consumption between H types and L types implied by the differences in their choice probabilities
relative to the average consumption of a type L individual. Similar measures can be computed for next
period net wealth and next period reputation (as measured by the difference in type score posterior).

     Table 1 provides these calculations for the case where there are small differences in patience between
type H and type L (i.e. where (  H -  L )/ L = 3.3%). The table illustrates an important point. Type L
newborns have a much lower consumption loss to mimicking a type H individual. This is because the
imitation costs are increasing in earnings and assets, both of which rise on average through one's life.
Since type H choose to save more, this imposes a bigger consumption loss to type L from mimicking.
Alternatively, it is easier to mimic when young as the dispersion in assets and scores are lower in youth.
The fact that it is less costly to mimic when young implies there is more pooling among the young and
the fact that is is more costly to mimic when old implies there will be more separation among the old.
Importantly, the table makes clear that even small differences in hidden type can lead to large static
costs of mimicking a good type in order to gain a better dynamic reputation.


5    Mapping the Model to Data

     We now examine the U.S. unsecured credit market through the lens of our model. We rely on
the equivalence result between the model with type scores (RCE) and the model with credit scores



                                                                              20
(RCECS) described in Theorem 3 of Section 3.5 when there are two  types. Specifically, it allows us
to use the model with type scores in order to target the joint behavior of earnings, aggregate credit
market moments, and credit rankings over the life cycle.18 We then verify that the sufficient condition
in Theorem 3 is satisfied for the estimated parameters so that the equivalence result holds.

    As described briefly in the introduction, credit scores, earnings and assets all grow with age on
average, and we want our model to capture those features. Unfortunately, we do not have access to a
panel dataset which contains all these dimensions. So we use a version of simulated method of moments
to estimate our model. Specifically, we take some non-controversial information from outside the model:
the earnings process, the risk free rate of return, demographics, preferences over risk, a measurement of
the costs of bankruptcy filings, and a generic value of debt (a) to which the credit score is normalized.19

    Next we obtain a set of data moments that summarize the properties of the unsecured credit market
(default rates, average interest rates, dispersion of interest ratios, fraction of households in debt, debt
to income ratio) and we approximate the behavior of credit scores as a function of age (specifically,
affine functions of the mean and the standard deviation of credit scores and the autocorrelation of the
annual change in individual scores). Establishing a credit history is, in light of our model, just code for
age.

    We then proceed to estimate the parameters of interest which are the values of patience for both
types, the transition probabilities of types and their frequency at birth, as well as measures of noise
(the variances of the extreme value shocks) by minimizing the weighted sum of squared differences
between the values of the moments in the data and their model counterparts. We have tried various
alternative sets of moments with minimal effects on the findings. While earnings, credit and bankruptcy
statistics have been used since Chatterjee et al. (2007) and Livshits et al. (2007a), credit scores, and
their evolution by age, have not. The evolution of credit scores are crucial for understanding the building
of a reputation over the early part of the life-cycle.

    Computation of equilibrium requires solving for two endogenous functions: the bond price function
and the type-score updating function. The bond price function is standard in unsecured debt models like
Chatterjee et al. (2007), except that the endogenous type score is an additional dimension. The type
scoring function is new: individuals take as given how feasible actions change the market's perception
of their type, and this perception has to be consistent with the actions taken by both types.
  18 An analogy would be that real business cycle models solve the simpler Planner's problem to compute consumption and
investment allocations consistent with a decentralized competitive equilibrium. It is faster to compute the RCE because
Bayesian updating gives a candidate input used to generate p ( 0,a ) (^ ) , while iterating on an initial guess of p ( 0,a ) ( ^ ) in
an RCECS does not use information on how an agent's type affects her repayment decision.
  19 We verify that the choice of a does not matter provided it is higher than the bankruptcy filing costs.




                                                                21
5.1       Preliminaries: Parameters Chosen Outside the Model

      A model period is one year. We take the relevant life span of people to be 40 years as the bulk
of borrowing is by young people, implying a survival probability of 0.975. We choose a CRRA utility
function with risk aversion parameter 3. We pose a risk free rate of 1% which implies an effective interest
rate of 3.59% in the presence of perfect annuity markets. We take the cost of filing for bankruptcy to be
about 2% of median earnings as estimated in Albanesi and Nosal (2015). Since it is a dominant action
not to default on debt less than the filing cost, we choose a
                                                            ¯ (the value used to compute the probability
of default in a credit score) to be 3.5% of median earnings (i.e. sizeably above those costs). Finally
we take the earnings class to be the persistent AR1 process estimated by Floden and Lindé (2001) and
assume agents are born with the lowest earnings level to replicate the upward earnings path in the life
cycle.20 This is all summarized in Table 2.

                               Table 2: Parameters Chosen Outside the Model

              Parameter                                               Value       Notes

                                          Demographics and preferences
              Survival probability                                    0.975       avg. life span 40 years
              Risk aversion                                             3.0       CRRA preferences
              Earnings at birth                                 e      0.57       Footnote 22

                                                       Technology
              Risk-free rate (%)                                r     1.000
              Filing cost                                             0.020       2% of median earnings
              Debt level for computing credit score             ¯
                                                                a     -0.035      3.5% of median earnings

                                                         Earnings
              Persistence of log ( e )                         e     0.9136       Floden and Lindé (2001)
              Std. dev. of innovations to log ( e )            e     0.0426       Floden and Lindé (2001)
              Std. dev. of log ( z )                           z     0.0421       Floden and Lindé (2001)

  20 We approximate this process by a three-state Markov chain using the Adda and Cooper (2003) method, which yields
                                                                  0.818 0.178 0.004
                                                                                           
support E = {0.57, 1.00, 1.74}, transition matrix Q e ( e | e ) = 
                                                                                           
                                                                   0 . 178 0 . 643 0 . 178 
                                                                                            , and a transitory component with a
                                                                  0.004 0.178 0.818
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
three-point uniform distribution on support Z = {-z , 0, z }, where z =    3   · 0.0421 = 0.18.
                                                                           2




                                                              22
5.2     Estimation

      We start by describing the data moments that we target in our simulated method of moments
estimation.

5.2.1     Data and Targets

      As indicated above the set of statistics that we deem important to target pertain to the main
aggregate characteristics of the U.S. unsecured credit market: credit usage (the fraction of households
in net debt and the debt-to-income ratio), credit terms (average interest rates and their dispersion),
how many net borrowers and how many defaulters. Importantly, we are also interested in the age profile
of credit rankings.

      To obtain these data targets, we use three primary sources: the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF),
the administrative records of the U.S. Bankruptcy Courts, and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Consumer Credit Panel/Equifax (FRBNY CCP/Equifax). The first provides information on individual
level variation in debt and interest rates, the second provides information on aggregate bankruptcy
filing rates, and the last contains individual level information on credit records from an anonymized
panel which provides us with moments on the variation and evolution of credit scores. The credit score
measure is the Equifax Risk Score (hereafter Risk Score), which is a proprietary credit score similar to
other risk scores used in the industry.

      We choose 2007 as our baseline year. In the SCF, we focus on the subset of households with heads
between the ages of 20 and 60 years excluding the top 5% of the wealth distribution for whom we think
our theory is not relevant. The fraction of indebted households is the fraction of such households with
negative networth. The average debt-to-income ratio is the ratio of total unsecured debt of indebted
households to 2007 per household U.S. GDP. For the mean and standard deviation of interest rates we
used the interest rates reported on unsecured debt by all households with negative networth.

      The default rate is the ratio of the total number of nonbusiness Chapter 7 filings in 2004 reported
by the U.S. Bankruptcy Courts, scaled by the total number of U.S. households in 2004. We chose 2004
filing rates rather than later ones because they are unaffected by the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and
Consumer Protection Act of 2005 (which changed the eligibility requirements for a discharge in ways
we do not model in this paper).

      While the previous credit market data targets have been used in numerous quantitative theory papers
on bankruptcy, what is novel is our use of the age profile of Risk Score moments. For this we use a


                                                    23
                          Figure 7: Credit Ranking Age Profile: Model vs. Data




Notes: The credit ranking data is based on author calculations using FRBNY CCP/Equifax data in Table 11 in Appendix
D. The linear approximation to the model generated credit ranking age profiles use the regression coefficients from Table 3.


2% sample (approximately 150,000 observations) of the FRBNY CCP/Equifax panel (described in detail
in Appendix D). With this data, we create credit rankings (defined as a percentile ranking of individuals
among the overall sample using Risk Scores) and group individuals between the ages of 20 and 60 in
5 year bins. We then compute the means and standard deviations of credit rankings within each age
bin. With these age bin data values, we estimate affine age profiles for means, standard deviations, and
autocorrelations of year-to-year changes in credit rankings (2004Q1, 2005Q1 and 2006Q1).21 Figure 7
shows the data and auxiliary affine approximations to the data (in red) as well as the model generated
data and approximation (in black).

    Our system is overidentified (we have 7 parameters and 10 moments) so not all moments will be
exactly replicated. While all moments jointly identify the parameters of the model, we find it useful
to provide an informal discussion of how different moments in the data relate to the identification of
different parameters. This discussion is guided by a sensitivity analysis examining how model moments
change in response to changes in the parameters which can be found in Appendix B.9.

    It is important to recall that the process for earnings was estimated outside the model, so all these
considerations are conditional on such a process, which we assume is the same for both types. For
instance, we find the aggregate debt-to-income ratio is primarily determined by that exogenous process
and our assumption that newborns start with the lowest earnings class level. Further, along with the
  21 We do not use the slope of the age profile of the autocorrelation of year-to-year credit score changes as a target
because it is zero, which makes matching the relative deviation between model and data a problem.


                                                            24
extreme value parameter  , the exogenous earnings process is also important for the autocorrelation
of changes in credit rankings given that repayment probabilities are highly dependent on the earnings
process.

   The affine age profile of average credit rankings helps identify the "evolution" parameters of the
type transition process. The constant primarily determines the fraction of high types at birth G H , while
the slope is informative about the difference between Q  ( L | H ) and Q  ( H | L) ) along with the upward
sloping earnings profile. The constant and the slope of the age profile of the standard deviations is
partially determined by the Q  parameters and the extreme value parameter  , both of which affect
the speed of learning in the economy. Furthermore, the fact that earnings dispersion is rising with age
contributes to the slope.

   The four other aggregate credit statistics, namely, the default rate, average interest rate, interest
rate dispersion, and the fraction in debt, are important to identify the remaining parameters. One can
think of the difference in discount factors  H -  L and the extreme value parameter  as also governing
the speed of learning in our economy. That is, if  H -  L is small (large), then there will be more (less)
pooling and therefore quicker (slower) learning. A higher  H -  L , implying more separation, leads to
higher aggregate default, interest rates, and interest rate dispersion. This occurs in the model because
type L are less able to imitate type H and hence face worse terms and have less to lose from defaulting
(so that the aggregate default rate helps identify this difference). While a higher  H relative to  L leads
to a lower fraction of individuals in debt, more separation implies type H face better borrowing terms,
which leads them to select higher amounts of debt (conditional on borrowing) thereby contributing to
higher average rates as well as dispersion. The fraction of households in debt helps identify  because
it attenuates the precautionary savings motive and along with the earnings age profile contributes to
a larger fraction of households in debt. A higher fraction of households in debt contributes to higher
aggregate default, average interest rates, and dispersion moments despite more pooling.

5.2.2      Estimated Parameters

   To estimate the parameters, we proceed by a mixture of simulated method of moments for the
aggregate statistics and indirect inference for the credit score auxiliary affine model of means, standard
deviations, and autocorrelations across the age profile. Our model does not provide for an explicit source
of errors in the cross section (given the large sample sizes, measurement error is not really a problem),
so we cannot use standard procedures to choose the weighting matrix in the sum of squared differences
between model and data moments. Consequently, we choose to weight the two sets of moments,



                                                    25
aggregate credit market statistics and the credit ranking age profile moments, equally.22,                         23   The values
of the data moments and their model counterparts, as well as the average mean square errors (both
total and for each of the two blocks of moments), are reported in Table 3 and graphed for the auxiliary
model in Figure 7.

      The estimated parameter values are in Table 4. The values for patience are   {0.886, 0.915}, so
that low types discount the future 3.6% more than high types. This differential is capable of allowing
reputation acquisition to play a role in equilibrium: types are far enough apart to want to behave
differently, but close enough that imitation is not too costly.

      The estimates for the transition matrix Q  display a slight secular increase of the high types but
with large turnover of nearly 20% (i.e. Q  ( H | L)/Q  ( L | H ) = 0.013/0.011). This implies an ergodic
distribution featuring 55% high types, but the life-cycle demographic structure implies a lower stationary
fraction equal to 41%.          24   Note that the demographic improvement in the average assessment of an
individual's type (and hence creditworthiness) given by s = s · Q  ( H | H ) + ( 1 - s ) · Q  ( H | L) over one's life
with estimated initial fraction of high types G = 0.28, is independent of alternative credit arrangements
we consider. The fact that G is estimated to be below the stationary fraction of high types is a robust
consequence of the rising average credit score over the age profile.

      We view our estimates of the parameters  and  of the extreme value distributions as consistent
with a modest amount of noise in behavior, but not so much that fundamentals are over-ridden. This
is especially true for the binary default/no-default action where the share of modal defaulters is 87%,
and somewhat less so for no-default actions. For debt, where there are (potentially large) pricing and
reputational differences between nearby actions, 71% of choices fall within 1 grid point of the mode. For
assets, where pricing penalties are non-existent and reputational differences are smaller, the analogous
figure is 47%.25


5.3       Model Fit

      We next assess how the model does against certain non-targeted properties in the data.
  22 We  have explored alternative weighting schemes without finding relevant differences.
  23 Specifically,we estimate the parameters of the model by minimizing the sum of squared residuals normalized by the size
of the moments) with equal weighting of the two sets of targets. Because the slope of the age-profile of the autocorrelation
of year-to-year changes of credit scores is almost zero, we do not use it in the estimation, instead we use it as an over
identifying restriction. We use the derivative-free, least squares minimization routine developed in Zhang et al. (2010) to
implement the minimization routine. For more details on computation and estimation see Appendix B.4.
  24 The    fraction of type H in the stationary distribution (call it µ H ) solves µ H                           =      ·
                                                                                     Q  ( H | L) + ( 1- ) G
 ( 1 - Q  ( L | H )) µ H + Q  ( H L) ( 1 - µ H ) + ( 1 -  ) · G H or µ H = 1- ( 1-Q  ( L | H )) + Q  (H
                                                                                                      H | L)
                                                                                                             .   For our estimated
parameter values in Table 4, µ H = 0.41. The fraction of type H asymptotes (when  = 1) to 0.55.
   25 See Appendix B.5 for a description of these calculations.



                                                                  26
                                          Table 3: Estimation Targets

                   Moment (%)                                                    Data      Model


                   Aggregate credit market moments
                   default rate                                                   0.99       0.98
                   average interest rate                                         12.87      13.96
                   interest rate dispersion                                       6.56       7.28
                   fraction of HH in debt                                        10.43      10.58
                   debt to income ratio                                           0.35       0.25


                   Credit ranking age profile moments
                   intercept, mean credit ranking                                0.281      0.355
                   slope, mean credit ranking                                    0.037      0.029
                   intercept, std. dev. credit ranking                           0.216      0.255
                   slope, std. dev. credit ranking                               0.011      0.004
                   average autocorrelation of change in credit ranking           -0.202     -0.109


                   Mean squared errors
                   Aggregate credit market moments                                          0.020
                   Credit ranking age profile moments                                       0.152
                   Total                                                                    0.085

Notes: The credit ranking data is based on author calculations using FRBNY CCP/Equifax data. MSEs are computed in
percentage deviation terms to control for relative magnitudes of moments. That is, for data moment x with model
analog x , the contribution of x to the MSE is ( x /x - 1) 2 . Within each group of moments, each moment receives equal
weight (1/5 on each moment), and each group of moments receives weight 1/2 of the total MSE (hence 0.085 = (0.020
+ 0.152)/2).




5.3.1    Credit Ranking of Defaulters

    Figure 8 shows the non-targeted default rate by credit ranking quintiles in the data and in the model.
As in the data, the model generates high default rates among individuals with low credit rankings and
low default rates among individuals with high credit rankings. The model replicates the decreasing
pattern in the data, except for the second quintile. This arises due to the coarseness of the earnings
class grid which generates a high proportion of low earners in credit ranking quintiles 1 and 2.



                                                          27
                             Table 4: Parameters Chosen Within the Model

                             Parameter                                        Value


                             Evolution of types
                             high discount factor                H            0.915
                             low discount factor                  L           0.886
                             high to low  transition          Q  (L   |H )    0.011
                             low to high  transition          Q  ( H | L)     0.013
                             fraction high  at birth             G H          0.280


                             Extreme value shocks
                             scale parameter (×10-3 )                         3.387
                             correlation parameter                            0.991




                          Figure 8: Default Rate by Credit Ranking Quintiles




Notes: : The credit ranking data is based on author calculations using FRBNY CCP/Equifax data.




                                                        28
                                         Figure 9: Default Event Study




Notes: The credit ranking data is based on author calculations using FRBNY CCP/Equifax data. Model results are
obtained by simulating a panel of 10, 000 individuals for 1, 000 periods and dropping the first 100 periods. Default events
are then isolated, and each data point reported represents the mean of credit rankings across all default events for the
given lead or lag from the date of default (normalized to 0).


5.3.2    Credit Rankings Around Default

    A key property of real world Risk Scores is that they fall upon bankruptcy and mean revert. We
illustrate this property for credit rankings in both the data and the model in Figure 9. Specifically,
we pose the non-targeted average change in credit rankings during a default episode for various age
bins, a form of event study. There are three things to emphasize here. First, the average ranking of
defaulters is around 25% for all ages in the data and a bit higher in the model, but not much. Second,
more importantly, default does not trigger a tremendous fall in credit rankings and is followed by a
mild improvement both in the data and in the model, confirming the mean reversion of scores following
bankruptcy documented in Musto (2004).

    Why is there so little change in credit rankings? The reason is that bankruptcy discharges the debt
burden, which ceteris paribus lowers the likelihood of subsequent default. Third, there is no reversion
to the mean (see the bottom right panel of Figure 13) just before bankruptcy indicating that both the



                                                            29
model and the data are picking up some bad news that are likely being confirmed subsequently via
default.

5.3.3      Credit Access Following Default

      Musto (2004) documents that credit access upon default is limited and slow to grow especially for
those with initially low credit scores (see Figures 2 through 4 in his paper). Is our model consistent with
these properties? This is an important question, since in standard models of unsecured debt, bankruptcy
is modeled as an event that exogenously punishes the defaulter by exclusion from borrowing for a random
number of periods. Punishment in our model is endogenous and works through the effect of dynamic
reputation on future borrowing costs. While the model is in principle clearly capable of delivering these
properties of the data cited by Musto (2004), we have just seen that an individual's credit ranking barely
drops upon default, so how can default trigger these difficulties? The reason is that there is regression
to the mean, and the lack of improvement of the ranking of the defaulters suffices to give them more
adverse terms than those faced by the non- defaulters.

      To see this we plot in Figure 10 the average percent difference in the prices faced two agents who
had the same state in the previous period (earnings class, wealth and credit ranking). One defaulted
(and hence has zero assets today), while the other did not, but this latter agent chose to have zero
assets today (our extreme value shocks implies it is always possible to find two such individuals). As
the figure shows for all except the tiniest of loan sizes (for which approximation error blurs the effect),
the agent who defaulted got a worse update on their score, leading her to face lower debt prices (higher
interest rates). The drop in spread at higher borrowing levels is due to more confusion about type.


5.4     Implication of the Estimates for Credit Rankings

5.4.1      Cross-Section

      Figure 11 shows the tight relation between credit rankings and an individual's earnings class for
selected asset levels. The figure also verifies a form of the sufficient condition (one-to-one mapping
between type scores and credit scores) in Theorem 3 that establishes the equivalance between the
fundamental type score equilibrium (RCE) and the credit score equilibrium (RCECS). Since there is
little overlap in credit rankings across earnings classes in the figure, earnings are a primary predictor
of credit rankings. However, within an earnings class, a credit ranking is a very discerning market
assessment of an individual's type.

      Because of the tight connection of credit scores to the earnings class, credit rankings may not always

                                                     30
                      Figure 10: Average Price Effects, Default vs. No Default




be a good predictor of actual default rates. This can be seen in the top left panel of Figure 12. While
perhaps counterintuitive, it is due to that fact that higher earners do borrow more when they borrow
(which generates the positive relation between borrowing and ranking in the top right panel) even if
fewer of them do borrow (top center panel). The debt to income ratio is, however, monotonic (bottom
right panel), lower score individuals have much higher debt relative to their own income, which is related
to the reversion to the mean in income, low income individuals expect it to go up so they will borrow
a bigger fraction than high income indiviudals that expect it to go down. These relations about debt,
income, and credit status are consistent with the empirical findings in Diaz-Gimenez et al. (2011) [Table
17, p. 19]. The nonmonotonicity in default rates similarly show up in the relation between the credit
ranking and the average and standard deviation of the interest rate.

5.4.2   Age Profile

   Our parameter estimates in Table 4 imply there is demographic drift; specifically that the passage
of time increases the fraction of type H . Our economy also displays demographic drift in earnings class
as all individuals are born as low earners and over time an increasing fraction of them switch to mid and
high earners. These two features are what capture the tight relation in the data between ages and the
main variables that we are interested in even though in the model age per se does not affect behavior.

   These properties are evident in Figure 13. Households earnings on average improve with age and the
standard life cycle wealth accumulation can be seen in the top two panels of the figure as a function of


                                                   31
                                    Figure 11: Credit Scoring Function



    0.9                                                   0.9

    0.8                                                   0.8

    0.7                                                   0.7

    0.6                                                   0.6

    0.5                                                   0.5

    0.4                                                   0.4

    0.3                                                   0.3

    0.2                                                   0.2

    0.1                                                   0.1


          0   0.2    0.4      0.6      0.8     1                0   0.2     0.4      0.6     0.8      1




age. The bottom left shows how the economy's assessments of type is aware of the demographic drift
of type starting from 28% to an asymptotic fraction of 54%. Note that the drift itself is independent of
behavior as we are including all individuals of any given age, but the dispersion is increasing indicating
how there is learning over time: the 5th and the 25th percentiles are drifting down. These are individuals
whose actions have revealed that they are more likely to be type L. The right panel shows the age
evolution of credit rankings where the effect of age is sharper indicating its joint determination by type
and earnings both of which are moving in the same direction.


6    Impact of Alternative Information Structures

    How important is the information structure for allocations? Is the presence of private information and
hence of adverse selection quantitatively significant? What would happen if society outlawed tracking
of individual credit histories and with it the incentives to build a good reputation? Would the credit
market shrink dramatically as the usefulness of maintaining a good reputation disappears? These are
natural questions that we can provide quantitative answers to in the context of our model by comparing
the outcomes of economies that only differ from our baseline in their information structures.

    Before we get into the details of our answers to these questions it is important to keep in mind certain
features of private information that are present in our model. First, because of imperfect separation,
low types are being subsidized by high types. Second, there are additional incentives to repay one's debt
and to save more so as to imitate a high type. Third, there can be important interactions of private
information across the age profile. Specific to our model, all newborns are low earners and face an


                                                    32
                               Figure 12: Outcomes by Credit Ranking Quintiles




Notes: Average moments are computed as the average conditional on credit ranking quintile. Default rate is total default
across all borrowers as in the calibration, not default rate conditional on borrowing, and debt to income ratio is computed
likewise. The size of debt conditional on borrowing averages across all choices made by each agent in a given state.


(expected) upward sloping age-earnings profile. Thus, newborns and young have a life-cycle reason to
borrow and so are more impacted by by private information. Finally, all individuals face idiosyncratic
earnings shocks against which direct insurance is unavailable. Since borrowing to smooth consumption
is costly in all the economies that we explore, all individuals have a precautionary savings reason to
accumulate assets.

      Differences between the economies imply not only that individuals behave differently on account of
the incentives that they face, but also that the equilibrium prices reflect these changes and accordingly
we have to look at both aspects simultaneously.


6.1        Description of alternative economies

      We now consider two stark alternative information structures in which reputation plays a limited
role: one where past actions cannot be used to price discriminate but demographic drift can be used to
infer type and another where type is public information.26
  26 For   the formal specification of these alternative economies, see Appendix B.8.




                                                              33
                                                Figure 13: Life Cycle Properties




Notes: Each figure plots the percentiles of the variable specified in the title, conditional on the age specified on the
horizontal axis. For example, a credit ranking of 0.2 puts an individual in the 95th percentile of 21 year olds, but only the
25th percentile of 30 year olds. Earnings in the figure include only the persistent component, e , since the transitory shocks
z do not impact one's credit ranking and are i.i.d. and mean zero across individuals regardless of age.


    Our first alternative economy poses hidden information as in the baseline model (hereafter termed
BASE) but creditors are prohibited from using a person's past to price loans. We assume that age
(or the length of one's credit history) is both publicly observable and legally used to price debt. We
make this assumption to isolate the role of the incentives from the role of the demographic drift in the
credit market. In this economy some information about the individual's type is inferred by her current
asset choice but this information cannot be carried across periods. We refer to this economy as the
no-tracking (NT) economy. To be concrete, in this alternative economy individuals start their adult
life with a type score equal to the fraction of high types among newborns and it evolves thereafter
according to the demographic drift slowly improving over time.27 Note that this implies a one-to-
one mapping between an individual's age and the prior that she is a high type (her type score in this
alternative economy). Consistent with no-tracking, lenders are also not allowed to use information about
an individual's beginning-of-period asset holdings when pricing loans since this also contains information
about their past actions. However, lenders are able to use the current action and the cross-sectional
distribution of agents in the NT economy when forming a posterior about the likelihood of repayment
  27 As   stated previously, the evolution is simply given by s = s · Q  ( H | H ) + ( 1 - s ) · Q  ( H | L) with initial condition s = 0.28.


                                                                     34
              Figure 14: Evolution of Types and Type scores in Alternative Economies




Notes: The green and black dashed lines of the left panel correspond to the fraction of high types at the indicated age
and the mean type score at each age in each economy. These lines coincide by construction. The three model variants
considered have different type score standard deviations. The right panel plots the type-specific CDF of type scores in each
model economy. Black / blue / red refer to BASE / NT / FI model economies, and solid (dashed) lines refer to high (low)
types.


necessary to price loans. In this NT economy there is private information and indeed, there is cross-
subsidization, but there are no incentives to look like a high type, as actions cannot be used to impute
type like they can in the BASE economy.

    Our second alternative features full information (hereafter termed FI) where the type is directly
observed by lenders that use it to price discriminate. Except for our extreme value shocks, this alternative
economy is similar in many ways to Chatterjee et al. (2007). There is no need to infer a person's type
and the price for a loan of size a depends directly on  and all other relevant observables. Importantly,
prices do not depend on s nor a because they are not directly payoff relevant. Comparing the FI economy
to the BASE reveals the full impact of hidden information: in the FI there is no subsidizing nor incentives
to look like a high type.

    Some of the main distinguishing features of the three economies can be seen already in Figure 14.
The right panel shows the CDF of the type scores for each type indicating the degree to which information
about type is revealed to creditors. In the BASE economy, the CDF of type L individuals rises steeply
and fast, indicating that most type L individuals have low scores. In contrast, the CDF of type H
individuals rises more gradually, indicating that type H individuals have more dispersed types scores.
In the NT economy, type scores (priors) are trapped between 0.28 (score at birth) and 0.54 (score at
age infinity). Although people of all types share the same age-specific type score at each age, there



                                                            35
are more type L individuals at each age (in the figure) than type H and, consequently, the CDF of low
types rises somewhat faster. Most importantly, the CDFs are closest to each other for the NT economy,
indicating that less is being learned about an individual's type as she ages, compared to the BASE and
FI economies.

      The left panel of Figure 14 plots the mean and standard deviation of type scores for each age across
the alternative economies. Importantly, the mean type score at each age is correctly assessed in all
economies to be equal to the fraction of high types. In the NT economy the standard deviation of type
scores at all ages is zero as nothing is learned.28 For the FI economy, the dispersion in type scores at
any age is the dispersion of types themselves in the economy that has not yet reached its maximum by
age 70. In the BASE economy it is increasing at a faster rate than in the FI economy, consistent with
learning.


6.2     No-Tracking Economy

      Recall that while creditors are prohibited from using a person's past to price loans in the NT economy,
some information about the individual's type is inferred by her current asset choice and can be used to
price each debt level accurately. Unlike the BASE economy, the assessment of default probabilities is not
permitted to depend on beginning-of-period assets (which reflect past actions prohibited by no-tracking)
but includes their age (since that determines the composition of types in a given borrowing pool). The
key feature of NT is that the only information that can be used by lenders in the future (i.e. earnings
class and the type score implied by their age) is exogenous so incentives to behave in asset markets are
absent.

      We start by looking at loan prices in Figure 15. The figure shows the percentage differences between
the prices faced by some agents in the NT economy relative to the BASE economy in comparable states.
For newborns (i.e. 20 year olds in our mapping to the data) the comparison is easy, as all newborns
begin life in the same observable state in both economies (i.e. they have zero assets (and it is common
knowledge they do), low earnings class, and they are high types with probability 0.28). The price
difference comes only from the different probabilities of repayment across the two economies owing to
differences in dynamic incentives. Prices are equal up to a loan size of 0.02 and for larger loans the
prices are lower in NT, reflecting higher default probabilities at each loan size. This is due to the lower
incentives to repay in the NT economy.

      As individuals age, besides incentive differences between the economies, selection effects begin to
  28 Strictlyspeaking, because the evolution of s implied by the Markov type transition function for the NT economy
typically does not yield scores which fall on the grid points in S , there is some negligible dispersion in type scores.


                                                          36
               Figure 15: Loan Price Comparison Between BASE and NT Economies




Notes: Let sj denote the average type score for an agent of age j , and let aj  NT be the average wealth of an agent of age
                                                                 ( 0,a )       ( 0,a )
j in the NT economy. Each line in the figure represents 100 · ( qNT ( j , e )/qBASE ( aj
                                                                                       NT , s , e ) - 1) .
                                                                                             j



play a role. For 21 year olds, there are low and middle earning class individuals. The 21 year old low
earners in the NT economy are of high type with probability 0.29 and have a certain amount of wealth
a, but they cannot be differentiated by asset holdings since the NT economy does not allow lenders to
price using an individual's a. Consequently, we compare the prices that they face with those faced by
an agent with s = 0.29 and the same amount of wealth a in the BASE economy. We plot this for the
case where a is the average asset holdings of 21 year olds in the NT economy. For low earners, the price
difference from the baseline is slightly different while for mid earners the differences from the baseline
are smaller. By age 30, most individuals have accumulated assets and so the need to borrow is much
lower. Consequently, if an individual seeks to borrow, lenders assign a higher probability to the person
having low assets and, so, of being the low type. In the baseline economy, assets are observable, so this
selection effect on price is absent. This adverse selection effect is present for both 21 year olds and 30
year olds but is weaker at younger ages because individuals have not had enough time to accumulate
assets.

    In summary, an important takeaway from a legal restriction which prohibits tracking an individual's
previous credit market actions is an equilibrium rise in borrowing rates individuals face on sizeable levels
of debt. How do agents respond to these higher borrowing rates in the NT economy relative to BASE?
A way to see this is via Figure 16 that compares allocations in the NT and the BASE by age. In the



                                                            37
    Figure 16: Percentage Differences by Age in No-Tracking Relative to Baseline Economy




Notes: In each panel, each line corresponds to the percent difference in the SI economy relative to the Base in the average
moment indicated at the specified age. For the type-specific measures, the average is computed conditional on type in
both economies.


left panel agents save more in the NT economy, especially the young who have the lowest wealth and
hence the most affected by a bad shock in the near future. Whatever incentives exist in BASE to save
more than in NT to signal type are dwarfed by the actual price differences themselves. Conditional on
borrowing, both types borrow less in the NT economy. The right panel shows there is a sizeable decrease
in default, a feature that may look counterintuitive given the fact that default is not tracked into next
period. However, lower default is a result of the lower individual borrowing in the NT economy, shifting
from relatively large individual loans in BASE to smaller amounts of debt in NT. This is especially true
for type H individuals who can shift to lower amounts of debt more easily since they are less impatient.

    An important implication of these differences across economies is that the stronger incentives to
pay back loans in BASE can accommodate a more active loan market than the NT economy. Indeed,
Table 5 shows how much less debt there is in the NT economy, especially for the high types, both in
absolute terms and in terms of the fractions of debt-to-income. As a result of this smaller debt volume
there is less default in the NT economy.

    Finally we turn to welfare. While it is immediate to talk about how newborns fare in both economies,
there is more than one way to think of how the switch from the BASE to NT is implemented for people
already alive. One possibility is to immediately outlaw the use of personal asset market history beyond
the length of one's credit history (i.e. age). Alternatively, one could treat older individuals just like
newborns, using information on their asset holdings and type score for the period of the policy switch
but then knowledge about subsequent savings or defaults cannot be used. Rather than make a choice




                                                            38
on implementation, we focus on newborns.29

      The findings are sharp. Eliminating incentives based on the use of credit histories reduces the average
welfare of newborns (measured using consumption equivalents) by 0.5% in Table 5.30 The losses are
larger for impatient agents mostly because they weigh the present more which is when they would be
more likely using the credit market. As we might expect, the losses are higher ­ almost 1.0% ­ for those
with the lowest transitory earnings. That all newborns are made worse off in the NT economy implies
that incentive effects which affect all types outweigh the cross-subsidization of type L by type H .

                             Table 5: Comparison of No-Tracking vs Baseline

                                                               Ratio to BASE (in %)
                                                            High Types       Low Types         All

                   Volume of Debt                                -4.20          -3.16         -3.50
                   Debt to Income Ratio                          -4.02          -2.97         -3.32
                   Default Rate                                  -9.03          -6.85         -7.52

                                                    Consumption equivalent gain (in %)
                   Transitory Earnings (z ):       Low        Median            High         Mean

                   All Newborns                    -0.88         -0.41          -0.25        -0.513
                   High type Newborns              -0.69         -0.33          -0.21        -0.414
                   Low type Newborns               -0.96         -0.44          -0.26        -0.551



6.3     Full Information

      Under full information (FI), types are observed, cross-subsidization ends, and so do incentives for a
type L to imitate a type H . In Figure 17, we compare the prices that individuals of a given age face in
the FI economy with their counterpart in the BASE economy who has the average type score for that
age and the FI economy's average asset holdings for that age. Since we use the average type score for
a given age, the price comparison does take into account the learning that naturally occurs in the Base
economy (i.e. type H (L) have a higher (lower) type score than the average type score for their given
age).
  29 One consequence of focusing on newborns is that we do not need to compute a transition. At the moment of the
policy switch, the average asset holdings of older cohorts are potentially different from those of the same age group in the
steady state of the NT economy. Hence, even in a small open economy, all except the newborns face a transition of prices
as the cross-sectional distribution used to infer future default probabilities evolves to the invariant distribution.
  30 See Appendix B.7 for the derivation of our consumption equivalent measures.




                                                            39
    As one might expect, Figure 17 shows that for each age, type L in the FI economy face lower loan
prices (higher interest rates) in the default territory (loans larger than .02) and type H face higher prices
(lower interest rates) than the BASE economy where there is some cross-subsidization. The figure also
shows that these price differences change with age. As individuals age, 1 - s falls for type H while s - 0
rises for type L so the elimination of cross-subsidization leads to even lower loan prices for type L and
less of an improvement in loan prices for type H .

      Figure 17: Loan Price Comparison Between Full Information and Baseline Economies




Notes: Let sj denote the average type score for an agent of age j , and let aj  FI be the average wealth of an agent of age j
                                                               ( 0,a )      ( 0,a )
in the FI economy. Each line in the figure represents 100 · ( qFI (  , e )/qBASE ( ajFI , s , e ) - 1) .
                                                                                           j



    As a result of the price differences, agents take different actions which can be seen in Figure 18
that plots the differences between the FI and BASE economies in important observables by type and
age, expressed again as percentage deviation relative to the BASE. The higher loan prices faced by the
high types allows them to borrow more effectively and to fear less low future earnings which induce
them to save less, while the opposite is true for the low types as the plot on assets holdings show. As
time passes the differences shrink. Interestingly, there is a small aggregate effect with the FI economy
showing lower assets overall despite the high types being a slight minority, which is due to the incentives
built to save in the BASE. Due to the better prices faced by the high types and their lack of need to
show that they are indeed high types, these agents default a lot more. The opposite occurs for the low
types, they borrow less and default less.



                                                             40
        Figure 18: Percentage Differences by Age Between Full Information and Baseline




Notes: In each panel, each line corresponds to the percent difference in the FI model relative to the baseline in the average
moment indicated at the specified age. For the type-specific measures, the average is computed conditional on type in
both economies.


    Perhaps the most important takeaway from Figure 18 is that while the type-specific age profiles
are very different from the base model, the average profiles are not. This explains why the aggregate
credit market moments in Table 6 are quite similar between the BASE and FI economies, while the
type-specific averages are quite different. High types both borrow and default more in the FI economy
than BASE. The opposite happens to low types. As expected, due to the knowledge of types, we find
that interest rate dispersion "within" types diminishes dramatically (over 90% lower for each type) while
the overall dispersion rate (including "across" types) drops only about 2%.

    The welfare implications for newborns are clear: high types rather live with full information where
they do not subsidize the low types while the opposite is true for low types. On average, partly because
of higher frequency of low types, the BASE is preferred.


7    Conclusion and Directions for Future Research

    In this paper, we present a hidden information model of unsecured consumer credit with risk of
default. People are subject to unobserved persistent and transitory shocks and the history of people's
asset market actions help forecast future defaults. The setup is possibly the simplest environment to
quantitatively study the role of credit scores in regulating consumer credit. We showed how this can be
done using shocks drawn from an extreme value distribution and recursive updating of beliefs.

    Our quantitative model with persistent hidden heterogeneity in types is capable of not only accounting
for aggregate credit market moments but also the joint behavior of the age profile of credit rankings.
Furthermore, the model generates an age profile of credit ranking patterns like those in U.S. data. In

                                                             41
                        Table 6: Comparison of Full Information vs. Baseline

                                                           Ratio to BASE (in %)
                                                                High      Low          All

                   Volume of Debt                               6.28     -3.14        -0.08
                   Debt to Income Ratio                         5.77     -2.95        -0.09
                   Default Rate                                 12.21    -6.84        -1.00


                                                  Consumption equivalent gain (in %)
                                                           Transitory Earnings (z )
                                                  Low       Median       High     Mean

                   All Newborns                   -0.169        -0.018   0.033    -0.051
                   High type Newborns             1.684         0.846    0.579    1.036
                   Low type Newborns              -0.890        -0.354   -0.179   -0.474

Notes: All numbers are reported in percentages.


this sense, our model provides a quantitative theory of the credit score.

    Two implications of our theory are worth highlighting. First, we found that restricting lenders'
access to an individual's history of asset market actions (no tracking) leads to a welfare loss for all
young adults. Since the young tend to borrow against their future income, the negative incentive effects
from not having to maintain a good reputation raises interest rates faced by the young which offsets
any benefits from pooling afforded to the low types. Our "big data" baseline model affords all of the
young with better intertemporal insurance at the expense of worse intratemporal insurance for a subset
of the population in a "small data" economy.

    Second, even though our model allowed lenders unrestricted access to the history of all actions
relevant for inferring an individual's type, the equilibrium allocations at an individual level remain far
removed from those of a full information economy. This stems from the fact that individuals select
actions that only partially reveal their type while in the full information economy they get that revelation
for free. Despite big differences at the micro level, the macro (aggregate) differences are small.

    Where next? First, type does not have to correspond to an individual's hidden time preference.
Alternatively, it could correspond to hidden ability differences that exogenously affect earnings. Furthermore,
hidden time preference could affect a hidden human capital decision (i.e. moral hazard) to endogenously



                                                           42
affect earnings or to a variety of other personal traits. Second, while the theory is written for many
types, the quantitative work assumed two types since it was adequate for the task at hand. Extending
the analysis to higher dimensional type differences is left for future research. Third, to keep the state
space reasonable, we restricted attention to a model with one asset so that we consider simply positions
of net debt. A model with separate debt and assets (e.g. housing) can generate stronger reputation
effects. In Online Appendix C we provide a simple example where reputation in the unsecured credit
market spills over to other asset markets, reinforcing reputation effects. More generally, a person's
reputation (or type score) in the unsecured credit market may have implications for other markets (e.g.
insurance, labor) and other interactions (marriage) that are worth exploring.



References

Acquisti, A. and H. R. Varian (2005): "Conditioning Prices on Purchase History," Marketing
 Science, 24, 367­381.
Adda, J. and R. Cooper (2003): Dynamic Economics: Quantitative Methods and Applications,
 Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Agarwal, S., S. Chomsisengphet, and C. Liu (2010): "The Importance of Adverse Selection in
 the Credit Card Market: Evidence from Randomized Trials of Credit Card Solicitations," Journal of
 Money, Credit and Bankin, 42.
Aguiar, M., S. Chatterjee, H. L. Cole, and Z. R. Stangebye (2016): "Quantitative Models
 of Sovereign Debt Crises," Tech. Rep. 22125, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Albanesi, S. and J. Nosal (2015): "Insolvency after the 2005 Bankruptcy Reform," FRBNY Staff
 Reports.
Amador, M. and C. Phelan (2018): "Reputation and Sovereign Default," National Bureau of
 Economic Research Working Paper No. 24682.
Athreya, K., X. S. Tam, and E. R. Young (2012): "A Quantitative Theory of Information and
 Unsecured Credit," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 4, 153­183.
Ausubel, L. (1999): "Adverse Selection in the Credit Card Market," Unpublished, University of
 Maryland.
Carter, B., K. Herkenhoff, and G. Phillips (2019):                     "Can the Unemployed Borrow?
 Implications for Public Insurance," Unpublished.
Chatterjee, S., D. Corbae, M. Nakajima, and J.-V. Rios-Rull (2007): "A Quantitative
 Theory of Unsecured Consumer Credit with Risk of Default," Econometrica, 75, 1525­1589.
Chatterjee, S., D. Corbae, and J.-V. Riios-Rull (2008): "A Finite-life Private-information
 Theory of Unsecured Consumer Credit," Journal of Economic Theory, 142, 149­177.
Cole, H. and P. Kehoe (1998): "Models of Sovereign Debt: Partial Versus General Reputations,"
 International Economic Review, 39, 55­70.

                                                   43
Corbae, D. and A. Glover (2018): "Employer Credit Checks: Poverty Traps versus Matching
 Efficiency," NBER Working Paper 25005.

D'erasmo, P. (2011): "Government Reputation and Debt Repayment in Emerging Economies,"
  Unpublished.

Diamond, D. W. (1989): "Reputation Acquisition in Debt Markets," The Journal of Political
  Economy, 97, 828­862.

Diaz-Gimenez, J., A. Glover, and J.-V. Rios-Rull (2011): "Facts on the Distribution of
  Earnings, Income, and Wealth in the United States: 2007 Update," Quarterly Review, Federal Reserve
  Bank of Minneapolis, 34, 2­32.

Drozd, L. and R. Serrano-Padial (2017): "Modeling the Revolving Revolution: The Debt
 Collection Channel," American Economic Review, 107, 897­930.

Dubey, P. and J. Geanokoplos (2002): "Competitive Pooling: Rothschild-Stiglitz Reconsidered,"
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 1529­1570.

Dvorkin, M., J. Sanchez, H. Sapriza, and E. Yurdagul (????):                       "Sovereign Debt
 Restructurings," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics (forthcoming).

Eaton, J. and M. Gersovitz (1981): "Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theoretical and Empirical
 Analysis," Review of Economic Studies, 48, 289­309.

Einav, L., M. Jenkins, and J. Levin (2013): "The Impact of Credit Scoring on Consumer Lending,"
  THe RAND Journal of Economics, 44, 249­274.

Elul, R. and P. Gottardi (2015): "Bankruptcy: Is it Enougj to Forgive or Must We Also Forget,"
  American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 7, 294­338.

Exler, F. and M. Tertilt (2020): "Consumer Debt and Default: A Macro Perspective,"
 Unpublished.

Floden, M. and J. Lindé (2001): "Idiosyncratic Risk in the United States and Sweden: Is There a
  Role for Government Insurance?" Review of Economic Dynamics, 4, 406­437.

Gale, D. (1992): "Walrasian Theory of Markets with Adverse Selection," The Review of Economic
 Studies, 59, 229­255.

Guerreri, V., R. Shimer, and R. Wright (2010): "Adverse Selection in Competitive Search,"
 Econometrica, 78, 1823­1862.

Heathcote, J., F. Perri, and G. Violante (2010): "Unequal We Stand: An Empirical Analysis
 of Economic Inequality in the United States, 1967-2006," Review of Economic Dynamics, 13, 15­51.

Hertzberg, A., A. Liberman, and D. Paravisini (2018): "Screening on Loan Terms: Evidence
 from Maturity Choice in Consumer Credit," The Review of Financial Studies, 31, 3532­3567.

Hutson, V. and J. S. Pym (1980): Applications of Functional Analysis and Operator Theory,
 Academic Press.

Jaffee, D. M. and T. Russell (1976): "Imperfect Information, Uncertainty, and Credit Rationing,"
  THe Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90, 651­666.

                                                44
Krueger, D. and F. Perri (2006): "Does Income Inequality Lead to Consumption Inequality ?
 Evidence and Theory," Review of Economic Studies, 73, 163­193.

Livshits, I., J. MacGee, and M. Tertilt (2007a): "Consumer Bankruptcy: A Fresh Start," The
  American Economic Review, 97, 402­418.

Livshits, I., J. C. MacGee, and M. Tertilt (2007b): "Consumer Bankruptcy: A Fresh Start,"
  American Economic Review, 97, 402­418.

------ (2016): "The Democratization of Credit and the Rise in Consumer Bankruptcies," Review of
  Economic Studies, 83, 1673­1710.

Luo, W. (2017): "The Consumer Credit Channel of Monetary Policy," Georgetown University.

McFadden, D. (1974): "Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior," in Frontiers in
 Econometrics, ed. by P. Zarembka, Academic Press, New York, 105­142.

Musto, D. (2004): "What Happens When Information Leaves the Market? Evidence From Post-
 Bankruptcy Consumers," Journal of Business, 77, 725­748.

Myerson, R. B. (1978): "Refinements of the Nash Equilibrium Concept," International Journal of
 Game Theory, 7, 73­80.

Narajabad, B. N. (2012): "Information Technology and the Rise of Household Bankruptcy," Review
 of Economic Dynamics, 15, 526­550.

Nelson, S. (2020): "Private Information and Price Regulation in the US Credit Card Market,"
 Unpublished.

Peski, M. (2014): "Repeated Games with Incomplete Information and Discounting," Theoretical
 Economics, 9, 651­694.

Prescott, E. C. and R. M. Townsend (1984): "Pareto Optima and Competitive Equilibria with
 Adverse Selection and Moral Hazard," Econometrica, 52, 21­46.

Riley, J. G. (2001): "Silver Signals: Twenty-Five Years of Screening and Signaling," Journal of
  Economic Literature, 39, 432­478.

Rust, J. (1987): "Optimal Replacement of GMC Bus Engines: An Empirical Model of Harold Zurcher,"
 Econometrica, 55, 999­1033.

Sanchez, J. M. (2018): "The Information Technology Revolution and the Unsecured Credit Market,"
  Economic Inquiry, 56, 914­930.

Selten, R. (1975): "Reexamination of the Perfectness Concept for Equilibrium Points in Extensive
  Games," International Journal of Game Theory, 4, 25­55.

Stokey, N. L. and R. E. Lucas Jr. (1989): Recursive Methods in Economic Dynamics, Harvard
  University Press.

Zhang, H., A. R. Conn, and K. Scheinberg (2010): "A Derivative-Free Algorithm for Least-
  Squares Minimization," SIAM Journal on Optimization, 20, 3555­3576.



                                               45
                                  Online Appendices
A     Model Appendix

A.1    Construction of Q s ( s | ) and Proof of Lemma 1

Let G  {0, 1/K , 2/K , ... 1} be a uniform discrete approximation of [ 0, 1] . Let S = {( s1 , s2 , ... sB )| si 
G and B  i =1 si = 1 } be the associated probability simplex. Let D = 1/K denote the distance between
adjacent (grid) points of G .

                                                                   B -1                            B -1
Lemma 4. Let si  G for i = 1, 2, ... B - 1. If                     i =1 si        < 1, then 1 -    i =1 si   G

             -1            B -1                 B -1
Proof. B  i =1 si < 1      i =1 ( i /K ) < 1    i =1 i < K where the i 's are integers between 0 and K .
                                                                                                     -1
Since a sum of integers is an integer and a difference of two integers is also an integer, K - B  i =1 i is
                                                                                   B -1
a positive integer and it is less than K . Therefore, by the definition of G , 1 - i =1 i /K  G .

Assumption 2. All elements of the matrix Q  are strictly positive.

Lemma 5. Let  = (1 , 2 , ... , B ) be any vector of type scores resulting from the Bayesian update.
Then, i  Q > 0.

Proof. Let Q be the smallest element of Q  . By Assumption 1, Q > 0.

                            i     =          Q  ( i | j ) × posterior probability of j | actions
                                         j

                                             Q × posterior probability of j | actions
                                         j
                                  = Q.

The first equality follows from the definition of i , the inequality follows from Assumption 1 and the
last line follows from the fact that the sum of posterior probabilities is 1.


We now identify the elements of S that approximate any given type-score vector  resulting from the
Bayesian update. Let si ,L = maxs G s  i and si ,H = si ,L + D . Consider the collection of 2B -1 vectors:
                                                           B -1
                 S = ( s1,l ( 1) , s2,l ( 2) , ... , 1 -          si ,l ( i ) )     where for each i , l ( i )  {L, H }
                                                           i =1

Lemma 6. If D < Q /( B - 1) then S  S .

Proof. By construction, si ,L  G . Next, observe that si ,L cannot be 1 since that would imply that i = 1
and, therefore, j i = 0 in contradiction to Lemma 5. Therefore, si ,H = si ,L + D must belong in G for




                                                                        1
                                                                           B -1
all i . To show that ( s1,l ( 1) , s2,l ( 2) , ... , 1 -                   i =1 si ,l ( i ) )     belongs in S it is sufficient to show, by virtue of
                     -1
Lemma 4, that B   i =1 si ,l ( i ) < 1.

                                                     B -1                              B -1
                                                             si ,l ( i )                        si ,H
                                                      i =1                             i =1
                                                                                       B -1
                                                                                               (i + D )
                                                                                        i =1
                                                                             = ( 1 - B ) + ( B - 1) D
                                                                              1 - Q + ( B - 1) D
                                                                             < 1

The first inequality follows because si ,l ( i )  si ,H . The second inequality follows because si ,L = si ,H + D
and i  si ,L . The third equality follows because B           i =1 i = 1. The fourth inequality follows from
Lemma 5 and the final inequality follows from the hypothesis of the Lemma.

By virture of lemma 6 we can take S to be the collection of approximating vectors. Note that for each
member of this set, the first B - 1 components are within i ± D so, in this sense, the vectors are close
to  .

We now determine the probability assigned to each of these vectors. To this end, let
                                            si ,H - i                   i - si ,L
                            p ( si ,L ) =             and p ( si ,H ) =           for i = 1, 2, 3, ... B - 1                                                         (19)
                                                 D                        D
Since si ,L  i < si ,H and si ,H - si ,L = D both p ( si ,L ) and p ( si ,H ) are nonnegative and their sum is 1.
We set
                                                               B -1                            B -1
        Pr     s1,l ( 1) , s2,l ( 2) , s3,l ( 3) , ... , 1 -           si ,l ( i )        =             p ( si ,l ( i ) ) , l ( i )  {L, H }, i = 1, 2, ... B - 1.
                                                               i =1                             i =1




Then our assignment rule Q s ( s | ) : S  [0, 1] is given by:
                                                                                     B -1
                                                                                     i =1 p ( si ,l ( i ) )      if s  S
                                                Q s ( s | ) =                                                                                                        (20)
                                                                             0                                  otherwise

For this assignment rule, we can prove:

Lemma 1. (i) s S si Q s ( s | ) = i , i, (ii)                                               s S ( si       - i ) 2 Q s ( s | )  2 ( B - 1) D 2 , i, and (iii)
Q s ( s | ) is continuous in  .

Proof. (i) First, note that
                                                               si Q s ( s |  ) =                          si Q s ( s |  )
                                                      s S                                       s S

since (20) assigns positive probability only to vectors that are in S .



                                                                                            2
     Let i  {1, 2, ... , B - 1}. Now, group the collection of vectors in S into two: In the first group are
all vectors for which si = si ,L and in the second group are all vectors for which si = si ,H . Denote these
groups as S  L and S H . Then,
                       


                                   si Q s ( s |  ) =           si Q s ( s |  ) +              si Q s ( s |  )
                             s S                       s SL                           s SH


                                                  = si ,L             Q s ( s | ) + si ,H               Q s ( s | )
                                                              s SL                            s SH


                                                  = si ,L p ( si ,L ) + si ,H p ( si ,H )
                                                  = i

The third equality follows from the fact that the first and second summation terms in the second line
are the probabilities of selecting a vector that belongs to group L and group H , respectively. Since the
assignment of si ,L or si ,H for si is done independently of the assignments to the other B - 2 components,
the probability of selecting a vector in group L is p ( si ,L ) and in group H is p ( si ,H ) . The last equality
follows from (19).


    Next, let i = B . Then,

                                   sB Q s ( s |  ) =            [ 1 - s1 - s2 - ... - sB -1 ] Q s ( s | )
                             s S                        s S
                                                                                     B -1
                                                   =            Q s ( s | ) -                     si Q s ( s |  )
                                                        s S                          i =1 s S
                                                               B -1
                                                   =1-                i
                                                               i =1
                                                   = B

(ii) Let i  {1, 2, ... , B - 1}.

                   ( si - i ) 2 Q s ( s | ) =            ( si - i ) 2 Q s ( s | ) +                ( si - i ) 2 Q s ( s | )
             s S                                 s SL                                       s SH


                                             =           ( si ,L - i ) 2 Q s ( s | ) +               ( si ,H - i ) 2 Q s ( s | )
                                                 s SL                                         s SH


                                              D2               Q s ( s | ) + D 2                 Q s ( s | )
                                                       s SL                               s SH


                                             = D 2 ( p ( si ,L ) + p ( si ,H ))
                                             = D2.


    Let i = B . Then,

                                                       B -1               B -1        2
                     2
          ( sB - B ) Q ( s | ) =
                         s
                                               1-             si - 1 +           i        Q s ( s | )
    s S                                s S             i =1               i =1



                                                                      3
                                             B -1                 2

                                 =                   ( si - i )       Q s ( s | )
                                     s S      i =1
                                     B -1
                                                              2
                                 =                   si - i       Q s ( s | ) + expectations of cross product terms
                                     i =1 s S

                                  ( B - 1) D 2 .

The inequality in the final line follows from the bound on each of the variances and from the fact that
the assignments of si for i  {1, 2, ... , B - 1} are independent of each other so that the expectation of
all the cross product terms are zero.


(iii) Let n be a sequence converging to   . Consider first the case where i                         G . Then, for n > N ,
N sufficiently large, in  ( si,L , si,H ) and, so,

                                                  si,H - in                         in - si,L
                                p n ( si ,L ) =               and p n ( si ,H ) =               .
                                                       D                               D
It follows that limn p n ( si ,L ) = p  ( si ,L ) and limn p n ( si ,H ) = p  ( si ,H ) . Next consider the case where
i  G . Then, by construction

                                  si,L = i , si,H = si,L + D and p  ( si,L ) = 1.

Then, for n > N , N sufficiently large, either in  ( si,L - D , si,L ) or in  ( si,L , si,L + D ) . Therefore,
p n ( si,L ) converges to 1 = p  ( si,L ) as in converges to i .


Note that by reducing the distance between adjacent points of G , or, equivalently, increasing the number
of (uniformly-placed) grid points approximating the unit interval, the dispersion of s around  can be
made arbitrarily small.

A.2     Proof of Theorem 1 (Existence of the Value Function)

Theorem 1. Given f , there exists a unique solution W (  , z ,  | f ) to the individual's decision problem
in (3) - (5).

Proof. The proof relies on the Contraction Mapping Theorem. However, since ( d ,a ) can take any value
on the real line, it is mathematically more convenient to seek a solution to (2), (4), (9), and (10) since
the extreme value errors do not appear in these. Define the operator ( Tf )( W ) : B +Z + | |  B +Z + | |
as the map that takes a vector W in B +Z + | | and returns a vector ( Tf )( W ) via (4), (9), (10)
using (2). We may easily verify that Tf satisfies Blackwell's sufficiency condition for a contraction
map (with modulus   ). Since B +Z + | | is a complete metric space (with, say, the uniform metric
 ( W , W ) = max1 i B +Z + | | Wi - Wi ), by Theorem 3.2 of Stokey and Lucas Jr. (1989), there exists
a unique W (  , z ,  | f ) satisfying ( Tf )( W ) = W .




                                                                  4
A.3        Proof of Lemma 2 (Existence of the Invariant Distribution)

                                                                                            ¯ (·| f ) at a
Lemma 2. There exists a unique invariant distribution µ (·| f ) and {µ 0 T n } converges to µ
geometric rate for any initial distribution µ 0 .

Proof. We will use Theorem 11.4 in Stokey and Lucas Jr. (1989) to establish this result. To connect to
that theorem, let i be a typical element of the finite state space B × Z × . Let the transition matrix
 in their theorem corresponds to T in (16) and let i j denote the probability of transiting to j from
i . Further, let j = mini i j and = j j . Then it is sufficient to establish that > 0. To this end,
consider the state j  ^ = (  ^, z^, e^ , 0, Gs ) with the property that g ( ^)H (z^ ) Ge ( e
                                                                                           ^ ) > 0. Then, (16) implies
i j^  ( 1 -  ) g ( ^)H (z
                        ^ ) Ge ( e
                                 ^ ) > 0 for all i . Hence j^  ( 1 -  ) g (  ^)H (z^ ) Ge ( e
                                                                                            ^ ) > 0. Since j  0 for all
other j , it follows that > 0.



A.4        Proof of Lemma 3 (Continuity of the Value Function)

Lemma 3.       W (  , z ,  | f ) is continuous in f and for any ( d , a )  F ( z ,  | f ) ,  ( d ,a ) (  , z ,  | f ) is
continuous in f .

Proof. To prove continuity of W (  , z ,  | f ) in f we first show that the operator Tf defined in Theorem
1 is continuous in f (meaning that for any given W , small changes in f lead to small changes in
Tf ( W ) ). Inspection of (9) and (10) shows that this will be true if the conditional value functions
v ( d ,a ) (  , z , e , a, s | f ) in (4) are continuous in f . Let f¯  F  and let ( d                                                 ^,a  ^ )  F ( z ,  | f¯ ) . Let
                                                                        ¯
f  F be a sequence converging to f . By Assumption 1, ( 0, 0) and ( 1, 0) are feasible choices
  n          

regardless of the value of any inherited debt (i.e. a < 0), so all debt choices (a < 0) and the default
choice belong in F ( z ,  | f n ) . Furthermore, if an asset choice (i.e. a  0) is feasible for f¯ , that
asset choice remains feasible for f n since the price of any asset is the same in f¯ and f n (namely,
                                            ^,a                                                      ^ ^)
 /( 1 + r ) ). Therefore, ( d                     ^ )  F ( z ,  | f n ) and so v ( d ,a                     (  , z , e , a, s | f n ) is well-defined for all n.
Observe that f affects v n                   ( d , a ) (  , z , e , a, s | f ) in (4) via how q n affects the feasible set given in (2)
                                                                              n
                                                                                                 ^ ^)                            ^ ^)
and how  n affects Q s ( s | n ) in (4). Since limn c ( d ,a                                           ( z ,  | f n ) = c ( d ,a       ( z ,  | f¯ ) , the continuity of
                                   ^ ^ ) ( z ,  | f n )) = u ( lim                      ^  ^ ) ( z ,  | f n )) = u ( c ( d ,a ^  ^ ) )z ,  |f ¯ )) . From Lemma 1,
u gives limn u ( c ( d ,a                                                  n c
                                                                                      ( d ,a

limn Q ( s |    s         ( d ,a )
                                   (  | f )) = Q ( s |
                                          n              s           ( d ,a )
                                                                              (  | f¯ )) . It follows that v             ( d , a ) (  , z , e , a, s | f ) is continuous
in f and hence limn Tf = Tf¯ . Since F is a Banach space and Tf is a contraction map, we may
                                             n

apply Theorem 4.3.6 in Hutson and Pym (1980) to conclude that W is continuous in f . The continuity
of  ( d ,a ) (  , z ,  | f ) in f follows directly by continuity of  in W .

A.5        Proof of Theorem 2 (Existence of Equilibrium)

Theorem 2. There exists a stationary recursive competitive equilibrium.

Proof. The proof of existence uses Brouwer's Fixed Point Theorem (Theorem 17.3 in Stokey and Lucas
Jr. (1989)). To connect to that theorem, we reinterpret the function f as a point in a unit (hyper)cube
in high-dimensional Euclidean space. To this end, let G = {(( d , a ) ,  , z ,  ) : ( d , a )  Y ,   B , z 
Z ,   }  Y × B × Z ×  where Y = {( d , a ) : ( d , a )  {0} × A or ( d , a ) = ( 1, 0)}. Let M and K
be the cardinalities of G and Y \ {( 1, 0)}. Then, f  F  can be thought of as a vector composed by


                                                                                   5
stacking q  [ 0, 1] K and   [ 0, 1] B ·M . Then f  [ 0, 1] K +B ·M and F   [ 0, 1] K +B ·M . Next, use (12)
                                           ( 0,a )                                               ( d ,a )
(with equality) to construct the vector qnew       (  | f ) and use (13) to construct the vector new      ( | f ) .
Then, let J be the mapping
                                                 ( 0,a )   ( 0,a )   ( 1,0)
                                        fnew  ( qnew     , new     , new    ) = J (f ) : F   F .

Since  ( d ,a ) (  , z ,  | f ) is a continuous function of f (Lemma 3), J is a continuous self-map as (12) and
(13) are continuous functions of  ( d ,a ) (  , z ,  | f ) . And since F  is a nonempty, closed, bounded and
convex subset of a finite-dimensional normed vector space, by the Brouwer's FPT there exists f   F 
such that f  = J ( f  ) .



A.6     Equivalence

   Let  ^ = {( e , a, m) : m  P ( e , a) , ( e , a)  E × A} with typical element   ^    ^ . An individual who
considers whether to default d or choose asset a in state ( ,  , z ,    ^ ) takes as given

   · a price function q ( 0,a ) ( ^) : A × ^  [0, 1] ,

   · a credit-score transition function Q m ( m |( d , a ) , e , ^ ) : P (e , a ) × A × E × ^  [0, 1] ,


when optimizing. As in (2), this implies that an individual of type  in state (z , ^ ) chooses ( d , a ) 
F (z , ^ ) inducing consumption c ( d ,a ) ( z , ^ ) satisfying:

                                              e + z + a - q ( 0,a ) ( ^) · a                if ( d , a ) = ( 0, a )
                    c ( d ,a ) ( z , ^) =                                                                                                  (21)
                                              e+z -                                         if a < 0 and ( d , a ) = ( 1, 0)


    For all ( d , a )  F ( z , ^ ) , the value functions given by equations (3), (5), (9), (10) and choice
probabilities given by equations (6), (7), (8) associated with the individual's problem are unchanged in
form after substituting  ^ for  except for equation (4) now given by:

      v ( d ,a ) (  , z , ^ ) = ( 1 -   ) u c ( d ,a ) ( z , ^)                                                                            (22)

                                  +  ·                         Q  (  |  ) Q e ( e | e ) H ( z ) Q m ( m |( d , a ) , e , ^ )W ( , z , ^)
                                               ,z ,e ,m



    Intermediaries issue a positive measure of contracts taking the price function q ( 0,a ) ( ^ ) and probability
of repayment function p ( 0,a ) ( ^ ) as given to maximize profits:
                                                           ( 0,a )
                                                             ^ ) ·(-a )
                              ( 0,a )         ·p            (
                                                            1+r         - q ( 0,a ) ( ^ ) · (-a )          if a < 0
                                        (^) =                                                                       .                      (23)
                                              q ( 0 , a ) · a -  · 1+r  a
                                                                                                           if a  0

If the intermediary issues a strictly positive measure of credit contracts, then zero profits requires:

                                                                          ·p ( 0,a ) ( ^)
                                                     ( 0,a )                  1+r           if a < 0
                                                 q             (^) =      
                                                                                                                                           (24)
                                                                         1+r                if a  0

                                                                             6
which is the analogue of (12).

     Consistency requires that the probability of repayment satisfy the analog of (14), namely,

                 p ( 0,a ) ( ^) =                                                                                                      (25)
                             H ( z ) · Q e ( e | e ) · Q m ( m |( d , a ) , e , ^ ) · M ( ^ ) · 1 -  ( 1,0) (  , z , ^ ) .
                  ,z ,e ,m


Here, M (  ^) : ^  S is a function mapping m to the probability an individual is of a given type  .
We will denote M ( ^ ) = ( M 1 ( ^ ) , ..., M B ( ^ )) .

    The transition function in equation (16) which tracks the probability that an individual in state
( , z , ^ ) transits to state (  , z , ^ ) is now given by:

                    T ( , z , ^ ;  , z, ^) =                                                                                           (26)
                                                         e
                         · Q ( | ) · H (z ) · Q (e |e ) ·              ( d ,a )
                                                                                  (  , z , m) · Q ( m |( d , a ) , e , 
                                                                                                 m
                                                                                                                       ^)
                             + ( 1 -  ) · G (  ) · H ( z ) · Ge ( e ) · 1 {a =0 } · 1 {s =G } .


     We can now give the definition of a stationary recursive competitive equilibrium with credit scores.
Definition 6. Stationary Recursive Competitive Equilibrium with Credit Scores A stationary
Recursive Competitive Equilibrium with Credit Scores (RCECS) is a pricing function q ( 0,a ) (              ^ ) , a credit-
scoring function Q m ( m |( d , a ) , e , ^ ) , a choice probability function  ( d ,a ) (  , z ,  ^ ) , a probability of
repayment function p ( 0,a ) ( ^ ) , a credit-score-to-type-probability function M  (       ^ ) , and a steady state
              
distribution µ ( ^ ) such that:

  (i). Given q ( 0,a ) ( ^ ) and Q m ( m |( d , a ) , e , ^ ) ,  ( d ,a ) (  , z , ^ ) satisfies (6) and (7) for all (  , z , ^) 
       B×Z×        ^ and ( d , a )  F ( z , ^ ),

 (ii). Given Q m ( m |( d , a ) , e ,  ^ ) , M  (^ ) , and  ( 1,0) (  , z , ^ ) , p ( 0,a ) ( ^ ) satisfies (25) for all ^ ^
       and ( d , a < 0)  F ( z ,   ^ ),

(iii). Given p ( 0,a ) ( ^ ) , q ( 0,a ) ( ^ ) satisfies (24) with equality for all ^ ^ and ( d , a )  F ( z , ^ ),

(iv). Given Q m ( m |( d , a ) , e ,  ^ ) and  ( 1,0) (  , z , ^ ), µ ( , z , ^ ) is a fixed point of µ (  , z , ^ ) =
             ^ T ( , z , ^ | , z ,   ^ ) · µ ( , z , ^ ) for T in (26).
                                                              
         ,z ,


Theorem 3. Equivalence: Suppose an RCE exists and let m = p ( 0,a                                 ¯ ) ( e , a , s ) using (14). Suppose

M  ( ^ ) given by the inverse function m = p ( 0,a          ¯ ) ( e , a , M  ( e , a , m)) exists. Let Q m ( m = m       ~ |( d , a ) , e , ^ )) 
Q ( s (  ) = M ( e , a , m
 s                         ~ )| ( d , a )    ( e , a, s )) using (13) m          ~  P ( e , a ) . Then an RCECS also exists in
which the choice probabilities        ( d , a  )  (  , z , e , a, m) =  a ) (  , z , e , a, s ) .
                                                                             ( d ,



Proof. Provided q ( 0,a ) (       ^ ) = q ( 0,a ) (  ) , then F ( z ,  ) = F ( z ,         ^ ) in (2) and (21). Since Q m ( m =
m~ |( d , a ) , e , ^ )) = Q ( s (  ) = M ( e , a , m
                               s                           ~ )| ( d , a ) ( e , a, s )) , then v ( d ,a ) (  , z ,  ) in (4) is identical
to v ( d ,a ) (  , z , ^ ) in (22) as well as all other value functions. Hence  ( d ,a ) (  , z ,  ) =  ( d ,a ) (  , z ,              ^)
satisfying (i). If the choice probabilities are the same, then repayment probabilities in (14) and (25) are
the same since s (  ) = M             (^ ) and Q m = Q s , thereby satisfying (ii). If the repayment probabilities
in (14) and (25) are the same, then prices in (12) and (24) are the same, thus satisfying (iii) and our

                                                                     7
initial conjecture q ( 0,a ) ( ^ ) = q ( 0,a ) (  ) . Since  ( d ,a ) (  , z ,  ) =  ( d ,a ) (  , z , ^ ) and Q m = Q s , then
(16) is the same as (26) so that (iv) holds.

B     Quantitative Appendix

B.1     Computational algorithm

    In this section, we describe the algorithm used to compute the baseline model presented in this
paper. Note that the model is calibrated by using the procedure below to solve the model for a given
set of parameters, and then updating these parameters to minimize the distance between the model
moments and the data moments.

    1. Set parameters and tolerances for convergence and create grids for (  , e , z , a, s ) .

    2. Initialize the following equilibrium objects with sensible initial conditions:31

        (a) value function, W (  , e , z , a, s ) from (10)
        (b) type scoring function,  ( d ,a ) ( e , a, s ) from (13)
        (c) repayment probability, p ( 0,a ) ( e , a, s ) from (14). Note that this implies a loan price schedule
            given condition (12).
        (d) stationary distribution, µ (  , e , z , a, s ) from (15)

    3. Taking the current guess of the equilibrium functions f0 = {q0 , 0 } as given, enter the equilibrium
       computation loop:

        (a) Solve for the expected value function W1 (·| f0 ) taking as given W0 (·| f0 ) :
                i. Assess budget feasibility, finding the set of feasible actions F ( e , z , a, s | f0 ) .
               ii. Compute the conditional value associated with each action ( d , a )  F ( e , z , a, s | f0 ) ,
                   v1( d ,a ) (  , e , z , a, s | f0 ) , according to (4), with W (·) = W0 (·)
               iii. Having looped over all feasible actions, aggregate the conditional values v1( d ,a ) (·| f0 ) into
                    the new expected value function W1 (·| f0 ) according to (3).
               iv. Assess value function convergence in terms of the sup norm metric, sup | W1 (·| f0 ) -
                    W0 (·| f0 )| . If less than tolerance, go to 3.b; otherwise, set W0 (·| f0 ) = W1 (·| f0 ) and go
                    back to 3.a.ii.
        (b) Compute the decision probabilities  ( d ,a ) (  , e , z , a, s | f0 ) implied by W1 (·| f0 ) according to
            (6), (7), and (9).
        (c) Given the decision probabilities  (·| f0 ) , compute the new set of equilibrium functions, f1 =
            {q1 , 1 }:
                           ( d ,a )
                i. Compute 1        ( e , a, s ) according to (13).
                            ( 0,a )
               ii. Compute q1       ( e , a, s ) according to (12).
  31 Since       the full information version of the model solves very quickly, the value functions, loan price schedules,
and stationary distributions from this case are good initial conditions. For type scores, a consistent initial guess is
 ( d ,a ) ( e , a, s ) = sQ  (  H |  H ) + ( 1 - s ) Q  (  H |  L ) .




                                                              8
          (d) Assess equilibrium function convergence in terms of the sup norm metric

                                                  max {sup |1 - 0 | , sup | q1 - q0 |}

               If less than tolerance, proceed to step 4; otherwise, set f0 = f1 and go back to the beginning
               of step 3.
   4. Compute the stationary distribution associated with the equilibrium behavior and the equilibrium
      functions computed in step 3.
          (a) For each state, compute µ1 (  , e , z , a, s ) according to (15), with µ (·) = µ 0 (·) and given the
              set of equilibrium functions solved for above.
          (b) Assess convergence based on the sup norm metric sup | µ 1 (·) - µ 0 (·)| . If less than tolerance,
              go to step 5; otherwise, set µ 0 = µ 1 and go back to 4.a.

B.2       The Role of Extreme Value Preference Shocks

    One of the key modifications in our model relative to standard consumer bankruptcy models in
macroeconomics is the inclusion of the additive, action-specific preference shocks.32 The mean of
these extreme value shocks is irrelevant, but we calibrate the scale parameter  , which governs the
overall variance of the shocks, as well as the correlation parameter  , which governs the correlation
between the shocks associated with non-default actions. How does behavior in the model change with
respect to these parameters? In this section we address this question in two ways. First, we use an
analytical approach to show how these parameters directly affect choice probabilities, taking the value
of specific actions (i.e. all equilibrium functions) and earnings processes as given. Then, in the context
of the full information version of the model, we compute actual decision rules under different parameter
combinations and describe the differences graphically.33

B.2.1      Deriving the impact of EV parameters

    To ease notation in this section, let an agent's entire state be denoted by x = (  , e , z , a, s ) , and the
set of feasible actions for that agent be denoted by F ( x ) . The goal of this section is to show how the
choice probability function  varies with the extreme value scale and correlation parameters,  and  .
We first cover the non-default actions, and then default.

Non-default actions Equation (7) describes the probability of choosing a feasible action ( 0, a )
conditional on not defaulting. To ease computations in this section rather than compute derivatives
with respect to  or  directly, we will compute them with respect to 1/ and 1/ .34 Considering first
,

  ~ ( 0,a ) ( x )
                                                   v ( 0,a ) ( x )
                    =     exp v ( 0,a ) ( x )/                                         exp v ( 0,a
                                                                                                 ~)
                                                                                                    ( x )/
   ( 1/ )                                                
                                                                     ( 0,a
                                                                         ~ )  F (x )

                                                                                                 v ( 0,a
                                                                                                       ~ ) (x )
                        - exp v ( 0,a ) ( x )/                       exp v ( 0,a
                                                                               ~)
                                                                                  ( x )/
                                                                                                       
                                                   ( 0,a
                                                       ~ )  F (x )

  32 Dvorkin et al. (????) have employed extreme value shocks to smooth out decision rules in models of sovereign default.
  33 We choose the full information model purely for convenience, since the reduction in the state space reduces computation
time and the number of states we need to account for in showing results. The same insights hold for other model variants.
  34 This keeps the analysis clean by avoiding repeated applications of the quotient rule for derivatives to the extent possible.



                                                                     9
                                                                                  2
                                            exp v ( 0,a
                                                      ~)
                                                                                  
                          
                                                         ( x )/                   
                                                                                  
                           ( 0,a
                               ~ )  F ( x )                                       
                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                             v ( 0,a ) ( x )       v ( 0,a
                                                                                                                                                                         ~ ) (x )
                               exp v ( 0,a ) ( x )/                                     ~ )  F (x )
                                                                                    ( 0,a               exp v ( 0,a
                                                                                                                  ~ ) ( x )/
                                                                                                                                                               -         
                 =
                              ~ )  F (x )
                          ( 0,a             exp v ( 0,a
                                                      ~ ) ( x )/
                                                                                                         ( 0,a
                                                                                                             ~ )  F (x )
                                                                                                                                     ~ ) ( x )/
                                                                                                                           exp v ( 0,a
                       1 ( 0,a )
                 =      ~        (x )                         ~ ( 0,a
                                                                    ~)
                                                                       ( x ) v ( 0,a ) ( x ) - v ( 0,a
                                                                                                     ~)
                                                                                                        (x ) .
                       
                                            ( 0,a
                                                ~ )  F (x )


    We can sign this derivative according to

                  ~ ( 0,a ) ( x )
                  
                                  >0                                               ~ ( 0,a
                                                                                         ~)
                                                                                            ( x ) v ( 0,a ) ( x ) - v ( 0,a
                                                                                                                          ~)
                                                                                                                             (x ) > 0
                   ( 1/ )
                                                                ( 0,a
                                                                    ~ )  F (x )

                                                                v ( 0,a ) ( x ) >                         ~ ( 0,a
                                                                                                                ~)             ~)
                                                                                                                   ( x ) v ( 0,a  (x )
                                                                                        ( 0,a
                                                                                            ~ )  F (x )


where the second line uses the fact that ( 0,a         ~ ) F ( x ) ~ ( 0,a
                                                                         ~ ) ( x ) = 1 by construction. Therefore, the

probability of choosing ( 0, a ) conditional on not defaulting increases in 1/ (decreases in  ) if and only
if the conditional value of choosing ( 0, a ) , v ( 0,a ) ( x ) , exceeds the expected value of choosing from the
set of alternative actions ( 0, a
                                ~ ) at the current decision rule. A symmetric calculation reveals that

                      ~ ( 0,a ) ( x )
                                                              1 ( 0,a )
                                                  =            ~        (x )                            ~ ( 0,a
                                                                                                              ~)
                                                                                                                 ( x ) v ( 0,a ) ( x ) - v ( 0,a
                                                                                                                                               ~)
                                                                                                                                                  (x )
                       ( 1/ )                                 
                                                                                      ( 0,a
                                                                                          ~ )  F (x )

                 ~ ( 0,a ) ( x )
                 
           =                       >0                         v ( 0,a ) ( x ) >                               ~)
                                                                                                        ~ ( 0,a
                                                                                                                             ~)
                                                                                                                 ( x ) v ( 0,a  (x )
                    ( 1/ )
                                                                                      ( 0,a
                                                                                          ~ ) F ( x )

Therefore, with respect to choice probabilities conditional on not defaulting, the effects of both extreme
value parameters are symmetric.

Default actions Equation (6) defines the probability of default as a function of the conditional value
of the default action and the inclusive value of not defaulting, WND ( x ) , which takes the familiar log-sum
form of (9). Since it will be useful in computing how  ( 1,0) ( x ) varies with  and  , we can begin by
taking derivatives of WND :

                                                                                                                           v ( 0,a ) ( x )
                           WND ( x )                            ( 0,a )  F ( x )   exp v ( 0,a ) ( x )/                           
                                                 = 
                           ( 1/ )                                      ( 0,a )  F ( x )    exp v ( 0,a ) ( x )/

                                                       - 2 log                               exp v ( 0,a ) ( x )/
                                                                         ( 0,a )  F ( x )
                                                        
                                                 =                               ~ ( 0,a ) ( x ) v ( 0,a ) ( x ) -  WND ( x )
                                                                                 
                                                        
                                                              ( 0,a )  F ( x )
                                                                                                                           v ( 0,a ) ( x )
                           WND ( x )                            ( 0,a )  F ( x )   exp v ( 0,a ) ( x )/                          
                                                 = 
                            ( 1/ )                                     ( 0,a )  F ( x )    exp v ( 0,a ) ( x )/



                                                                                 10
                                               =                         ~ ( 0,a ) ( x ) v ( 0,a ) ( x ) .
                                                                         
                                                      ( 0,a ) F ( x )


    Returning to the default decision,

  ( 1,0) ( x )
                 =        exp v ( 1,0) ( x )/ v ( 1,0) ( x ) exp v ( 1,0) ( x )/ + exp { WND ( x )/ }
  ( 1/ )
                                                                                                                                              WND ( x )
                     - exp v ( 1,0) ( x )/              exp v ( 1,0) ( x )/ v ( 1,0) ( x ) + exp { WND ( x )/ } 
                                                                                                                                              ( 1/ )
                                                                                                    2
                             exp v ( 1,0) ( x )/ + exp { WND ( x )/ }

                            exp v ( 1,0) ( x )/ exp { WND ( x )/ }                                                               WND ( x )
                 =                                                                              2
                                                                                                       v ( 1,0) ( x ) - 
                          exp   v ( 1,0) ( x )/
                                             + exp { WND ( x )/ }                                                                ( 1/ )
                                                                                                                              
                    ( 1,0)           ( 1,0)
                                                   ( 1,0)                            ( 0,a )       ( 0,a )
                 =         (x ) 1 -                                                ~                       ( x ) +  WND ( x ) 
                                                                                                                              
                                            ( x ) v
                                                          (x ) -                             (x )v                            
                                                  
                                                                  ( 0,a )  F ( x )                                            
                                                                                                                              
which is positive if an only if

                                v ( 1,0) ( x )
                                               >                        ~ ( 0,a ) ( x ) v ( 0,a ) ( x ) -  WND ( x ) .
                                                                        
                                      
                                                    ( 0,a )  F ( x )

Therefore, as  decreases, the probability of default increases if and only if the conditional value of
defaulting, scaled by 1/ , exceeds the expected value of all non-default actions less the inclusive value
of not defaulting. In the case when  = 1 (i.e. when our nested logit structure collapses to standard
logit), this condition reduces to evaluating the default action in the same way as the non-default actions
above.

    Likewise, turning to the correlation parameter  ,

           ( 1,0) ( x )                                                                                      WND ( x )  2
                            = - exp v ( 1,0) ( x )/ exp { WND ( x )/ }                                                - WND ( x )
           ( 1/ )                                                                                            ( 1/ )    
                                                                                                                   2
                                        exp v ( 1,0) ( x )/ + exp { WND ( x )/ }
                                                                                                                                       
                                    ( 1,0)                    ( 1,0)                                         ( 0,a )       ( 0,a )
                            =                (x ) 1 -                                                      ~
                                                                                                                                       
                                                                       ( x )  WND ( x ) -
                                                                                                                     (x )v         (x )
                                                                             
                                                                                          ( 0,a )  F ( x )                             
                                                                                                                                       
This implies that

                           ( 1,0) ( x )
                                        > 0   WND ( x ) >                                               ~ ( 0,a ) ( x ) v ( 0,a ) ( x ) ,
                                                                                                        
                           ( 1/ )
                                                                                    ( 0,a )  F ( x )

i.e. if a scaling of the inclusive value of not defaulting exceeds the expected value of not defaulting.

    Finally,
                                  arg         max            ( d ,a ) ( x ) = arg           max            v ( d ,a ) ( x ) ,
                                        ( d ,a )  F ( x )                              ( d ,a )  F ( x )



                                                                             11
so that the action which delivers the highest total utility before the extreme value shock is chosen
with the highest probability. Combining these two pieces of information, we see that as  increases,
the probability of choosing the action with the highest conditional value increases relative to all other
feasible actions. Put differently, as  increases, (i) more and more weight is placed on the modal action,
and (ii) the mean action converges to the modal action. For actions that are "suboptimal" in the sense
that they deliver lower conditional value than the modal action, the change in weight depends on the
difference in conditional value, weighted by the total value of these actions. This can have a meaningful
impact on the mean action taken, if not the mode, which can effect prices and type scores significantly.

B.2.2    Changing EV shocks in the full information model

    Figure 19 demonstrates the impact of changing  and  on decisions in the full information model,
discussed in Section B.8.1 below. Each figure contains three lines, corresponding to: (i) the baseline
parameterization of Table 4 (black solid); (ii) a "low variance" parameterization (blue dotted) where  is
reduced by 75% and  is held fixed; and (iii) a "high correlation" parameterization (red dashed) in which
 is reduced by 75% and  is held fixed. All figures are presented for an agents with (  , e , z ) = (  H , 1, 0) .
In each parameterization, the equilibrium pricing function, and therefore the conditional action values,
are held fixed, and so the changes in response shown here can be thought of as partial equilibrium in
order to highlight the direct effects on decisions.

     Consider first the default decision. The top left panel shows how the default decision varies over a
range of levels of debt. By lowering the variance, the slope of increase in the probability of default as the
level of indebtedness increases is much sharper than in the baseline parameterization. This is because
there is less chance for a high value shock to be realized for an action with lower fundamental value,
so the decision rule becomes more centered at the mode for each level of a. By raising the correlation,
the expected value of not defaulting is reduced, and so the default decision rule "shifts to the right,"
i.e. agents default more frequently for lower levels of debt.

    The remaining three figures show how non-default decisions are affected by changes in the extreme
value parameters. The top right panel depicts the modal decision across each case (with default depicted
as choosing a = -1 for simplicity). Since the action values are held fixed, according to the analysis
above the only parameter which can induce a change in the modal decision is the correlation parameter
 , and even this change can only apply to the default / no default decision. The top right panel confirms
this.

    The bottom left and bottom right panels show the mean and standard deviation of the decision
rule, respectively. The actions of zero to the left of the figure reflect default. The major changes across
parameterizations occur when default is an option, i.e. when a < 0. In this case, we see a steeper
shift in the mean decision for low variance, consistent with the analysis above. Additionally, we see that
the actions are biased towards default with a higher correlation. Turning to the standard deviation in
choices, both alternatives feature lower dispersion in decision rules than our baseline economy. In the
low variance economy, that dispersion is the lowest of the three cases, and reaches its peak at the level
of assets under which the default decision is "interior." In the high correlation economy, there is similarly
a smaller range of default decisions and more centering around non-default choices.

B.3     Grids

   Table 7 presents the key grids used in the computational analysis. Note in particular that the asset
and type score grids are quite dense in order to insure convergence, while in contrast the earnings and

                                                       12
                         Figure 19: Impact of extreme value preference shocks




Notes: Baseline refers to the parameterization of the extreme value shock process from Table 4. Low  ( ) is a quarter
of the baseline value:  =  /4 ( =  /4). All panels are constructed from the full information model, and fix the state
of an agent at (  , e , z ) = (  H , 1, 0) .


type grids are coarse in order to ease the computational burden and simplify the analysis.

B.4     Model moment definitions

Default rate The default rate is computed as the total fraction of the population who defaults within
a given period. The probability of a given state is given by µ (·) , and the probability of default given a
state is  ( 1,0) (·) , and so the aggregate default rate is

                          aggregate default rate =                       ( 1,0) (  , z ,  ) · µ (  , z ,  ) .   (27)
                                                                 ,z ,


By type, we have          ( 1,0) (  , z ,  ) · µ (  , z ,  )/    ^
                                                                     µ ( , z , ^)

Fraction in debt This is the fraction of the population with a < 0 in a given period, so

                                       fraction in debt =                           µ ( , z , ).                (28)
                                                                      ,z , | a <0

By type, the analogous figure is           | a <0 µ (  , z ,  )/      ^
                                                                          µ ( , z , ^ ).

Debt to income Income in the model is given by the sum of earnings (persistent and transitory) and
net interest on assets. That is, income = e + z + ( 1/q ( a , p ) - 1) · a. Therefore, debt to income is


                                                                 13
                                Table 7: Grids used in computational analysis

       Variable                x       N (x )      Range / Values                            Notes


       Discount factor                   2           {0.915, 0.886}                          2-point support makes Bayesian
                                                                                             functions scalar-valued.
       Earnings (per)          e         3         {0.57, 1.00, 1.74}                        See Table 2
       Earnings (trans)        z         3        {-0.18, 0.00, 0.18}                        See Table 2
       Assets                  a       150           [-0.25, 15.00]                          50 points in neg. region, 100 in pos.
                                                                                             Density close to 0 is critical.
       Type score              s        50                 [ 0.0, 1.0]                       bounded below by low  to high 
                                                                                             transition, above by high to low.


computed as the weighted average of the ratio of assets, a, to income conditional on a being negative:
                                                                      a                                      µ ( , z , )
                        debt to income =                                          ·                                           ,              (29)
                                                           e + z + ( 1/q - 1) · a                          ^    µ (  ^, z
                                                                                                                        ^, ^)
                                                    ,z ,                                                     ^ ,
                                                                                                            ,z  ^


Average interest rate The average interest paid (or received) by the agents in the economy is the
weighted average of the interest rates paid, 1/q - 1, over the stationary distribution and decision
probabilities.

                                                                 µ ( , z , )                    ( 0,a ) (  , z ,  )              1
         average interest rate =                µ ( ) ·                                               0   ~                 0
                                                                                                                                        -1   (30)
                                                            ,z         ^ µ ( )
                                                                    ^ ,z                 a     ~
                                                                                               a
                                                                                                    (   , a ) ( , z , ) q (   , a ) ( )


where µ (  ) =     ,z   µ ( , z , ).

B.5    Modal choice metrics

    In this section, we describe a series of metrics which quantify the dispersion in decision implied
by the extreme value shocks in our framework. These results are summarized in Table 8, but we first
describe the construction of the metrics.

      Let x = (  , z ,  ) be the state variable of an agent, let  ( d ,a ) ( x ) denote her decision rule, and let
µ ( x ) be the stationary distribution over individual states in the baseline economy. We want to get a
sense of dispersion around the highest value (or modal) choice, which may be defined as

                                                y  ( x )  arg            max              ( d ,a ) ( x )
                                                                     ( d ,a )  F ( x )


   Let Y  {( 1, 0) , {( 0, a )}| a  A} denote a set of possible actions. The share of agents for whom
an action in set Y is modal is
                                     m (Y) =    µ ( x ) 1 [ y  ( x )  Y]
                                                                 x


                                                                         14
                                share for whom               share of total                  share of decisions w/in
                                 action type is               action from                   k grid pts. of mode (%)
             Action type           modal (%)             modal agents (%)                   k=0     k=1      k=2


             Default                   1.84                        87.14                      -       -         -
             Non-Default              98.16                        99.13                    18.96   49.00    65.77
             Borrowing                 7.28                        66.20                    30.32   70.36    86.92
             Saving                   90.88                        99.36                    18.05   47.29    65.41

                                         Table 8: Modal choice metrics
Notes: For the right 3 columns, the share is computed over the total population of agents for whom the indicated action
type is the modal action.


The total mass of agents choosing an action in this set includes those for whom the action is not modal,
and so we can compute the share of the actions in this set accounted for by "modal agents," those for
whom an action in this set is the mode, via

                                            x   µ ( x )  ( d ,a ) ( x ) 1 [ y  ( x )  Y]
                                                                      ( d ,a ) ( x )
                                                        x µ (x )

Lastly, for agents whose modal action is not default, we can compute the share of decisions within k
grid points of the modal action. For a given individual (whose modal action is not default), let i  ( x )
denote the grid index of the modal choice y  ( x ) . Then let a k -band of actions around the mode be
defined by
                             Yk ( x ) = {i  ( x ) - k , ..., i  ( x ) , ..., i  ( x ) + k } .
Finally, define the total weight on decisions in the k -band of the mode for agent x via
                                                                           ( 0,a ) ( x )
                                                         ( 0,a ) Yk ( x ) 
                                           (x ) =                                        ,
                                                              1 -  ( 1,0) ( x )
where the denominator renormalizes the weights on actions to exclude default. We can aggregate this
metric over any group of actions Y via

                                                          {x | y  ( x ) Y }    (x )µ (x )
                                           (Y) =
                                                                   m (Y)


B.6     Credit Access Following Default

    For all a < 0, define the two price schedules
                                 ( 0,a )
                                qD       ( e , a, s )  q ( 0,a ) e , 0,  ( 1,0) ( e , a, s ) ,
                                 ( 0,a )
                                qN       ( e , a, s )  q ( 0,a ) e , 0,  ( 0,0) ( e , a, s ) ,



                                                                15
where the former corresponds to default (D ) and the latter corresponds to no default (N ). In order to
compute an "average" effect of defaulting, we can weight the price differences for each action by the
stationary distribution of agents who have the option to default. Specifically, define

                                                      ,z    µ (  , e , z , a, s )
                              µ ( e , a, s ) =                                              for all a < 0.
                                                       ~ <0 µ (  , e , z , a
                                                   ,z ,a                   ~, s)

Then, we can compute the aggregate metrics for each debt choice a < 0
                                                                                 ( 0,a )
                                                                                qN       ( e , a, s )
                               (a ) =
                                 q
                                                         µ ( e , a, s )          ( 0,a )
                                                                                                        -1 .
                                             e ,a <0,s                          qD       ( e , a, s )


B.7    Welfare Metric

    First, recognize that for a given state (  t , x ) , the value of an agent is
                                                                                      1-
                                                               c     -1
                                        V (t , x ) = ¾       Bt t       ,   t

                                                       t =0
                                                                 1 - 

where B0 = 1, and for all t  1
                                                                    t -1
                                                            Bt =            i ,
                                                                     i =0

so that B1 =  0 , B2 =  0  1 , etc.

    Let an agent's current  be givem, and let W be an agent's value under an alternative market
arrangement. Let x capture all other state variables besides  . Then, the consumption equivalent
measure is defined by
                                                         
                                                                     [( 1 +  (  , x )) ct ] 1- - 1
                            W ( , x ) = ¾                     t Bt
                                                     t =0
                                                                               1-
                                                                                                        1-     
                                                                          1-               c                           t Bt
                                           = ( 1 +  (  , x ))                    ¾       Bt t -¾t

                                                                                   t =0
                                                                                           1-                  t =0
                                                                                                                      1-

                                                                                                                A (  )
                                                                                                         1-
                                                                                                        ct -1
              = W (  , x ) + A (  ) = ( 1 +  (  , x )) 1- ¾                                      t Bt         + A( )
                                                                                         t =0
                                                                                                         1-
                                                                                       1
                                                  W ( , x ) + A( )                    1-
                   = 1 +  (  t , x ) =
                                                  V ( , x ) + A( )


   We approximate A (  ) by simulating N paths of length T of  starting from a given  0 , { 0 ( n) , ...,  T ( n)}n
                                                                                                                  N
                                                                                                                    =1
and pick T sufficiently large that  becomes vanishingly small. For each path n, we compute
                                     t




                                                                  16
{B0 ( n) , ..., BT ( n)} from which we compute the approximation
                                                       N    T
                                         ^ ( ) = 1
                                         A                          t Bt ( n)/( 1 -  ) .
                                                 N    n=1   t =0



B.8     Details of Alternative Economies

B.8.1    Full information (FI)

    Since there is no incentive to infer one's type, there is no type score in this model. Therefore, an
agent's full state is (  , e , z , a) , and the set of equilibrium functions does not include  . For comparability,
and since it is purely i.i.d. and contains no information for inference, we maintain the assumption that
z is unobservable. Therefore, the lender can observe FI = (  , e , a) for each individual.

    The household problem and equilibrium stationary distribution are exactly the same as in the main
text, with the state variable s removed. The only substantial change is in the pricing and repayment
                                                                           ( 0,a )
probability equations. The repayment probability function in this case is pFI      ( FI ) = Pr ( repay a | FI ) .
Since FI directly includes  and z is i.i.d., there is no further inference to be done. Therefore, a has
no impact on pricing, and we obtain
                   ( 0,a )                          ( 1,0)
                  pFI      ( , e ) =            1 - FI     ( , e , z , a ) Q  ( | )Q e (e |e )H (z ).         (31)
                                        ,e ,z

                            ( 0,a )
The loan pricing function, qFI      (  , e ) , simply adjusts the expression for the interest rate as in the
baseline model.

B.8.2    No tracking (NT)

     The key departure in the formal specification of this economy from the baseline comes from the
separation of the type score updating which follows individuals and the static assessment of types that
is relevant for pricing.

Evolution of type score Here, an individual's type score updates only based on the exogenous
transition probabilities, and so there is no dynamic incentive to acquire reputation. As a result, s
evolves from s according to
                                       1
                                     NT   , ( s ) = Q  ( | )s ( ).
                                                             

In the two-type case we employ in our quantitative model, we have
                                   1
                                   NT ( s ) = sQ  (  H |  H ) + ( 1 - s ) Q  (  H |  L ) .                    (32)


Static assessment of type In this version of the model, lenders to perform intraperiod updating of
type assessments based on the a chosen by the borrower. That is, the lenders compute
                        2
                        NT , ( a , s , e )  Pr (  | a , s , e ) =          Q  (  |  ) Pr (  | a , s , e ) .
                                                                        




                                                              17
All of the action is in the last term of the expression above, and so we analyze it here:
                                                              Pr (  , a , s , e )
                               Pr (  | a , s , e ) =
                                                               Pr ( a , s , e )
                                                                 z ,a Pr (  , a , s , e , z , a )
                                                       =
                                                                ~      Pr (  ~ , a , s , e , z , a)
                                                                  ,z ,a

                                                                     z ,a    ( 0,a ) (  , e , z , a, s ) µ (  , e , z , a, s )
                                                       =
                                                                 ~,z ,a      ( 0,a ) (  ~ , e , z , a, s ) µ ( ~ , e , z , a, s )
                                                                 

where the first line uses Bayes' Rule, the second sums over unobserved idiosyncratic states, and the
third once more applies Bayes' Rule via

         Pr ( a ,  , e , z , a, s ) = Pr ( a |  , e , z , a, s ) Pr (  , e , z , a, s ) =  ( 0,a ) (  , e , z , a, s ) µ (  , e , z , a, s ) .

Therefore, we obtain

                      2                                                          z ,a    ( 0,a ) (  , e , z , a, s ) µ (  , e , z , a, s )
                      NT         (a , s , e ) =            
                                                       Q ( | )                                                                                   (33)
                         ,
                                                                               ~,z ,a    ( 0,a ) (  ~ , e , z , a, s ) µ ( ~ , e , z , a, s )
                                                                               


Repayment probability function What the lender must compute is the probability that a is repaid
tomorrow given s , e observed today. For each choice of a , the lender revises the borrower's assessed
type today via (33). At the same time, though, due to the implicit "anonymity" assumption in this
economy, they recognize that the borrower's type score tomorrow (which is relevant for tomorrow's
default decision) will be determined via (32). Therefore, the p (·) function in this economy is

      p ( a , s , e ) = Pr ( repay a | s , e )
                        Pr ( repay a , s , e )
                      =
                               Pr ( s , e )
                           ,e ,z ,s Pr ( repay a |  , e , z , s , a , s , e ) Pr (  , e , z , s | a , s , e )
                      =
                                                    ,a,z Pr (  , e , z , a , s )

                                ,e ,z     1 -  ( 1,0) (  , e , z , a , 1 ( s )) Pr (  , e , z | a , s , e )
                      =
                                                               ,a,z     µ (  , e , z , a, s )
                                , ,e ,z     1 -  ( 1,0) (  , e , z , a , 1 ( s )) Q e ( e | e ) H ( z ) Q  (  |  ) Pr (  | a , s , e )
                      =
                                                                                   ,a,z    µ (  , e , z , a, s )
                        2
                      = NT (a , s , e )                1 -  ( 1,0) (  H , e , z , a , NT
                                                                                      1
                                                                                         ( s )) Q e ( e | e ) H ( z )
                                                e ,z
                                  2
                            + 1 - NT (a , s , e )                      1 -  ( 1,0) (  L , e , z , a , NT
                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                         ( s )) Q e ( e | e ) H ( z )
                                                              e ,z

where the last line once more applies the two-type implementation from our quantitative model.

B.9      Sensitivity Analysis

   We further explore the effect of our parameters on our target moments by solving the model changing
each parameter by a small amount individually. The aggregate credit market statistics resulting from


                                                                                 18
increasing each parameter by 5% in turn are reported in Table 9.

    Increasing  H increases the "distance" between types. High types default slightly less, while low
types default 21% more because it is more costly for them to imitate high types, and so the aggregate
default rate rises. The average interest rate paid in aggregate rises sharply because of the inference
problem: even though high types default less, they face higher prices on average because the low types
behave so much worse and the types cannot be perfectly separated. Correspondingly, the fraction of
high types in debt decreases, and despite an increase in indebtedness by low types, the mass of debtors
in the economy decreases overall.

    In contrast, increasing  L lowers this between-type distance. High types default more relative to the
baseline, while low types default less. Both outcomes hinge on reputation; high types have less incentive
to separate themselves from low types through good behavior, while low types find it more attractive
to imitate high types and enhance their reputations. Notably, this economy features a large incentive
to avoid debt and the reputational hit associated with it, as evidenced by the large declines in the debt
to income ratio and fraction of households in debt.
                                                                                                  
    Changes to the type transition process Q  have similar, but smaller effects. Increasing QHL lowers
the stationary fraction of high types, which is analogous to increasing  L or decreasing  H . This is
because high types in this economy have a lower expected future  , and therefore effectively discount
                                                           
the future more steeply. The reverse holds for increasing QLH .

    Lastly, increasing  increases the overall variance of the extreme value shocks. As actions become
noisier, default rates increase for both types. Interest rates follow the same pattern, but critically agents
do not react to these increased interest rates by borrowing less: both the fraction of households in debt
and the debt to income ratio increase. Fixing the scale parameter and varying  instead has a markedly
different effect. While the default vs. no default decision remains as noisy as in the baseline case, the
choice of a effectively becomes less noisy: since the shocks for specific a are now less correlated, it
is more likely that an action with low conditional value will receive a high enough shock to merit
choosing it over an action with high conditional value. Therefore, agents choose actions with a lower
"bang-for-buck" and the average interest rate rises due to this selection effect.

C    Credit Score Interactions Across Markets (AM)

    In our baseline model, one's type score (or reputation) only plays a role by affecting unsecured debt
prices. In reality, though, credit scores impact more than credit card interest rates. Financially, they
impact mortgage rates, auto loan rates, and many other forms of credit; in other areas, they can affect
employment outcomes. In this section, we consider in a simplified way how these interactions affect the
acquisition of reputation and behavior in the unsecured credit market.

    To capture the role that credit scores play across markets (AM), we assume that each period an
individual must finance an expenditure weakly calibrated to proxy mortgage payments on a home loan.
This expenditure is decreasing in type score, which proxies the empirical fact that individuals with higher
credit scores tend to pay lower interest rates on standard mortgage contracts. All of the equilibrium
type scoring and pricing functions are specified in exactly the same way as in the baseline economy; the
only thing that differs is the household's budget constraint. Specifically, we model the financial burden
of a bad reputation as an additional expense

                                            m ( s ) = m0 - m1 s .                                       (34)



                                                     19
                        Table 9: Sensitivity Analysis for Credit Market Moments

    Moment (%)                       Base.                      Sensitivity to 5% increase in
                                                H        L      Q  (L |H )    Q  ( H | L)                    G H


    Aggregate credit statistics
    default rate            agg.      0.98     1.12     0.93       0.98          0.98       0.99    1.02     0.98
                            high      0.73     0.70     0.82       0.73          0.73       0.73    0.77     0.74
                            low       1.16     1.42     1.01       1.15          1.16       1.16    1.20     1.16


    average int. rate       agg.      13.96    15.88    14.30      13.95        13.96       14.10   14.98    13.96
                            high      14.75    19.67    14.10      14.76        14.73       14.92   15.98    14.75
                            low       13.40    13.22    14.45      13.40        13.41       13.53   14.26    13.39


    int. rate dispersion    agg.      7.28     10.67    6.32       7.28          7.28       7.31    7.51     7.27
                            high      6.13     12.05    6.12       6.13          6.12       6.18    6.47     6.14
                            low       7.95     8.64     6.45       7.94          7.96       7.97    8.10     7.94


    fraction HH in debt     agg.      10.58    9.73     9.65       10.59        10.57       10.63   10.79    10.57
                            high      8.47     6.31     8.51       8.49          8.44       8.51    8.67     8.54
                            low       12.06    12.13    10.44      12.03        12.12       12.11   12.27    12.03


    debt / income ratio     agg.      0.25     0.26     0.24       0.25          0.25       0.25    0.27     0.25
                            high      0.20     0.18     0.21       0.20          0.20       0.20    0.21     0.20
                            low       0.29     0.32     0.26       0.29          0.30       0.30    0.31     0.29


    Age Profile of Credit Rankings
    intercept, mean                   0.35     0.35     0.24       0.32          0.32       0.32    0.36     0.33
    slope, mean                       0.03     0.03     0.05       0.03          0.03       0.03    0.03     0.03
    intercept, std. deviation         0.25     0.24     0.24       0.24          0.24       0.19    0.25     0.24
    slope, std. deviation             0.00     0.01     0.00       0.01          0.01       0.04    0.00     0.01
    average, autocorrelation          -0.11    -0.10    -0.13      -0.11        -0.11       -0.13   -0.11    -0.11

Notes: For parameters for which raising by 5% would violate core assumptions of the model, we raise them by a smaller
amount. For example, a 5% increase in  L would make  L >  H , and so instead we set  L = 0.999 ×  H . Likewise, raising
 by 5% would yield  > 1, and so we raise  only to 1.


The household's flow income becomes e + z - m ( s ) , as opposed to simply e + z .35
  35 The parameters m0 and m1 in equation (34) are chosen to be consistent with a scaled down version of the cost of
holding a 30 year fixed-rate mortgage on a home of median price as of 2007.



                                                          20
    The baseline results are collected in the last column (AM) of Table 10. We see that the effects
of modeling reputation in this way are large. Relative to the baseline economy, the default rate drops
by 12%. While average interest rates remain close to their baseline levels, dispersion in interest rates
rises, and quantities of debt decline sharply on both the extensive and intensive margins. There are
three sharp changes in the credit ranking life cycle moments. First, the intercept of the lifetime path of
credit rankings is much higher in the AM economy: given the additional incentives to acquire a good
reputation, young agents are in general much less risky in the AM economy than in the baseline. Second,
the average improvement in credit ranking over one's lifetime is much lower, dropping by more than
1/3 relative to the baseline. Third, the mean reversion in credit rankings is much sharper in the AM
economy. Given the additional costs of having a bad reputation, agents tend to more sharply "correct"
past actions which were destructive of their credit scores.

D    Data Appendix

   This appendix describes the construction of the data underlying the life cycle credit ranking moments
reported in Table 3 and Figures 7, 8, and 9.

    We begin with a 2 percent random sample of the FRBNY CCP/Equifax anonymized panel containing
each individual's birth year and the individual's credit score in the first quarters of 2004, 2005 and 2006.
The credit score measure is the Equifax Risk Score (hereafter Risk Score), which is a proprietary credit
score similar to other risk scores used in the industry. We drop individuals who are not within the ages
of 21 and 60 years in 2004Q1 and any individual whose Risk Score is missing for any of the quarters.
This yields our base sample.

    For this sample, we construct empirical cumulative distribution functions of Risk Scores for each of
the three years. And, for each individual, we computed the percentile ranking of his or her Risk Score
for each year. We call this the individual's credit ranking -- it is a number that gives the fraction of
people who had Risk Scores not exceeding the individual's score in that year. We then placed individuals
in 5-year age bins according to their age in 2004Q1.

    Table 11 reports the mean and standard deviations of the credit rankings in each bin. These
moments were used in the regressions that determine the coefficients in the first 4 rows of the middle
panel of Table 3. For the final row of the middle panel of Table 3, we computed the change in an
individual's credit ranking from 2004Q1 to 2005Q1 and, again, from 2005Q1 to 2006Q1. For each age
bin, we computed the correlation between these pair of changes across individuals in that bin. These
correlations are reported in the final column of Table 11. The final row of the middle panel of Table 3
reports the average of these correlations.

     Turning next to the construction of the data for the default event study in Figure 9, we first isolated
about 50,000 individuals who filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in sometime in 2004 and obtained a
discharge sometime in 2005. As above, we eliminated all individuals younger than 21 years and older
than 60 years. This yielded our base sample of bankrupts. For each individual in this sample, we recorded
their birth year and Risk Score in the filing quarter and in the four quarters preceding and following the
filing quarter. We placed each individual in the appropriate 5-year age bin based on their age in 2004.
We computed the average Risk Score in each age bin for each of the nine quarterly observations and
then computed the fraction of individuals in the base sample who had scores not exceeding this average.
This gave us the average credit ranking by age bin of people in the base sample of bankrupts reported
in Table 12.



                                                    21
Table 10: Comparison between Baseline and Across Market (AM) Economies

         Moment (%)                 Subgroup               Model
                                                        BASE      AM


         Aggregate credit market statistics
         default rate               aggregate           0.981    0.915
                                    high                0.731    0.662
                                    low                 1.156    1.099


         average interest rate      aggregate           13.96    13.84
                                    high                14.75    14.71
                                    low                 13.40    13.21


         interest rate dispersion   aggregate           7.282    8.595
                                    high                6.128    9.058
                                    low                 7.946    8.184


         fraction of HH in debt     aggregate           10.58    9.12
                                    high                8.472    6.988
                                    low                 12.06    10.68


         debt to income ratio       aggregate           0.252    0.230
                                    high                0.196    0.174
                                    low                 0.293    0.271


         Credit ranking age profile moments
         intercept, mean credit ranking                 0.355    0.424
         slope, mean credit ranking                     0.029    0.018
         intercept, std. dev. credit ranking            0.255    0.240
         slope, std. dev. credit ranking                0.004    0.008
         average autocorr of change in credit ranking   -0.109   -0.143




                                        22
                                Table 11: Age Profile of Credit Rankings

             Age Bins       Mean, Score Pctl        SD, Score Pctl       Corr(Pctl05       06
                                                                                  04 , Pctl05 )



            21-25 years             0.32                    0.20                    -0.22
            26-30 years             0.35                    0.23                    -0.18
            31-35 years             0.40                    0.26                    -0.20
            36-40 years             0.44                    0.28                    -0.21
            41-45 years             0.47                    0.28                    -0.21
            46-50 years             0.50                    0.28                    -0.21
            51-55 years             0.54                    0.28                    -0.19
            56-60 years             0.58                    0.28                    -0.20

Notes: The credit ranking data is based on author calculations using FRBNY CCP/Equifax data.




                                   Table 12: Default Event Study Data

                  Quarters     26-30 years      31-35 years        36-40 years   41-45 years


                      -4            0.23            0.21              0.20            0.18
                      -3            0.19            0.18              0.17            0.15
                      -2            0.16            0.15              0.14            0.12
                      -1            0.13            0.12              0.10            0.10
                      0             0.18            0.16              0.15            0.14
                      1             0.25            0.22              0.21            0.19
                      2             0.28            0.25              0.24            0.21
                      3             0.28            0.26              0.25            0.23
                      4             0.28            0.26              0.25            0.23

Notes: The credit ranking data is based on author calculations using FRBNY CCP/Equifax data. The data presented in
this table corresponds to the black lines in Figure 9.




                                                       23
