                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE RETURN TO CAPITAL IN CAPITAL-SCARCE COUNTRIES

                                            Anusha Chari
                                           Jennifer S. Rhee

                                        Working Paper 27675
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27675


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2020




We thank Wayne Landsman, Tim Schmidt-Eisenlohr, Francesco Caselli, Pierre-Oliver
Gourinchas, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Alwyn Young, Peter Blair Henry, Ju Hyun Kim, Simon
Alder, Patrick Conway, and Lutz Hendricks for helpful discussions. We thank conference and
seminar participants at 2020 AEA Meetings, UNC-Chapel Hill and the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation. Opinions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the FDIC or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Anusha Chari and Jennifer S. Rhee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Return to Capital in Capital-Scarce Countries
Anusha Chari and Jennifer S. Rhee
NBER Working Paper No. 27675
August 2020
JEL No. E13,F21,G15,G32,O16

                                           ABSTRACT

In this paper, we use firm-level data to investigate the link between the marginal product of
capital and financial rates of return across countries. Computed estimates from financial
statement data show that capital-scarce countries display higher marginal products of capital.
However, inflation-adjusted financial returns are roughly equal across capital-scarce and capital-
abundant countries. The divergence between the marginal products of capital and financial
returns implies that there may be little incentive for capital to flow to capital-scarce countries. We
suggest that domestic capital-accumulation frictions such as sufficiently large capital adjustment
costs can decouple financial rates of return from the marginal product of capital across countries.


Anusha Chari
301 Gardner Hall
CB#3305, Department of Economics
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
and NBER
achari@unc.edu

Jennifer S. Rhee
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
550 17th Street NW, Rm #2005
Washington, DC 20429
jrhee@fdic.gov
1    Introduction
The neoclassical model predicts that poor countries (capital-scarce) will have a higher rate
of return to capital than rich countries (capital-abundant). Accordingly, scholars expend
considerable effort trying to understand why capital does not flow from rich to poor nations
(Lucas, 1990; Alfaro, et al., 2008; and Reinhart and Rogoff, 2004). An emerging body of
empirical work based on national income accounts suggests that the neoclassical predictions
about capital scarcity and higher rates of return do not hold up in the macro data. The
marginal product of capital is apparently no higher in poor countries than it is in rich ones
(Caselli and Feyrer, 2007, and Gourinchas and Jeanne, 2013). If recent empirical studies are
accurate then it is unsurprising that capital does not flow from rich to poor countries; with
equalized marginal products, it has little incentive to do so.
     In this paper, we investigate the link between the marginal product of capital and financial
rates of return in emerging and developed economies. In a one-sector neoclassical model,
a firm's first-order condition states that the marginal product of capital (M P Kt ) and the
financial return (rt ) should differ only by the depreciation rate ( ), which is often assumed
constant across countries (rt = M P Kt -  ). Therefore, theory predicts that high financial
returns and high marginal products of capital should go hand in hand. If this link breaks
down (i.e., if a high marginal product of capital does not turn into high financial returns),
it is not clear that capital ought to flow to countries with high marginal products of capital.
     Notwithstanding the significance of this first-order condition that lies at the heart of
the Lucas Paradox, aggregate data pose limitations for testing its validity. In this paper,
we use firm-level accounting and stock market data from a set of developed and emerging
countries between 1997 and 2014 to examine the link between the marginal product of capital
and financial returns. Much of the international macro literature imputes an aggregate
marginal product of capital using calibration techniques. The imputations rely on underlying
assumptions about functional form, such as technology, capital shares, and elasticities of
substitution.
     The innovation in Caselli and Feyrer (2007) is to measure the aggregate return on cap-
ital using national income accounts instead of relying on calibration. In general, however,
delivering the finding that marginal products of capital are essentially the same across rich
and poor countries requires adjustments for (i) the capital per effective worker and a hu-
man capital externality (Lucas, 1990), (ii) non-reproducible capital and the price of capital
goods (Caselli and Feyrer, 2007), or (iii) technology catch-up and distortions in saving and
investment decisions (Gourinchas and Jeanne, 2013).
     Our paper offers an alternative approach to measuring the return to capital using micro


                                               2
data. In contrast to previous literature about the return to capital that uses (i) calibrated
estimates, or (ii) aggregate data, we directly compute rates of return at the firm level,using
market and accounting data.1 Despite the centrality of firm productivity in macroeconomic
modelling, the link between accounting earnings and the macroeconomy remains relatively
unexplored (Konchitchki and Patatoukas, 2014). Our paper therefore contributes to a recent
body of literature that uses firm-level accounting data to draw macroeconomic insights.
    Our main finding is that the link between the marginal product of capital and the finan-
cial return, which is often assumed in the international capital flows literature, does not hold
for a sample of developed and emerging countries between 1997 and 2014.2 Consistent with
predictions from the neoclassical framework, the results show that firm marginal products
of capital are indeed higher in emerging countries relative to their developed market coun-
terparts. The evidence suggests an inverse correlation between marginal products of capital
and output per capita3 The pattern is robust to controlling for firm- and industry-specific
effects and remarkably consistent across different sample periods and countries.
    The neoclassical model also implies that the higher marginal product of capital should
translate to higher financial returns in emerging markets. Contrary to this prediction, we find
that inflation-adjusted financial returns are roughly equal between developed and emerging
countries. The result is significant as it casts new light on the use of differences in the
marginal products of capital to explain international capital flow patterns. The firm-level
evidence using computed estimates suggests that the marginal product of capital might not
be a valid proxy for financial returns. The divergence between marginal products of capital
and investment returns is consistent with the capital wedge documented in Gourinchas and

   1
       It is worth noting that the measurement of investment and capital in corporate balance sheets and
national income accounts can vary across countries and depends on the firms in the formal economy, a
fraction that rises with economic development. Therefore the "coverage", i.e. the fraction of output or value
added covered by corporate balance sheets can vary with income per capita. However, it is precisely the
firms in the formal economy that are the beneficiaries of foreign capital flows. We suggest that focusing on
this subset of firms provides a salient snapshot to address the shortfalls in capital flows to capital scarce
countries.
     2
       While, some cross-country studies use long-term investment returns, we use annual returns to investigate
the relationship between the marginal product of capital and investment returns. To account for aggregate
and idiosyncratic shocks, we include country, industry and time fixed effects. We also control for firm fixed
effects and find that the main results are robust.
     3
       Following Banerjee and Duflo (2005) and Gourinchas and Jeanne (2013) we use we use per capita output
as the main explanatory variable. The literature also uses alternative measures, such as output per worker.
However, these measures can suffer from the drawback that they do not account for productive activities
that do not fall under the purview of the market economy such as home production. Further there are cross-
country variations in definitions of employment, such as the definitions of working age populations that can
differ across countries, that make direct cross-country comparisons difficult. Hussmanns (2004) provides
a detailed discussion of the technical challenges with respect to cross-country differences in employment
measures. Even so, we run robustness checks using these alternative measures of output per worker to which
our main results are robust.

                                                      3
Jeanne (2013).
    In addition, the results confirm the view that there is no prima facie evidence that
international credit frictions play a major role in preventing capital flows from rich to poor
countries (Caselli and Feyrer, 2007). If marginal product of capital differentials correctly
translate to higher financial returns in emerging markets, then the shortfall in the capital flow
to these countries points to international capital market frictions and investment barriers.
However, if financial returns are equalized across developed and emerging countries, an
alternative hypothesis may be that there is little incentive for capital to flow to less-developed
countries.
    To further explore this hypothesis, note that the firm's first-order condition that links
the marginal product of capital and financial returns stems from the capital accumulation
equation, which suggests that the capital stock tomorrow is the sum of capital stock today
and the investment net of depreciation (Kt+1 = (1 -  )Kt + It such that Kt and It are
the capital stock, and investment in period t, respectively).4 On the other hand, if a unit
investment does not lead to a unit increase in the capital stock, the cross-country investment
return and marginal product of capital patterns can differ.
    Although models with capital adjustment factors are widely used in the investment lit-
erature (see Cochrane, 1991; Hayashi, 1982; Abel and Blanchard, 1986), domestic capital
accumulation frictions are relatively unexplored in the international capital flows literature.
Jin (2012) is an exception as she uses a capital accumulation equation with adjustment costs
from Abel (2003). Jin's empirical analysis focuses on the revealed comparative advantage
using international capital flows whereas our paper focuses on the measurement of marginal
product of capital. In this paper, we show that capital accumulation frictions can help
model the divergence between the investment returns and marginal product of capital pat-
terns observed in the data between 1997 and 2014. We also show that the model with capital
accumulation frictions provides an analytical framework that links cross-country differences
in the relative price of capital and the capital wedge, explanations used to resolve the Lucas
Paradox in the literature (Caselli and Feyrer, 2007; Gourinchas and Jeanne, 2013).
    In large part, cross-country differences in capital accumulation processes have not been


   4
     Cross-country differences in investment portfolios may drive the wedge between the marginal product
of capital and investment returns leading to differences in capital composition and depreciation rates,  .
To test this hypothesis, we repeat the cross-country analysis by industry. If cross-country differences in
industry portfolios drive the wedge between the marginal product of capital and investment returns, we
ought to observe the wedge at the aggregate level, but not necessarily at the industry level. We find that
the investment returns wedge is remarkably consistent across industries, with a few exceptions only, and
suggests that cross-country differences in industry portfolios are not the main driver behind the observed
patterns.

                                                    4
empirically explored in the capital flows literature because of data limitations.5 With aggre-
gate data, estimates of the aggregate capital stock are constructed from aggregate investment
data (such as from the Penn World Tables) using the perpetual inventory method, which
requires one to posit a capital accumulation process. Since this process is typically assumed
to follow a model where a unit increase in investment leads to a unit increase in capital
stock, the aggregate capital stock estimate itself implicitly relies on the assumption that the
link between marginal product of capital and the investment return holds. A key advantage
of the firm-level data we use in this paper is that unlike aggregate estimates, we can directly
observe capital stock measures from accounting and market values. This allows us to directly
compute the marginal product of capital and investment returns, and to empirically test the
tightness of the link between the two.
    A key advantage of firm level data that is important for our analysis is that it allows
one-to-one matching between the investment return and the marginal product of capital.
Alternative methods that compare investment returns estimates from the MSCI index with
marginal product of capital estimates from aggregate macro data suffer from a sample mis-
match problem as investment returns estimates use a subset of public firms and the marginal
product of capital is estimated using both public and private firms. In this case, the gap
between investment returns and the marginal product of capital may be due to capital accu-
mulation frictions, or due to sample differences across the two measures. Our method does
not suffer from this mismatch problem as the investment return and the marginal product
of capital estimates use the same sample of firms.
    The paper limits the analysis to listed firms in MSCI emerging and developed countries
that have relatively well-established stock markets, which substantially reduces the number
of countries in the sample. But, as Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) suggest, roughly 25 emerging
markets account for the bulk of international financial flows. Therefore, the analysis of the
firms in these countries can provide useful insights into the factors that drive international
capital flows. We also restrict the period of analysis to the post-1996 period because of the
limited availability of reliable firm-level data from emerging countries in the early 1990s.
    A word of caution is that the Lucas paradox refers to many forms of capital invest-
ment. While publicly listed firms in the United States account for a significant proportion
of economic activity, this may not hold for the rest of the world, and especially in the case
of emerging markets. A large literature documents the large role that private firms play
in emerging markets, and also in developed European markets. Therefore our conclusions
   5
     It is important to note the extensive use of the implications of capital accumulation frictions within
the international capital flows literature. For example, the cross-country differences in the relative price of
capital introduced in Caselli and Feyrer (2007) and the capital wedge used by Gourinchas and Jeanne (2013)
can both be derived within the neoclassical model using capital accumulation frictions.

                                                      5
about the Lucas paradox are restricted to the sample of public firms but but one should
also note that these firms constitute a bulk of the investment opportunity set for foreign
investors.6
    Although firm-level data have many advantages, some drawbacks exist. For example,
available firm-level data do not provide insight into the productivity of self-employed workers
or informal sector firms. This is a significant drawback as these types of households and firms
make up a large part of the economy in developing countries. Unlike aggregate data, firm-
level market variables are also susceptible to market volatility. Since the period of analysis
includes the global financial crisis (2007-2008), we control for year-specific effects and run
a robustness test excluding these years. We suggest that despite these shortcomings, the
firm-level data provide useful insights about the relationship between financial returns and
firm productivity. The paper provides an alternative lens to complement existing literature
that primarily uses macroeconomic data to perform aggregate analysis.
    An important concern with using cross-country firm-level data is the difference in the
accounting standards across countries. For example, the definition of "assets" in the U.S.
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (U.S. GAAP) may differ from the definition in
the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). To minimize the effects of these
differences, we use financial and accounting data from Worldscope Datastream. Datastream
not only provides extensive accounting and market data on listed firms across countries but
also aims to "provide the data in a manner that allows maximum comparability between
one company and another, and between various reporting regimes" (Worldscope/Disclosure
Partners, 1992). Thus, the numbers reported in the firm's annual/quarterly audit reports
could differ from the numbers provided by Worldscope, which adjusts the data to make the
definitions more comparable to their U.S. counterparts (Wald, 1999). Although Datastream
takes extensive measures to increase firm comparability across countries, we further check
for the effects of cross-country differences in accounting standards that may remain in the
data, by running a robustness test restricted to firms from countries that adopt the IFRS.
We find that the main results remain robust.
    Other potential concerns include the overseas operations of the listed firms. Overseas
subsidiaries are common among the major firms in both developed and emerging market
countries and could influence the outcome of analysis. The globalization of firms also may
increase the noise in the data. We further test the robustness of our results by looking at
the cross-country patterns within industries that are less likely to have multinational firm
presence (e.g., utilities). We find that the main findings remain intact within these industries.

   6
     The capital flows in our sample are restricted to those received by the private sector and do not cover
sovereign flows.

                                                     6
Related Literature: Our paper relates to a vast international capital flows literature on the
Lucas Paradox. Alfaro et al. (2008) divide the literature into two groups. The first group
relies on differences in fundamentals that affect the production structure of the economy,
such as technological differences, missing factors of production, government policies, and the
institutions, to explain the paucity of capital flows to poor countries. The second group
focuses on international capital market imperfections that stem from sovereign risk and
asymmetric information.
    Much of the international macro and growth literature that uses cross-country marginal
product of capital differences to explain international capital flow patterns relies on macroe-
conomic fundamentals and endowments that affect differences in productive efficiency to
explain the Lucas Paradox. In their 2005 paper, Banerjee and Duflo outline an exhaus-
tive list of methods used to calibrate the marginal product of capital in the development
literature. Approaches include proxies for firm returns to capital using lending rates in
the emerging countries that show extremely high risk-adjusted costs of borrowing in these
countries.
    Other work posits a production function and derive the expression for marginal product of
capital. Using this approach, Lucas (1990) shows that adjusting for productivity differences,
marginal product of capital differences fall substantially. Caselli and Feyrer (2007) argue that
interest rates may be poor proxies for the firm-level cost of capital in financially repressed
and distorted economies. Caselli and Feyrer (2007) therefore take an alternative approach
and directly measure the marginal product of capital using national income accounts without
assuming the production function. Their results show that the return to capital is roughly
equal between emerging and developed countries once we adjust for the relative price of
capital, and non-reproducible factors of production such as land.
    The international capital market imperfections literature focuses on the frictions in the
capital market that keeps capital from flowing to countries with higher returns. Notable ex-
amples include Stulz (2005) who shows that agency problems in emerging countries can lead
to a wedge in the investment returns received by the international and domestic investors.
Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) highlight the default history of emerging countries, suggesting
that the credit risk can explain the paucity of capital flows to emerging countries and Montiel
(2006) proposes information frictions as important deterrents. David, et al. (2016) examine
the relationship between high investment returns and the co-movement with US returns and
show that despite higher returns, emerging market countries are not only more volatile, but




                                               7
also have a high exposure to global growth-rate shocks.7
    The findings in this paper are closely related to Gourinchas and Jeanne (2013), Banerjee
and Duflo (2005), and Chirinko and Mallik (2008). Although the approaches differ, all of
these papers investigate the role of domestic capital frictions on marginal product of capital
differences. Hsieh and Klenow (2008) and Alfaro, et al. (2008) also study domestic capital
market imperfections (i.e., the misallocation of capital within countries). These analyses
focus on aggregate total factor of productivity (TFP) and institutional quality differences
across countries rather than return differences. This paper adds to the literature by examin-
ing the impact of domestic capital frictions on the relationship between the marginal product
of capital and financial investment returns. The paper is also related to the extensive liter-
ature on measurement of real returns in the economy. The efforts to correctly measure the
real return in the economy at a macro level involve improving the measurement of income
and capital shares in production (see Gollin, 2002; Karabarbounis and Neiman, 2013; and
Jorda et al., 2019).
    The paper proceeds as follows. In section 2, we introduce the basic neoclassical model and
its predictions about the relationship between the marginal product of capital and financial
investment returns, and explain the empirical methodology. Section 3 describes the firm-
level data used in the analysis and presents summary statistics. We analyze the cross-country
marginal product of capital and investment return patterns in section 4 and investigate an
alternative model that can explain the divergence between the two patterns in section 5.
Section 6 concludes.




2       A Benchmark Model and the Empirical Methodology
In this section, we present a simple neoclassical model to motivate the empirical analysis.
Following that we describe the empirical methodology.


2.1     A Benchmark Neoclassical Model
To fix ideas, we introduce a neoclassical one-sector model with perfectly competitive factor
markets. This simple, benchmark model delivers useful predictions and illustrates the first
    7
     David, et al. (2016) compute MSCI index long run returns across 33 countries for the period of 1988-
2014 and find that the emerging market MSCI country index outperforms developed countries. This finding
is different from our findings likely due to differences in the sample and method. Our sample includes more
countries (44 countries), but over a shorter time period (1997-2014). Also note that developed markets
substantially outperformed emerging market countries in the recent decade. Unlike David, et al. (2016), our
measure computes the total asset return, which tends to be lower and less volatile relative to equity returns.

                                                      8
order condition that we use to motivate the empirical analysis. We also consider a brief
extension to a multi-sector setting.

2.1.1   One-Sector Model

Consider a neoclassical one-sector economy where the representative firm faces competitive
factor and goods markets. The production function is given by Yt = F (Kt , Lt ) where the
firm chooses capital, investment, and labor ({Kt , It , Lt }t0 ) to maximize the net present value
of future cash flows, taking the interest rate as given:

                                                     1
                                 max                    (Yt - It - wt Lt )                    (1)
                             {Kt ,It ,Lt }t0
                                               tt0
                                                     Rt

The capital accumulation process is defined as Kt+1 = G(Kt , It ) = (1 -  )Kt + It , and the
aggregate investment return between period t0 and t is Rt = (1 + rt )(1 + rt-1 )...(1 + rt0 ). Yt
is the period output of the representative firm, and wt is the exogenously determined wage.
Note that there is no capital rental market in this economy, as the firms own the capital used
in production. Rt is the aggregate compounded investment return from period t0 to t, and
 is the depreciation rate of the physical capital, which is assumed constant. The first-order
conditions yield:

                                                 G1 (Kt , It )
                    1 + rt =        F1 (Kt , Lt ) +                    G2 (Kt-1 , It-1 )
                                                 G2 (Kt , It )
                             = F1 (Kt , Lt ) + 1 -                                            (2)

and,
                                               F2 (Kt , Lt ) = wt                             (3)

    for all periods t > t0 . It is evident from equation (2) that the key determinant of the
relationship between the period marginal product of capital (F1 (Kt , Lt )) and the investment
return (rt ) is the capital accumulation equation (G(Kt , It )). Thus, if friction exists in the
capital accumulation process, then the cross-country investment return and marginal product
of capital patterns may diverge.
    To illustrate, assume a constant return to scale Cobb-Douglas production function (Y =
AK  L1- ), such that yt = L   Yt
                               t
                                 and A is total factor of productivity or productive efficiency.
                                                                        yt
Note that if alpha is the measured capital share in income, M P K =  k   t
                                                                           holds for neoclassical
production functions of any functional form in a one-sector setting with perfect competition.
The Cobb-Douglas production function serves as a simple example. The capital share of
output () is assumed less than unity. Since we also assume that all firms in the economy

                                                         9
share an identical production function, the output per unit of labor should be identical across
all entities.

                                                                 1   -1
                                             F1 (kt ) = A  yt 
                                                         yt
                                                      =                                              (4)
                                                         kt

It follows from equations (2) and (4) that both the period investment return and marginal
product of capital should decline with increases in the output per unit of labor. With these
simplifying assumptions, the model predicts that firm-level marginal products of capital and
investment returns should be inversely correlated with the aggregate output per unit of labor.

2.1.2    Multisector Model

Consider a multi-sector neoclassical economy that produces J final goods and a capital good.
The production function for firms that produce a final good i is given by Yt = F i (Kt , Lt )
where the firm chooses level of capital, investment, and labor ({Kt , It , Lt }t0 ) to maximize
the net present value of future cash flows:

                                                   1
                              max                   N
                                                      (P1,t Yt - PK,t It - wt Lt )                   (5)
                          {Kt ,It ,Lt }t0
                                            tt0
                                                  Rt

The capital accumulation process of the firm is defined as Kt+1 = G(Kt , It ) = (1 -  )Kt + It ,
and the aggregate investment return between period t0 and t is Rt = (1 + rt )(1 + rt-1 )...(1 +
                  N
rt0 ). Note that Rt in the equation (5) is the aggregate nominal investment return, such that
                                                                                                 N
                                                                                              1+rt
  N          N      N            N
Rt = (1+ rt )(1+ rt  -1 )...(1+ rt0 ). The real investment return (rt ) is defined as 1+ rt = 1+t ,
where t is inflation in period t. The first-order condition for producers of good i yields:

                               P1,t i               G1 (Kt , It )
                   1 + rt =         F1 (Kt , Lt ) +                          G2 (Kt-1 , It-1 )
                               PK,t                 G2 (Kt , It )
                              P1,t i
                            =     F (Kt , Lt ) + 1 -                                                 (6)
                              PK,t 1

for all periods t > t0 .
     P1,t
    PK,t 1
          F i (Kt , Lt ) is the price adjusted marginal product of capital introduced in Caselli and
Feyrer (2007). In their paper, Caselli and Feyrer show that adjusting for the cross-country
difference in the price of capital significantly reduces marginal product of capital differences
between developed and developing economies. However, this cross-country difference in the
relative price of capital does not affect the relationship between the price-adjusted marginal
                           P1,t  i
product of capital( P       K,t
                                F1 (Kt , Lt )) and the real return(rt )-the two only differ by a constant

                                                          10
 . Therefore, if the price-adjusted marginal product of capital is higher in emerging market
countries, the real investment return ought also be higher.
    Further, if capital is efficiently allocated within the economy, rt should be identical for
                                              Pj,t  j              P1,t   i
all firms within the economy and thus, PK,t        F1 (Kt , Lt ) = P K,t
                                                                         F1 (Kt , Lt ). Therefore, if for
               P1,t
any sector i, P K,t
                    FiK (Kt , Lt ) is higher in emerging market countries relative to developed
ones, the price-adjusted marginal product of capital for all final goods should be higher in
emerging market countries.
   Firm-level data allow us to test these implications at a more granular level than aggregate
data. The next section describes how we map the theoretical predictions to the firm-level
accounting and stock market data.


2.2     Mapping the Theory to Firm-Level Data
In this subsection, we describe the methodology to estimate marginal products of capital
and investment returns used in the empirical analysis. To map the two variables of interest
from the theory to the data, we use accounting and financial measures of profitability with
some modifications to better align the measures with the economic definitions described in
the benchmark model.
                                                                      yt
   From equation (4), the marginal product of capital is equal to  k   t
                                                                         , or in the multi-sector
        P y yt
case,  Pk kt . Given that  is the capital share of output, this expression suggests that the
marginal product of capital is the ratio between the portion of earnings that accrue to capital
holders (in the model simply the firm), and firm assets. The empirical estimations use return
on assets (ROA) as a measure of the marginal product of capital as follows:


                                                    EBIT DAf,i,c,t
                                    ROAf,i,c,t =    M V Af,i,c,t-1
                                                                                                     (7)

    EBIT DAf,i,c,t is the earnings before interest, tax, depreciation, and amortization, and
measures the income that accrues to capital holders or the firm f in industry i in period t in
country c. We use this measure of earnings rather than net income since the model assumes
that the firm owns all of its capital assets, and, therefore, there are no interest costs.
    This measure is in line with the cash flow definition used by Fama and French (1999) and
is similar to the one used by Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1995). The key difference between
our method and the one in Gilchrist and Himmelberg(1995) is that we do not subtract
interest payments due to a difference in our definition of capital. The definition of capital in
Gilchrist and Himmelberg(1995) only includes the capital stock, and therefore treats interest
payments as a fixed cost. We follow the Fama and French(1999) approach and use broader

                                                   11
definition of capital, which includes both the capital stock and debt, and therefore interest
payments are not deducted from our cash flow measure. In the analysis, we further adjust
this measure of income for extraordinary gains/costs. The adjustment is necessary as these
costs/gains are often unrelated to business operations, and they can increase the volatility
of earnings by inflating or deflating the income from the operations. Using pre-tax earnings,
we also minimize the effect of differences in tax treatments across countries.8
    M V Af,i,c,t is the current market value of the firm's assets9 and is defined as M V Af,i,c,t =
Debtf,i,c,t + M Vf,i,c,t . Debtf,i,c,t is the book value of debt, and M Vf,i,c,t is the market value
of equity for the firm f in industry i in period t in country c. Poterba (1998) uses a similar
measure to estimate the return to tangible capital at an aggregate level. This measure
differs from the standard accounting ROA, which uses the book value of the assets in the
denominator as the measure of capital. Although this ratio is widely used in finance and
accounting10 , assets on the balance sheet are measured at the acquisition cost. As the market
value of an asset can change over time (e.g., the value of buildings or land may appreciate
or depreciate), the value of assets on financial statements may not correctly reflect current
values. Therefore, we replace the denominator of the indicator with the sum of the book value
of debt and market value of equity. As total assets necessarily equal the sum of liabilities
and equity, this measure ought to provide a more accurate estimate of the replacement value
of an asset in period t - 1 under perfect capital markets.11
    Yet another advantage of our measure is that it includes value of intangible assets (re-
search and development (R&D)) owned by firms. Dictated by accounting conservatism and
uncertainty about the payoff from R&D activity, R&D expenditures are accounted for as
costs rather than as assets and thus taken as expenses. Therefore, R&D assets are not re-
flected as assets on firm balance sheets. Market participants,on the other hand, observe news
related to R&D and can readily incorporate this information into stock prices. Therefore,
in many R&D intensive industries, the book value of firm assets is often substantially lower
than market values. The accounting treatment of R&D can potentially inflate the marginal
product of capital in developed countries especially in R&D intensive industries.
    The value of assets at the end of period t - 1 is used in the denominator as a measure
of what the firm owns entering period t. This is the capital employed during period t to
generate the income EBIT DAf,i,c,t . Due to a time period mismatch between the numerator
    8
      In the robustness tests, we examine the effects of these cross-country differences in tax treatments and
find that our main result remains robust.
    9
      This is also the replacement value of the asset based on the q-theory of investment.
   10
      See Eisenberg et al. (1998), Guenther and Young (2000), Chaney et al. (2004), Bowen et al. (2008).
   11
      Debt also enters financial statements at a historical cost, and the interest rate on debt may differ across
time. However, the income used in the analysis is income before interest. Therefore, even if debt is refinanced
at a "current" rate of interest, it should not affect the ROA measure used in the analysis.

                                                       12
and denominator, we adjust the M V Af,i,c,t-1 for inflation using the consumer price inflation
(CPI) index.
                                                                      -It
     We can rewrite the capital accumulation equation as 1 -  = Kt+1Kt
                                                                          . Then, if investment
efficiency holds,

                                              Yt - It + Kt+1 - Kt
                                     rt =                                                                (8)
                                                      Kt

Note that this is the rate of return equation commonly used in finance to assess the prof-
itability of an investment 12 . It measures the investment return that capital owners can
receive by purchasing one unit of capital at time t and selling it at time t + 1.
    Using equation (8) as the benchmark, we derive the following expression to measure the
investment return:

                                   EBIT DAf,i,c,t + [M V Af,i,c,t - BV AAdj
                                                                        f,i,c,t ]
                    IRRf,i,c,t   =                                                                       (9)
                                                   M V Af,i,c,t-1

M V Af,i,c,t is the change in the market value of assets, (M V Af,i,c,t -M V Af,i,c,t-1 ). BV AAdj
                                                                                                 f,i,c,t =
BV Af,i,c,t + depreciationf,i,c,t , such that BV Af,i,c,t is the change in the book value of as-
sets net of depreciation.
    In essence, the difference between ROA and IRR has two components: the first one is
the growth rate of the market value of the firms assets, the second one is the change in the
book value relative to market value in the previous period. We use BV AAdj     f,i,c,t as a measure
of the current value of gross investments by firms. This is primarily due to accounting rules
that govern the booking of costs incurred on firm financial statements as either expenses or
capitalized costs. There is, however, no mandatory rule on when to expense or capitalize
costs. A common rule of thumb is that costs are expensed on income statements when the
future economic value of the cost does not yet exist such as for example future utility bills. On
the other hand, if a future economic value exists, such as for example real estate purchases,
the cost is capitalized on the balance sheet as an asset at acquisition price. Therefore,
although balance sheet assets do not reflect the current market value of aggregate capital,
the change in asset value net of depreciation, measures the capital investment of firms at the
current market price.13
    While our measure of investment does not include a significant portion of the R&D
spending by the firm as mentioned above, this ought not affect the measurement of IRRf,i,c,t .
  12
    See Gordon (1974), Salamon(1985), Fama and French(1999), Graham and Harvey(2001)
  13
     We use the change in the book value instead of CAPEX, as capital expenditures only capture in-
vestments in fixed assets. As our definition of capital is not limited to fixed assets, we use the book value
measure.

                                                     13
R&D spending is reflected in the EBIT DAf,i,c,t , and deducted as an expense. We also adjust
our investment returns for inflation across different countries. It is important to note that
equations (7) and (9) apply in both the single- and multi-sector cases. Market values of
capital assets implicitly adjust for differences in the relative price of capital goods across
countries. If the market value for capital assets is higher in emerging markets relative to
developed markets, the market value firm assets will reflect the higher price of capital goods.
    Our definition of investment returns is similar to a period investment return measure used
by Fama and French (1999) for the U.S. stock market. In their paper, this estimate is termed
the "internal rate of return (IRR) on value" and is used as the measure of the required rate
of return by investors, or more precisely, an estimate of investor earnings during the sample
period through passive investment in all corporate securities as they enter the sample.




3    The Data and Summary Statistics
Financial and market data used to calculate the firm-level marginal product of capital and
investment return are from Worldscope Datastream. Datastream is a preferred source of
data for the cross-country comparison because it not only provides extensive accounting
and market data on listed firms across countries, but it also aims to "provide the data in a
manner that allows maximum comparability between one company and another, and between
various reporting regimes" (Worldscope/Disclosure Partners, 1992). These adjustments by
Worldscope help minimize the potential bias from the cross-country differences in accounting
standards.
   Although Datastream takes extensive measures to increase the accounting comparability
across countries, we further check for the effects of cross-country differences in account-
ing standards by running a robustness test restricting the analysis to the countries that
adopted IFRS. Since the mid-2000s there has been increasing attempt led by Euro-zone
countries to unify accounting standards across countries. These efforts led to formation of
the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB), whose explicit goal is "to develop
an internationally acceptable set of high quality financial reporting standards" (Barth et al.
2008). Although the United States is yet to adopt IFRS, the standards were adopted by
EU countries by 2005 and a majority of MSCI developed and emerging countries by 2011
(the Appendix provides a list). Many other countries that have yet to adopt IFRS have
announced their plans for convergence in the near future. For example, India's Ministry of
Corporate Affairs released a road map for convergence with the IFRS, and all Indian com-
panies whose securities traded in a public market other than the SME Exchange, will be

                                              14
required to use IFRS by 2017. These efforts may lead to even greater data comparability
going forward facilitating firm-level research. In this paper, we test that the main results
remain robust to the cross-country differences in accounting standards.
    The countries used in the analysis are MSCI emerging and developed countries that
have relatively well-established stock markets.14 Exchange floors in developing countries are
often very new (e.g., Laos opened its stock exchange in 2011, Syria in 2009, and Somalia
in 2012), and in many cases Datastream does not carry data on the firms traded on these
exchanges as the market capitalization of these countries is small (e.g., the Maldives Stock
Exchange had only five firms listed as of 2008). Some developing countries do not have a
national stock exchange (e.g., Angola, Brunei). Restricting the analysis to MSCI emerging
and developed countries reduces the countries in the sample, but as Reinhart and Rogoff
(2004) point out, roughly 25 emerging markets account for the bulk of the financial flows.
Therefore, analyzing the marginal product of capital and the investment returns of the firms
in the MSCI developed and emerging country sample can provide useful insights into factors
that drive international capital flows.
    The period of analysis is 1997 to 2014. A longer period may be preferred for the anal-
ysis as it provides more reliable estimates of return on assets (ROA) and internal rates of
return (IRR) patterns. But unlike macroeconomic aggregate data, which date back to mid-
1900s, firm level data for emerging countries are often unavailable before 1995. Even though
the estimation period used in the paper is relatively short compared with papers that use
macroeconomic data, the period after 1995 is characterized by a large volume of interna-
tional capital investment following a series of trade and financial liberalization programs
undertaken since the mid-1980s. Therefore, the period post-1990 is especially relevant for
answering questions related to the marginal product of capital, investment returns, and the
observed patterns of international capital flows. A major drawback, however, is that the
sample period includes the global financial crisis, which was characterized by high levels of
volatility in both earnings and market values. Thus, in the empirical analysis, we control for
time fixed-effects and also run a robustness check excluding the crisis period.
    Within the Worldscope dataset, we exclude firm-years with missing market value, assets,
liabilities, depreciation, EBITDA, or extraordinary gains/cost. We also exclude balance-
sheet insolvent firm-years where total liabilities exceed total assets. As period t - 1 asset
values are used to calculate the period t ROA and IRR, firm-years without debt and mar-
ket value from the previous year are also excluded from the sample. The remaining data
are winsorized at 1% and 99% by country to control for the outliers, following accounting


  14
       Saudi Arabia is dropped from the sample due to the limited availability of firm-level data in early 2000s.

                                                        15
practice.15
    To adjust for industry-specific effects, we sort the firms into the 48 Fama-French indus-
tries.16 Firms in the financial sector are dropped from the analysis as the paper focuses
on the real economy. To test for the robustness of the empirical results to changes in the
industry classification schemes, we repeat the exercise using the two-digit Standard Industry
Classification (SIC) codes. After these exclusions, the main analysis uses 334,471 firm-years
from 42 countries. Table 1 provides summary statistics for the raw data.


3.1     Summary Statistics
Table 1 shows a large variation in sample sizes across countries. The United States has
the largest sample size with 68,438 firm-years, followed closely by Japan with 52,501 firm-
years. The sample size is the smallest for Colombia, which has only 365 firm-years. Industry
diversity also differs across countries; all 44 Fama-French (FF) industries are observed in
Canada, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States. In contrast, only 23 FF
industries are observed in Hungary. Purchasing power parity (PPP)-adjusted real GDP17 ,
population, employment, and average hours worked per employed are from the Penn World
Tables 9.0. In this paper, we use GDP per capita as the measure of output per unit labor,
and we check the robustness of the results using GDP per employed and GDP per hours
worked. Consumer price indices are from the World Bank database.
    Table 1 also provides summary statistics for the return on assets (ROA) and internal
rates of return (IRR) estimates across countries. The bottom of the table reports unweighted
averages of ROA and IRR for MSCI developed and emerging market countries. On average,
MSCI developed and emerging market countries have an ROA of 9.2% and an IRR of 8.3%
between 1997 and 2014. While this pattern is consistent with the benchmark model (r =
M P K - ), two notable patterns emerge from the data. First, emerging market countries have
a higher ROA, but lower IRR compared with developed countries. This pattern holds for both
average and median values and suggests that a potential explanation for the Lucas Paradox
may lie in the gap between investment return and marginal product of capital. Second,
among developed countries, the average IRR is higher than the average ROA, in contrast

  15
      Some of the major outliers in the sample are due to merger/acquisitions. Consider a listed firm that
merged with another (listed or unlisted) firm in January 2000. The ROA2000 will be the ratio between the
post-merger EBITDA and the pre-merger asset value, and the indicator will be inflated. Major mergers are
highly uncommon, but they can upwardly bias the results. For robustness, we repeat the analysis without
winsorization, and the results remain unchanged.
   16
      The actual number of industries used in the analysis is 44, as four financial industries are dropped from
the sample.
   17
      A detailed discussion about the construction of the PPP adjusted GDP is available on Feenstra et al.
(2015)

                                                      16
to the implications of the benchmark model. This is likely due to the right skewness in the
distribution of investment returns, illustrated in Figure 1. The figure shows that compared
with the ROA distribution (Figure 1a), which is almost perfectly symmetric across the mean,
the IRR distribution (Figure 1b) is skewed to the right. Indeed, even for developed countries,
the median ROA is higher than the median IRR.18
    Figure 2 shows two-way plots between firm-level ROA and IRR against the log of per
capita GDP (PCGDP). The figure includes the best-fit line with a 95% confidence inter-
val for the mean trend. Figure 2(a) shows a steep downward sloping line of best-fit with
a very narrow confidence interval, suggesting a negative correlation between ROA and the
log(PCGDP). On the other hand, the Figure 2(b), which shows the two-way plot for the IRR
and the log(PCGDP), depicts an upward sloping line of best-fit with a wide confidence inter-
val suggesting a potential deviation between the cross-country marginal product of capital
and the financial return patterns. While this positive mean-trend contradicts the predictions
of the neoclassical model, it is consistent with the uphill international capital flows pattern
documented in Prasad et al. (2007).
    Although the two-way plots are revealing, firm-specific factors may drive the observed
patterns. Firms in emerging countries may be more risky and may face greater financial
constraints relative to their peers in the developed markets. To delve deeper, we control for
firm- and industry-specific factors in the following sections.




4        Cross-Country Marginal Products of Capital and In-
         vestment Returns
4.1      The Return on Assets and Per Capita GDP
To formally assess the relationship between aggregate output per unit of labor and firm-level
profitability (return on assets), we estimate the following benchmark specification:

             ROAf,i,c,t =  + 1 log (P CGDP )c,t + 2 Dt + 3 Fi +  X f,i,c,t +            f,i,c,t       (10)

ROAf,i,c,t is the return on assets (ROA) for a firm f in industry i in country c in period t,
and P CGDPc,t is the purchasing power parity adjusted real GDP per capita in country c
in period t in 2011 U.S. dollars (USD) that we use as a proxy for labor productivity. Note
    18
     A third pattern observed is the negative mean ROA for Australia. This is due to the significant under-
performance of the metal mining industry during and after the financial crisis; excluding the metal mining
companies (SIC 2-digit code: 10), Australia's mean ROA turns positive.

                                                    17
that we repeat the exercise using labor productivity which reduces the sample of countries.
Dt and Fi are time and industry dummies to control for global macroeconomic shocks and
industry-specific effects. Xf,i,c,t is the vector of firm-specific factors, which include size (the
log of the book value of assets denominated in USD, adjusted for inflation using the CPI
index), leverage (the book debt to asset ratio), and the equity price-to-book ratio. The set of
firm-specific controls come from Fama and French (1992) to proxy for alternative firm-level
risks.
    Standard errors are clustered at the country-year level to control for the firm-level error
correlation within the country-year groups.19 We do not include country fixed effects in the
benchmark regression due to the relatively limited time dimension of the dataset (less than
20 years). The Appendix presents regression results with country clusters and with country
fixed effects. The main findings remain robust.
    Table 2 reports the results from the benchmark regression specification. Column (1)
shows the results for the MSCI developed and emerging countries between 1997 and 2014.
The coefficient on per capita GDP is negative and statistically significant at the 1% level.
Consistent with the predictions of the neoclassical model, the result suggests that the firm-
level ROA (our proxy for the marginal product of capital) is negatively correlated with
income per capita during our sample period and holds for firms in both MSCI developed
and emerging countries after controlling for firm-, industry-, and time-specific effects. In
other words, as the model predicts, firm ROA falls with increases in the proxy for labor
productivity. This finding also suggests that if, on average, the first-order condition that
equates the marginal product of capital and the investment return holds, then investment
returns should also be negatively correlated with per capita GDP.
    Column (1) shows that, on average, firm-level ROA declines with increases in per capita
GDP but the specification is silent about how the pattern varies within the sample. For
example, does the relationship between firm-level ROA and per capita GDP change when
we examine high-productivity firms with an above-average return on assets? Quantile re-
gressions make up for this shortcoming of the ordinary least squares benchmark by modeling
the relationship between the specified percentile of the response variable and the control
variables (i.e. the median quantile regression portrays the relationship between the median
marginal product of capital and the predictor variables). Also note the quantile regressions
take on particular importance when analyzing the differences between internal rates of re-
turn (IRR) and the return on assets, owing to the high level of skewness observed in the
distribution of the IRR in Figure 1.

  19
     The errors are clustered by country-year rather than country due to the limited number of country
clusters.

                                                 18
    Columns (2) through (4) show that the coefficient on per capita GDP is consistently
statistically significant across the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles. The coefficient is the
most negative for firms in the 75th percentile of ROA, and there is little difference in the
coefficients between the 25th and the 50th percentiles. This finding suggests that the effect
of the changes in the aggregate output per unit labor is most acutely apparent for the most
productive firms in the economy.
    As stated in the data section, the period of analysis includes the global financial crisis,
during which financial systems went through substantial stresses. We repeat the exercise
in column (1) for the 2011 to 2014 post-financial crisis period. Owing to the short period
of analysis, the values are susceptible to skewness from market volatility, but the regression
results presented in column (5) confirm the findings in column (1). Columns (6) and (7)
check for the effect of the cross-country differences in the accounting standards. Column
(6) repeats the regression in column (5) using firms from the countries that adopted the
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) during the post-financial crisis period,
and column (7) shows the results using firms in MSCI EU countries between 2006 and 201420 .
Greece is excluded in the post-financial crisis (2011-2014) and in the 2005 to 2014 EU samples
because of the Greek government-debt crisis that severely affected its stock market and firm
performance between 2011 and 2013. The results presented in columns (5) through (7) of
Table 2 show that the negative relationship between per capita GDP and the firm-level return
on assets is surprisingly consistent across time, and is robust to cross-country differences in
accounting standards.
    Figure 3(a) examines the relationship between the return on assets and per capita GDP
by industry with year fixed effects. We estimate the following industry-by-industry regression
for each of the 48 Fama-French industries (44 excluding financial industries) using the base
sample of firms in the MSCI developed and emerging countries between 1997 and 2014.

                     ROAf,c,t =  + 1 log (P CGDPc,t ) + 2 Dt +  X f,c,t +    f,c,t            (11)

Figure 3(a) shows that the negative coefficient on per capita GDP is remarkably consistent
across industries. In other words, across industries, a negative relationship exists between
per capita GDP and the firm-level return on assets-our measure of the marginal product of
capital. The figure plots industry-by industry point estimates with whiskers that represent
the 95% confidence intervals. Points to the left of the zero line line have a statistically
significant negative coefficient at the 5% level, and those with points to the right of the zero
have a statistically significant positive coefficient. There is a statistically significant decline

  20
       The European Union officially adopted IFRS starting 2005.

                                                    19
in firm-level returns on assets with increases in per capita GDP in almost all 44 non-financial
Fama-French industries. Forty industries have statistically significant negative coefficients for
per capita GDP, and only one industry (aircraft manufacturing) has a statistically significant
positive coefficient. The coefficient is most negative for defense and medical/pharmaceutical
industries, both of which require high levels of human and physical capital.
     Estimating year-by-year regressions, Figure 4(a) shows that the observed results are also
consistent across time. The figure visually depicts the results for the following estimating
equation using the base sample:

                  ROAf,i,c =  + 1 log (P CGDPc ) + 2 Fi +  X f,i,c +      f,i,c             (12)

In the figure, yearly point estimates and confidence intervals (whiskers) all lie below zero
between 1997 and 2014, suggesting a statistically significant negative coefficient for all years
in the sample. The incline of the negative slope is steep during the financial crisis (2007-2010)
and early-2000 recession but slowly flattens in recovery periods. Conversely, the negative
slope is relatively flat during the Asian financial crisis (1997) and slowly increases as the
Asian tigers move out of their deep recessions.
    The results in this section show that consistent with the neoclassical model, the marginal
product of capital is higher in countries with low per capita GDP. In the next subsection,
we repeat the exercises using investment returns (or the IRR).


4.2    Internal Rates of Return and Per Capita GDP
To test for the validity of the firm first-order condition described in equation (2), we use the
following regression specification:

            IRRf,i,c,t =  + 1 log (P CGDPc,t ) + 2 Dt + 3 Fi +  X f,i,c,t +       f,i,c,t   (13)

The predictor variables in the equation are identical to those in the benchmark regression
specification, equation (10), but the dependent variable is now the internal rate of return
(IRRf,i,c,t ). As in equation (10), firm-level factors, such as size, leverage, and the price-
to-book ratio, control for the firm-specific characteristics, and industry and time dummies
control for industry- and time-specific effects. If the neoclassical relationship between the
firm investment return and marginal product of capital holds, then the internal rate of return
should also be inversely correlated with per capita GDP.
    Table 3 presents the results. Column (1) reports the results for the MSCI developed
and emerging countries between 1997 and 2014. Despite the statistically significant nega-


                                               20
tive relationship with marginal product of capital observed in the previous subsection, the
coefficient on per capita GDP is not statistically significant when controlling for firm- and
industry-specific factors. This result implies that the cross-country marginal product of cap-
ital and investment return patterns do not necessarily mirror each other-as the neoclassical
model predicts. The finding also suggests that even accurate measures of marginal products
of capital may not explain patterns of international capital flows, as the marginal product
of capital may itself be an inaccurate proxy for investment returns.
    As Lucas (1990) suggests, if investment returns are inversely correlated with per capita
GDP, capital ought to flow from developed to emerging countries and any deficiencies in
these flows imply international financial market frictions. However, the results in column
(1) suggest that the investment returns are roughly equal across developed and emerging
countries. Therefore, an incentive may not exist for capital to flow to emerging markets, since
opportunities that deliver similar investment returns also exist within developed economies.
The result also suggests that a potential resolution to the Lucas paradox lies in the within-
country gap between marginal products of capital and investment returns.
    As in the previous subsection, we run a quantile regression to identify the within-sample
heterogeneity in response to changes in per capita GDP. Given the large rightward skewness
in the data from the summary statistics in Figure 1, this analysis is particularly important
for internal rates of return. Compared with the results in Table 2, the quantile regression
results in Table 3 vary more across percentiles. The regression results presented in columns
(2),(3), and (4) show that the coefficient on per capita GDP is positive and statistically
significant at the 5% level for the bottom 25th percentile and statistically insignificant for
firms in the 50th and 75th percentile. The estimates suggest that even the best-performing
firms within emerging countries cannot successfully translate their higher marginal products
of capital to higher investment returns. A potential resolution to the Lucas paradox may
therefore lie in macroeconomic factors that affect all firms within emerging economies.
    Column (5) presents the results for the post-financial crisis period and reaffirms the
divergence between the marginal product of capital and the investment return patterns
observed in column (1). The coefficient on P CGDP is statistically insignificant, which
implies that the investment return in developed countries is statistically indifferent from
that in emerging countries during the sample period. Column (6) repeats the regression in
column (5) using only the firms that adopted IFRS accounting standards during the period,
and documents that the cross-country pattern observed in column (5) is robust to cross-
country differences in the accounting standards. Column (7) repeats the exercise in column
(1) using the MSCI EU countries and finds that P CGDP is statistically insignificant.
    Figure 3(b) shows the results for the following specification to check for any variation in


                                              21
cross-country internal rate of return patterns across industries. We run industry-by-industry
regressions with year fixed effects to examine whether the negative correlation between return
on assets and per capita GDP also holds for internal rates of return by industry:

                  IRRf,c,t =  + 1 log (P CGDPc,t ) + 2 Dt +  X f,c,t +      f,c,t            (14)

    The results confirm the aggregate pattern observed in Table 3. Unlike Figure 3(a), Figure
3(b) point estimates and confidence intervals lie on/cross over the zero line and the coefficient
estimate is statistically insignificant in the regression. In particular, the coefficient on per
capita GDP is statistically insignificant in 42 out of 44 industries. Only the defense industry
has a statistically significant negative coefficient. This pattern for cross-industry firm-level
IRR estimates contrasts sharply with Figure 3(a), in which 40 industries have a statistically
significant negative coefficient, and confirms the finding that the cross-country investment
return pattern diverges from the marginal product of capital pattern.
    Figure 4(b) displays the results for the following estimating equation to check for annual
variation in the cross-country internal rates of return pattern with industry fixed effects:

                   IRRf,i,c =  + 1 log (P CGDPc ) + 2 Fi +  X f,i,c +      f,i,c             (15)

Unlike Figure 4(a), in which all point estimates lie below zero, Figure 4(b) shows coefficient
estimates both above and below zero. Between 1997 and 2014, the coefficient on P CGDP
is statistically insignificant or positive and significant for 10 years. For eight years, the
coefficient is negative and significant; four of the eight years occur around the financial crisis
(2006-2008, and 2010). The negative slope is also the steepest during this period (2006 and
2007). The patterns once again confirm that the negative correlation between the marginal
product of capital and per capita GDP does not necessarily translate to a negative correlation
with investment returns.
    The empirical results in this section document a divergence between the cross-country
investment returns and the marginal product of capital patterns-a finding that is surprisingly
robust across different sets of countries and time periods. In the following subsection, we
check the impact of cross-country differences in employment and taxes to further confirm
the robustness of the results documented thus far.




                                               22
4.3     Additional Tests and Robustness Checks
4.3.1     Output per worker

In the previous two subsections, we used per capita GDP as the measure of output per
unit labor. While this is a widely used measure of labor productivity (see Banerjee and
Duflo, 2005; Gourinchas and Jeanne, 2013), the literature also uses alternative measures.
In this section, we check the robustness of the results using an alternative measure of labor
productivity: output per worker. Output per worker is estimated using P EGDPc,t = GDP          c,t
                                                                                            Empc,t
                                                                                                   .
Empc,t is the total number of employees and self-employed in country c, in time t. The
measure considers only the fraction of the population directly involved in production. This
measure, which is used in Caselli and Feyrer (2007), is potentially more precise relative to
P CGDPc,t , but coverage in the data is less reliable, especially for developing countries.21
    To further check the robustness of the results in sections 4.1 and 4.2, we replace log (P CGDPc,t )
in the benchmark regressions with log (P EGDPc,t ). Table 4 presents the regression results.
Columns (1) and (2) confirm the negative relationship between output per unit labor and
firm-level ROA observed in section 4.1. The coefficient on per worker GDP is negative and
significant in the main sample (column 1) and in the countries that adopted IFRS during
the post-financial crisis period (column 2). Columns (3) and (4) reinforce the findings on
cross-country investment return patterns presented in section 4.2. The coefficient on per
worker GDP is statistically insignificant in the main sample (column 3) and in the coun-
tries that adopted IFRS during the post-financial crisis period (column 4). The empirical
results presented in this section confirm the findings of section 4.1 and 4.2, and show that
the results hold across different measures of labor productivity. The findings strengthen the
argument that within-country inefficiencies in resource allocation may explain the shortfall
in international capital flows from rich to poor countries.




   21                                                                                                  GDP
                                                                                                         c,t
      Yet another measure of output per unit labor is output per hour worked (P HGDPc,t AHWc,t Emp            c,t
                                                                                                                  ).
AHWc,t is the average annual hours worked by persons employed, and Empc,t is the fraction of the employed
population in country c in time t. P HGDPc,t is frequently used as a measure of labor productivity in the
macroeconomics literature (see Freeman, 1988; O'Mahony and Boer, 2002; Prescott, 2004) and is an even
more precise measure than output per worker, as it measures the labor input by hour. However, lack of reliable
hourly data substantially reduces its use. For example, China had to be dropped from the sample because
of a lack of data, and some major assumptions are made to interpolate missing values. For completeness, we
repeat the estimations of the benchmark regression specification using P HGDPc,t as a measure of output
per unit labor in the Appendix, and the results remain robust. When regressed against ROA, not only does
log (P HGDPc,t ) have a negative and statistically significant coefficient, but the incline of its slope is also
steeper relative to log (P EGDPc,t ). The measure, however, has a statistically insignificant positive coefficient
when regressed against IRR.

                                                        23
4.3.2     Tax-adjusted income

Previous sections use EBITDA as a measure of capital owner earnings to calibrate firm ROAs
and investment returns. This approach is consistent with the benchmark neoclassical model,
but corporate tax rates can also affect firm decisions and economic behavior. Corporate tax
rates tend to be lower in emerging markets relative to developed countries, which suggests
that tax rate differences are an unlikely friction in the international flow of capital. For
robustness, we calibrate the firm-level tax-adjusted ROA and investment returns using the
three-year average income tax rate. We exclude firm-years with tax rates exceeding 100%
and use the three-year average income tax rate rather than an annual income tax rate to
smooth large variations in tax rates.22 For completeness, we run a regression with annual
income tax rate for the main sample and the results remain unchanged.23
    The tax-adjusted measures of ROA and IRR reduce the size of the sample, as firm-years
without three-year average tax-rate data are dropped from the sample. Therefore, the cross-
country pattern is estimated using 122,465 firm-years across 42 countries, in contrast to
334,471 firm-years in the main sample. Table 4 presents the results using the tax-adjusted
ROA and IRR. Columns (5) and (6) confirm the inverse relationship between log (P CGDPc,t )
and the marginal product of capital. The coefficient is negative and statistically significant
in the main sample (column 5) and in countries that adopted IFRS during the post-financial
crisis period (column 6). Column (7) and (8) on the other hand show that the log (P CGDPc,t )
is a statistically insignificant predictor of investment returns in the base sample.
    These findings corroborate the evidence about the differences between the cross-country
marginal product of capital patterns and the investment return patterns observed in sections
4.1 and 4.2 and remain robust across alternative specifications. A significant gap exists
between the cross-country marginal product of capital pattern and the investment return
pattern, suggesting that an explanation for the shortfall in international capital flows may
lie in understanding the factors that drive the gap. In the following section we propose a
modification to the traditional neoclassical model, as a potential explanation for the gap
between marginal product of capital and investment returns.




   22
      This modification is necessary as EBIT DAf,i,c,t used in the analysis excludes extraordinary
gains/losses. Thus, any major fluctuations in tax rate caused by unusual event can bias the corporate
tax-adjusted ROA and IRR.
   23
      An alternative expression for tax-adjusted income is EBIT DAf,i,c,t - T axf,i,c,t , where T axf,i,c,t is the
income tax on firm f . However, this estimate is heavily affected by the capital structure of a firm.

                                                       24
5      Explaining the Divergence between Marginal Products
       of Capital and Investment Returns
5.1      Domestic Capital Accumulation Frictions
The empirical patterns documented in the previous sections show that while a statistically
significant negative relationship exists between GDP per capita and the marginal product
of capital, no such relationship exists between GDP per capita and investment returns.
This finding suggests that differences in the marginal product of capital across countries do
not necessarily translate into corresponding differences in investment returns, and the link
assumed between marginal products and investment returns appears not to hold.
    In this section, we turn our attention to the nature of the capital accumulation process
that governs the relationship between the marginal product of capital and the investment
returns. We discuss the implications introducing adjustment costs and connect this to the
Lucas Paradox.
    Consider the benchmark one-sector model introduced in section 2.1. Cochrane (1991)
shows that the following holds in this one-sector setting:

                                                           G1 (Kt , It )
                            1 + rt =    F1 (Kt , Lt ) +                    G2 (Kt-1 , It-1 )
                                                           G2 (Kt , It )
                                                                       k
                                       F1 (Kt , Lt )                 pt t+1
                                  =                  + G1 ( K  ,
                                                              t tI )                           (16)
                                           pk t
                                            t-1                      pk  t
                                                                       t-1

 k
pt t+1 is the price of installed capital in period t + 1 in measured in period t output. The
process follows from the fact that G2 (Kt , It ) is the marginal rate of transformation of a
consumption good in period t to installed capital in period t + 1. Therefore in equilibrium,
the price of an installed capital in period t + 1 in period t output is

                                                 k             1
                                                pt t+1 =                                       (17)
                                                           G2 (Kt , It )

      F1 (Kt ,Lt )
and       kt         is a price corrected measure of marginal product of capital. With a standard
         pt- 1
                                            k
capital accumulation equation, pt t+1 = 1 for all t, which suggests that buying a unit of
period t installed capital costs a unit of period t - 1 consumption good; therefore cross-
country differences in the price of installed capital are perfectly correlated with cross-country
differences in the price of output. However, if friction exists in the capital accumulation
process, the relative price of capital can diverge from a unity. In the benchmark model in
section 2, the relative price of capital difference played a role in the multiple-sector case. The

                                                           25
above equation suggests that when there are cross-country differences in capital accumulation
processes, relative price differences can also create a wedge in a single-sector case.
    In the benchmark model without adjustment costs, G1 (Kt , It ) = 1 -  , the investment
return and the marginal product of capital differ only by a constant depreciation rate,  .
However, with adjustment costs, G1 (Kt , It ) is no longer constant, and is a function of level
of capital (Kt ) and investment (It ). This divergence between the marginal product of capital
and the investment return is consistent with the capital wedge in Gourinchas and Jeanne
(2013). There, investors receive only a fraction of gross return owing to the capital wedge
caused by distortion in the market, and this capital wedge-adjustment substantially re-
duces the cross-country variation in returns across developed- and emerging-market coun-
tries. Gourinchas and Jeanne (2013) suggest that the source of the capital wedge may be
taxes, corruption, and capital market frictions, among other factors. Using a capital ac-
cumulation friction, we explicitly depict how a within-country capital market friction can
generate the capital wedge introduced in Gourinchas and Jeanne (2013).
    The capital accumulation friction also affects the multi-sector model. In the multi-sector
model with a capital adjustment factor,

                                Pj,t                 G1 (Kt , It )
                   1 + rt =          F1 (Kt , Lt ) +                    G2 (Kt-1 , It-1 )
                                PK,t                 G2 (Kt , It )
                                                                            k
                                 Pj,t                                      pt t+1
                          =               F 1 ( K t , Lt ) + G1 ( K  ,
                                                                    t tI )                   (18)
                              PK,t  pk t
                                      t-1                                  pk  t
                                                                             t-1


With the capital accumulation friction, the relative price of capital has two components: the
cross-country differences in the capital accumulation process (pk      t
                                                                      t-1 ), and the cross-country
                                                             P
differences in price of capital relative to price of good j ( PK,t
                                                               j,t
                                                                   ).
    The price of capital used in Caselli and Feyrer (2007) is from PWT, which is compiled
using the United Nations International Comparisons Program (ICP) price data. The ICP
specifically states that the reported price includes "import duties and other product taxes
actually paid by the purchaser, the costs of transporting the asset to the place where it will
be used, and any charges for installing the asset so it will be ready for use in production."
The transportation/installation costs are some of the most commonly cited sources of the
capital accumulation friction. Therefore, the explanation from the ICP is consistent with
           kt
     P pt-
the K,tPj,t
              1
                adjustment used in the above equation.
    In the next section, we use a capital accumulation process with adjustment costs com-
monly used in the investment theory literature and empirically test its validity using firm-
level data.



                                                     26
5.2     Capital Accumulation with Quadratic Adjustment Costs
The benchmark neoclassical model assumes capital accumulation without adjustment costs,
where a unit increase in investment leads to a unit increase in capital stock. In this section, we
introduce a modified capital accumulation equation with an adjustment cost factor, which
accounts for installation costs and/or potential synergistic gains with the existing capital
stock.
    We assume the following modified capital accumulation condition:

                                                                                        It2
               Capital accumulation: Kt+1 = G(Kt , It ) = (1 -  )Kt + It +                            (19)
                                                                                        Kt

The process commonly used in the investment literature yields the traditional capital accu-
mulation equation if we set  = 0. The adjustment term, which is quadratic in investment,
accounts for the nonlinear costs incurred in the installation process.24 Moreover, the adjust-
ment costs are inversely proportional to the size of the existing capital stock, as firms are less
affected by the reallocation of resources when they have a large capital base. Chirinko(1993),
Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1995), and Jin (2010) assume quadratic adjustment costs, while
Chocrane (1991) assumes a cubic adjustment cost. In this paper, we use a quadratic adjust-
ment cost term. The results, however remain robust even with a cubic adjustment cost.
    The investment theory literature assumes that  is negative, as it is the cost incurred
in the installation process. However, extensive research in the finance literature studies
potential synergies in corporate mergers. Here, the fact that the value of the combined firm
can exceed the sum of assets in the individual firms suggests that a unit investment can
lead to a greater than one-unit increase in the aggregate capital stock. Therefore, we are
agnostic about placing restrictions on the sign of  . If  < 0, then a unit of investment
leads to a less than one unit increase in the aggregate capital stock (a friction). If  > 0, a
unit of investment leads to a greater than one-unit increase in the aggregate capital stock (a
synergy).
    With the above-modified capital accumulation model, the following relationship holds
between the price-adjusted marginal product of capital and investment return:

                                                                        2    k
                                    F1 (Kt , Lt )                 It        pt t+1
                         1 + rt =                 +   1-+                                             (20)
                                        pkt
                                         t-1
                                                                  Kt        pk  t
                                                                              t-1


The new quadratic term affects investment returns in two ways: (1) indirectly through

  24
    This assumption implies, for example, that large investments will increase installation costs, as firms
need to set aside more resources for the installation.

                                                      27
the marginal product of capital price adjustment; and (2) directly as an investment wedge,
          2
    It
 K    t
         . This implies that the cross-country investment return pattern may deviate from the
price-adjusted marginal product of capital pattern depending on the sign and the magnitude
of  .
    In the following section, we test the validity of this modified capital accumulation equation
using firm-level data.


5.3       Empirical Analysis
Note that we can rewrite the capital accumulation process with adjustment costs as:
                                                                             2
                                   Kt+1 - Kt       It                   It
                                             = - +    +
                                      Kt           Kt                   Kt

The modified equation includes a higher-order investment-capital ratio to describe the capital
accumulation process.
   To test the validity of the quadratic capital adjustment cost, we first define the following
two variables:
                                               BV AAdj f,i,c,t
                                   IKf,i,c,t =                                             (21)
                                               M V Af,i,c,t-1
                                                       M V Af,i,c,t
                                         RWf,i,c,t =                                                    (22)
                                                       M V Af,i,c,t-1
IKf,i,c,t is the ratio between change in book value of an asset adjusted for depreciation and
the market value of an asset. RWf,i,c,t is a investment returns wedge that measures the
growth rate of a firm's capital stock at market prices. Also, note that there is a quadratic
                                                                           2
adjustment cost term, the square of investment to capital ratio (IKf,i,c,t       ). Both ratios are
further adjusted for inflation in the respective countries. If the benchmark model without
                                                                         2
adjustment costs holds, then RWf,i,c,t should be independent of IKf,i,c,t      . As in the previous
                                                                             2
sections, following accounting practice, we winsorize the IKf,i,c,t , IKf,i,c,t     and RWf,i,c,t at
                            25
the 1% level by country.
    As stated earlier, BV AAdj  f,i,c,t does not include investment in research and development
(R&D), as R&D costs are considered expenses on financial statements. This does not affect
the measurement of IRRf,i,c,t as both expenses and investment are deducted from the period
income, but it may lead to a downward bias in the estimate of IKf,i,c,t by underestimating
the level of investment in R&D intensive industries. In contrast, the market value of assets,
M V Af,i,c,t-1 , includes the value of the intangible assets in the firm, as the market observes

  25
       For robustness, we repeat the exercise without winsorization and the results remain unchanged.

                                                       28
the outcome of R&D activities. However, if the omitted R&D expense is the sole driver
                                 2
of the observed gap, then IKf,i,c,t  may not have statistical significance in the regression
analysis as the effect of omission on W edgef,i,c,t should be linear; in other words, omitted
R&D investment may affect the level of IKf,i,c,t , but it should not affect the curvature of
the capital accumulation process.
    Another related concern is that while R&D activities conducted by the firm are considered
an expense (thus, not included in the book value of asset), patents purchased from external
firms are considered capital and are included in the firm's asset account at market value.
This differential treatment of intangible assets can potentially create a bias by inflating the
investment level of firms that conduct extensive M&A activities relative to those that focus
on in-house research. To address this issue, we use the following definition of investment-to-
capital ratio to check for the robustness of the results:

                                                    Capexf,i,c,t
                               CapexIKf,i,c,t =                                             (23)
                                                    M V Af,i,c,t-1

Capexf,i,c,t measures capital expenditure of firm f in industry i in period t in country c.
Capital expenditure is the total amount of investment in fixed assets, such as plant and
machinery, and excludes current assets and intangible assets. Therefore, the measure is
shielded from the differential treatment of the intangible assets described above.
    We run the following specification to incorporate the impact of adjustment costs in the
capital accumulation process:

                                                        2
         RWf,i,c,t =  + 1 Dt + 2 Fi + 1 IKf,i,c,t + 2 IKf,i,c,t + Xf,i,c,t +   f,i,c,t      (24)

                                      2
Column (1) of Table 5 shows that IKf,i,c,t is positive and statistically significant between 1997
and 2014. This finding suggests that the aggregate capital estimates, which rely on a linear
capital accumulation process, require modification. Column (2) confirms the result in column
(1) and shows that the quadratic adjustment term is statistically significant and continues
to hold even when the sample is reduced to countries with IFRS accounting standards.
    To further test the robustness of the result, we replace IKf,i,c,t with CapexIKf,i,c,t . Col-
umn (3) of Table 5 shows that results remain unchanged; the quadratic adjustment factor
remains positive and statistically significant between 1997 and 2014. This result further
strengthens the view that the capital adjustment process is non-linear with respect to the
investment-to-capital ratio. Column (4) shows that the result continues to hold for MSCI
developed and emerging market countries that adopted IFRS accounting standards during
the post-financial crisis period.


                                               29
    We also test whether the effect of the adjustment term is homogeneous across countries
by including an interaction effect between the capital adjustment factor and the level of
                   2
development (IKf,i,c,t  log (P CGDPc,t )). To control for industry- and time-specific effects,
we run the regression using industry and time fixed effects. In addition, we include firm-
specific factors. The results in column (5) show that the effect of the adjustment term is
                       2
not homogeneous. IKf,i,c,t  is negative and statistically significant, suggesting a friction in a
                                                                        2
capital accumulation process. However, the interaction between IKf,i,c,t     with log per capita
GDP in the regression specification is positive and statistically significant during the sample
period. The results remain robust for CapexIKf,i,c,t . This suggests that while most emerging
market countries may suffer from capital accumulation friction, the effect slowly dissipates
as the economy develops. The result is not however statistically significant when sample is
restricted to countries that adopted IFRS accounting standards in the post-financial crisis
period. This may be due to the limited number of observations and a high correlation
             2
between IKf,i,c,t and IK 2  log (P CGDP )f,i,c,t in the post-crisis period.




6    Conclusion
According to textbook neoclassical theory, if two countries share identical production func-
tions, and trade in capital is free and competitive, new investment will occur only in the
poorer country since the marginal return to capital should be higher in economies with less
capital (owing to the law of diminishing returns). However, as Lucas points out in his sem-
inal 1990 paper, observed capital flows from developed to developing countries fall short of
what should be observed according to the theory.
    In this paper, we use firm-level data to show that higher marginal products of capital
in emerging countries do not translate into higher financial returns in emerging countries.
We suggest that the marginal product of capital patterns do not mirror investment return
patterns because of cross-country differences in capital accumulation efficiency. Sufficiently
large capital adjustment costs can decouple the cross-country financial returns pattern from
the marginal product of capital. This finding also suggests that a key explanation for the
pattern of international capital flows may indeed be domestic rather than international
frictions that affect the capital accumulation process. Thus, what matters is not only factors
that affect productive efficiency but also those that affect capital accumulation efficiency.
    This paper differs methodologically from most others in the literature in that it uses
firm-level data instead of aggregate data to explain cross-country differences in return and
marginal product of capital. Firm-level data have an advantage over macroeconomic data in

                                               30
that they allow direct computation of marginal products of capital and the financial returns.
Future research using data that encompasses unlisted firms and self-employed workers may
help increase our understanding of domestic capital market frictions.




                                             31
7     References
Abel, A. (2003). The Effects of a Baby Boom on Stock Prices and Capital Accumulation in the
    Presence of Social Security. Econometrica, 71(2), 551-578.


Abel, A., and Blanchard, O. (1986). The Present Value of Profits and Cyclical Movements in In-
    vestment. Econometrica, 54(2), 249-273.


Acemoglu, D., and Angrist, J. (2000). How Large Are Human-Capital Externalities? Evidence from
    Compulsory Schooling Laws. NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 15, 9-59.


Alfaro, L., Kalemli-Ozcan, S. and Sayek, S. (2009). FDI, Productivity and Financial Development
    The World Economy, 32(1), 111-135.


Alfaro, L., Kalemli-Ozcan, S. and Volosovych, V. (2008). Why Doesn't Capital Flow from Rich
    to Poor Countries? An Empirical Investigation The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(2),
    347-368.


Banerjee, A., and Duflo, E. (2005). Growth Theory through the Lens of Development Economics.
    In Handbook of Economic Growth ed.1 Durlauf, S., and Aghion, P., vol. 1(A) (Elsevier Science)
    chapter 7, pp. 473-552.


Barth, M., Landsman, W., and Lang, M. (2008). International Accounting Standards and Account-
    ing Quality. Journal of Accounting Research, 46(3), 467-498.


Bowen, R., Rajgopal, S., and Venkatachalam, L. (2008). Accounting Discretion, Corporate Gover-
    nance,and Firm Performance. Contemporary Accounting Research, 25(2), 351-405.


Caselli, F., and Feyrer, J. (2007). The Marginal Product of Capital. The Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 122(2), 535-568.


Chaney, R., Jeter, D., and Shivakumar, L. (2004). Self-Selection of Auditors and Audit Pricing in
    Private Firms. The Accounting Review, 79(1), 51-72.


Chirinko, R. (1993). Business Fixed Investment Spending: Modeling Strategies, Empirical Results,
    and Policy Implications. Journal of Economic Literature, 31(4), 1875-1911.


Chirinko, R. and Mallick, D. (2008). The Marginal Product of Capital: A Persistent International
    Puzzle., CESifo Working Paper Series 2399, CESifo Group Munich.

                                                32
Cochrane, J. (1991). Production-Based Asset Pricing and the Link Between Stock Returns and
   Economic Fluctuations. The Journal of Finance, 46(1), 209-237.


David, J., Henriksen, E., and Simonovska, I. (2016). The Risky Capital of Emerging Markets, un-
   published manuscript.


Eisenberg, T., Sundgren, S., and Wells, M. (1998). Larger Board Size and Decreasing Firm Value
   in Small Firms. Journal of Financial Economics, 48, 35-54.


Fama, E., and French, A. (1999). The Corporate Cost of Capital and the Return on Corporate
   Investment. The Journal of Finance, 54, 1939-1967.


Freeman, A., and Nickell, S.(1988). Labour Market Institutions and Economic Performance. Eco-
   nomic Policy, 3(6), 63-80.


Gilchrist, S., and Himmelberg, C. (1995). Evidence on the Role of Cash Flow for Investment. Jour-
   nal of Monetary Economics, 36(3), 541-572.


Gollin, D. (2002). Getting Income Shares Right Journal of Political Economy, 110(2), 458-474.


Gordon, L. (1974). Accounting Rate of Return vs. Economic Rate of Return. Journal of Business
   Finance & Accounting, 1(3), 343-356.


Gourinchas, P., and Jeanne, O. (2013). Capital Flows to Developing Countries: The Allocation
   Puzzle. The Review of Economic Studies, 82(3), 347-368.


Graham, J., and Harvey, C. (2001). The Theory and Practice of Corporate Finance: Evidence From
   the Field. Journal of Financial Economics, 60(2,3), 187-243.


Guenther, D., and Young, D. (2000). The Association Between Financial Accounting Measures and
   Real Economic Activity: a Multinational Study. Journal of Accounting and Economics, 29(1),
   53-72.


Hayashi, F. (1982). Tobin's Marginal q and Average q: A Neoclassical Interpretation. Economet-
   rica, 50(1), 213-224.


Horne, J. (1983). Financial Management and Policy, 6th Ed., Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.



                                                33
Hsieh, C., and Klenow, P. (2009). Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India. The
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 4, 1403-1448.


Jin, K. (2012). Industrial Structure and Capital Flows. American Economic Review, 102(5), 2111-
   2146.


Jorda, O., Knoll K., Kuvshinov D., Schularick M., & Taylor A. (2019). The Rate of Return on
   Everything, 1870-2015. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134 (3), 1225-1298.


Karabarbounis, L., and Neiman, B. (2014). The Global Decline of the Labor Share. Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, 129, 61-103.


King, R., and Rebelo, S. (1993). Transitional Dynamics and Economic Growth in the Neoclassical
   Model. American Economic Review, 83(4), 908-31.


Konchitchki, Y., and Patatoukas, P. (2014). Accounting Earnings and Gross Domestic Product.
   Journal of Accounting and Economics, 57(1), 76-88.


Lucas, R. (1990). Why Doesn't Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries. American Economic
   Review, 80,92-96.


Montiel, P. (2006). Obstacles to Investment in Africa: Explaining the Lucas Paradox. Seminar
   Paper, IMF Seminar, Tunis, 28 Feb.-12 Mar. 2006.


O'Mahony, M., and Boer, W. (2002). Britain's Relative Productivity Performance: Has Anything
   Changed?. National Institute Economic Review , 179, 38-43.


Portes, R., and Rey, H. (2005). The Determinants of Cross-Border Equity Flows. Journal of Inter-
   national Economics, 65, 269-296.


Poterba, J. (1998). The Rate of Return to Corporate Capital and Factor Shares: New Estimates
   using Revised National Income Accounts and Capital Stock Data. Carnegie-Rochester Confer-
   ence Series on Public Policy, 48, 211-246.


Prasad, E., Rajan, R., and Subramanian,A. (2007). Foreign Capital and Economic Growth. Brook-
   ings Paper on Economic Activity 1, 153-230.




                                                34
Prescott, E. (2004). Why Do Americans Work So Much More Than Europeans? Federal Reserve
   Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 28(1), 2-13.


Reinhart, C., and Rogoff, K. (2004). Serial Default and the "Paradox" of Rich-to-Poor Capital
   Flows. American Economic Review, 94(2), 53-58.


Reinhart, C., Rogoff, K. and Savastano, M. (2004). Debt Intolerance. NBER Working Paper, No.
   9908.


Salamon, G. (1985). Accounting Rates of Return. The American Economic Review, 75(3), 495-504.


Stulz, R. (2005). The Limits of Financial Globalization. The Journal of Finance, 31(4), 1875-1911.


Wald, J. (1999). How Firm Characteristics Affect Capital Structure: An International Comparison.
The Journal of Financial Research, 22(2), 161-187.




                                               35
    Figure 1: The Return on Assets and Internal Rates of Return
This figure plots the distribution of firm-level return on assets and internal rates of return for the entire sample. Histogram is
plotted in density units, and the k-density line estimates density function f (x) of the respective variable.




                                              (a) Return on Assets (ROA)




                                          (b) Internal Rate of Return (IRR)




                                                               36
Figure 2: The Return on Assets, Internal Rates of Return, and Per
Capita GDP
This figure plots the best-fit line and 95% confidence interval of firm-level return on assets and internal rates of return for the
entire sample against log of purchasing power parity (PPP)-adjusted real per capita GDP.




                                       (a) Return on Assets and log(PCGDP)




                                  (b) Internal Rates of Return and log(PCGDP)




                                                                37
Figure 3: The Return on Assets, Internal Rates of Return, and Per
Capita GDP Across Industries
This figure plots industry-by-industry coefficients on per capita GDP for each of the 48 Fama-French industries (44 excluding
financial industries) using the entire sample of firm-years in MSCI developed and emerging market countries. Panel (a) plots
the coefficients for the return on assets and panel (b) for internal rates of return. The figure presents coefficient point
estimates and whiskers that represent the 95% confidence intervals by industry. Appendix Tables A.3 and A.5. provide the
regression results.




                      (a) Return on Assets                                    (b) Internal Rates of Return




                                                                38
Figure 4: The Return on Assets, Internal Rates of Return, and Per
Capita GDP Across Time
This figure plots yearly regression coefficients on per capita GDP for each year between 1997 and 2014 using the entire sample
of firm-years in MSCI developed and emerging market countries. Panel (a) plots the coefficients for the return on assets and
panel (b) for internal rates of return. The figure visually presents coefficient point estimates and whiskers that represent the
95% confidence intervals by year. Appendix Tables A.4 and A.6. provide the regression results.




                                                   (a) Return on Assets




                                             (b) Internal Rates of Return



                                                               39
                       Table 1: Summary Statistics (1997-2014)
This table presents summary statistics for the firm-level return on assets (ROA) and internal rates of return (IRR) estimates
across MSCI developed and emerging market countries within the sample. The table also presents number of firm-years and
Fama-French industries by country.


                                  Firm-years    Fama-French             ROA                            IRR
                                                Industries       Mean Median         SD       Mean    Median      SD
      Australia      AUS          14,839        43              (0.001) 0.020       0.183     0.185    0.007     0.922
      Austria        AUT          1,147         28               0.098  0.098       0.069     0.065    0.042     0.275
      Brazil         BRA          1,450         35               0.093  0.097       0.072     0.060    0.042     0.278
      Belgium        BEL          3,250         38               0.139  0.124       0.108     0.102    0.052     0.354
      Canada         CAN          12,624        44               0.065  0.084       0.139     0.131    0.037     0.626
      Chile          CHL          2,080         30               0.107   0.099      0.085     0.062    0.025     0.303
      China          CHN          20,090        43               0.062  0.052       0.061     0.146    0.012     0.577
      Colombia       COL          365           24               0.132   0.119      0.093     0.062    0.007     0.365
      Czech Republic CZE          436           24               0.145  0.134       0.098     0.040    0.021     0.254
      Denmark        DNK          1,890         36               0.085  0.092       0.087     0.071    0.032     0.342
      Finland        FIN          1,929         36               0.094   0.097      0.070     0.088    0.061     0.313
      France         FRA          8,621         42               0.087  0.087       0.076     0.067    0.042     0.303
      Germany        DEU          9,039         42               0.080  0.088       0.095     0.063    0.040     0.345
      Greece         GRC          3,643         37               0.072  0.069       0.075     0.120   (0.015)    0.823
      Hong Kong      HKG          11,342        41               0.063   0.064      0.118     0.150    0.011     0.749
      Hungary        HUN          423           23               0.104  0.109       0.094     0.002   (0.025)    0.333
      India          IND          17,621        43               0.113  0.104       0.087     0.058   (0.029)    0.459
      Indonesia      IDN          3,826         37               0.111   0.099      0.105     0.072   (0.019)    0.489
      Ireland        IRL          782           26               0.075  0.084       0.079     0.137    0.065     0.551
      Israel         ISR          3,189         40               0.068  0.076       0.103     0.083    0.034     0.425
      Italy          ITA          3,141         36               0.079  0.082       0.064     0.030    0.020     0.229
      Japan          JPN          52,501        44               0.081   0.077      0.059     0.055    0.027     0.244
      Malaysia       MYS          11,428        41               0.090  0.088       0.085     0.044    0.015     0.317
      Mexico         MEX          1,470         35               0.107  0.102       0.071     0.066    0.040     0.292
      Netherlands    NLD          2,120         39               0.095  0.097       0.063     0.084    0.063     0.305
      New Zealand    NZL          1,380         35               0.087   0.100      0.100     0.082    0.060     0.330
      Norway         NOR          2,260         33               0.075   0.086      0.108     0.087    0.039     0.454
      Peru           PER          986           26               0.155   0.137      0.127     0.157    0.074     0.510
      Philippines    PHL          1,706         33               0.095   0.089      0.101     0.110    0.022     0.527
      Poland         POL          3,053         40               0.085   0.084      0.094     0.073    0.011     0.473
      Portugal       PRT          812           30               0.090   0.086      0.063     0.037    0.018     0.194
      Russia         RUS          1,869         35               0.148  0.123       0.137     0.040   (0.014)    0.476
      Singapore      SGP          7,146         43               0.085  0.082       0.090     0.068    0.013     0.407
      South Africa   ZAF          3,621         40               0.126   0.123      0.118     0.105    0.058     0.422
      South Korea    KOR          16,905        42               0.091   0.093      0.113     0.068    0.018     0.391
      Spain          ESP          1,883         36               0.090   0.087      0.062     0.077    0.049     0.268
      Sweden         SWE          4,761         42               0.040   0.072      0.130     0.092    0.037     0.500
      Switzerland    CHE          2,936         33               0.084  0.087       0.064     0.096    0.070     0.302
      Thailand       THA          5,740         40               0.116  0.109       0.095     0.125    0.055     0.386
      Turkey         TUR          2,907         36               0.108  0.091       0.106     0.016   (0.047)    0.566
      United Kingdom GBR          18,822        44               0.066  0.086       0.106     0.085    0.037     0.489
      United States  USA          68,438        44               0.063  0.081       0.112     0.110    0.048     0.535
      Total                       334,471       44               0.092   0.092      0.094     0.083    0.028     0.421
      MSCI Developed              234,852                        0.078  0.084       0.093     0.089    0.039     0.411
      MSCI Emerging               99,619                         0.108  0.101       0.096     0.075    0.013     0.434




                                                             40
Table 2: The Relationship Between Firm-Level Returns on Assets
and Per Capita GDP
This table presents the regression results from the benchmark regression specification. Size is the inflation-adjusted book value
of the firm's assets in U.S. dollars, and leverage is the ratio between the book value of liabilities and assets. Price-to-book
measures the ratio between the market and the book value of the firm's equity. Time fixed effects and industry fixed effects
for the 48 Fama-French industries are included in all regressions. Robust standard errors are reported in the parenthesis.
Column (1) shows the results for the MSCI developed and emerging countries in the sample between 1997 and 2014. Columns
(2) through (4) show quantile regression results for the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles, and column (5) presents the result for
post-financial crisis periods. Column (6) repeats the regression in column (5) using firms from the countries that adopted the
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) post-financial crisis, and column (7) shows the results using firms in
MSCI EU countries between 2006 and 2014 (Greece is excluded from the sample of EU countries because of its debt crisis).


                ROAf,i,c,t =  + 1 Log (P CGDP )c,t + 2 Dt + 3 Fi +  X f,i,c,t +                              f,i,c,t

ROAf,i,c,t is the return on assets (ROA) for a firm f in industry i in country c in period t, and P CGDPc,t is the purchasing
power parity adjusted real GDP per capita in country c in period t in 2011 U.S. dollars. Dt and Fi are time and industry
dummies to control for global macroeconomic shocks and industry-specific effects. Xf,i,c,t is the vector of firm-specific factors.
(*), (**), and (***) refer to the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels of significance, respectively.

                         (1)            (2)              (3)          (4)        (5)                    (6)          (7)
                       97-14      97-14 (25th)     97-14 (50th) 97-14 (75th)   11-14              11-14 (IFRS) 06-14 (EU)
 Log(PCGDP)        -0.0218***      -0.0113***      -0.00981***   -0.0138*** -0.0176***             -0.0277***   -0.0287***
                     (0.00220)      (0.00198)        (0.00256)    (0.00234)  (0.00451)              (0.00445)    (0.00549)
 Log(size)          0.0141***      0.0141***        0.00757***   0.00200*** 0.0138***               0.0197***   0.0145***
                    (0.000636)     (0.000527)       (0.000455)   (0.000410)  (0.00145)              (0.00192)   (0.000754)
 Leverage          -0.0443***      -0.0246***       -0.0345***   -0.0608*** -0.0463***             -0.0366***   -0.0278***
                     (0.00386)      (0.00294)        (0.00426)    (0.00467)  (0.00666)               (0.0120)    (0.00578)
 Price-to-Book     -1.75e-05**    -0.000230**        -0.000115  -2.47e-05*** -1.95e-05            -5.24e-05*** -6.48e-05***
                    (7.63e-06)     (0.000112)       (9.69e-05)   (5.34e-06)  (1.22e-05)            (1.92e-05)   (2.31e-05)
 Constant            0.163***       -0.000293        0.116***     0.280***    0.105**               0.129***     0.223***
                      (0.0221)       (0.0208)         (0.0272)     (0.0241)   (0.0441)               (0.0462)     (0.0539)
 Observations         334,471        334,471          334,471      334,471     87,775                 35,204       34,084
 R-squared             0.139          0.112            0.119        0.059      0.144                   0.200       0.134
 Time FE                  Y              Y                Y            Y          Y                      Y            Y
 Industry FE              Y              Y                Y            Y          Y                      Y            Y




                                                                41
Table 3: The Relationship Between Firm-Level Internal Rates of
Return and Per Capita GDP
This table presents the regression results from the benchmark regression specification. Size is the inflation-adjusted book value
of the firm's assets in U.S. dollars, and leverage is the ratio between the book value of liabilities and assets. Price-to-book
measures the ratio between the market and the book value of the firm's equity. Time fixed effects and industry fixed effects
for the 48 Fama-French industries are included in all regressions. Robust standard errors are reported in the parenthesis.
Column (1) shows the results for the MSCI developed and emerging countries in the sample between 1997 and 2014. Columns
(2) through (4) show quantile regression results for the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles, and column (5) presents the results
for post-financial crisis periods. Column (6) repeats the regression in column (5) using firms from the countries that adopted
the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) post-financial crisis, and column (7) shows the results using firms in
MSCI EU countries between 2006 and 2014 (Greece is excluded from the sample of EU countries becuase of its debt crisis).


                IRRf,i,c,t =  + 1 Log (P CGDPc,t ) + 2 Dt + 3 Fi +  X f,i,c,t +                              f,i,c,t

IRRf,i,c,t is the internal rate of return (IRR) for a firm f in industry i in country c in period t, and P CGDPc,t is the
purchasing power parity-adjusted real GDP per capita in country c in period t in 2011 U.S. dollars. Dt and Fi are time and
industry dummies to control for global macroeconomic shocks and industry-specific effects. Xf,i,c,t is the vector of
firm-specific factors. (*), (**), and (***) refer to the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels of significance, respectively.

                        (1)        (2)                    (3)             (4)           (5)         (6)        (7)
                       97-14  97-14 (25th)         97-14 (50th)      97-14 (75th)     11-14  11-14 (IFRS) 06-14 (EU)
 Log(PCGDP)          -0.00289   0.0235**               0.0108           -0.0142      0.0300      0.0245     -0.00620
                     (0.0184)   (0.0117)              (0.0124)         (0.0169)     (0.0208)    (0.0259)    (0.0619)
 Log(size)           0.00262   0.0212***             0.0112***         0.000110    0.000562    -0.000693   0.0108***
                    (0.00234)  (0.00144)             (0.00134)        (0.00162)    (0.00343)   (0.00433)   (0.00201)
 Leverage           -0.125***   0.117***            -0.0442***        -0.270***   -0.0911***   -0.118***   -0.103***
                     (0.0183)   (0.0126)              (0.0129)         (0.0208)     (0.0311)    (0.0404)    (0.0196)
 Price-to-Book     0.000213** 2.15e-05**           0.000462***        0.0140***    0.000103   0.000421** 0.000277***
                   (8.43e-05)  (1.03e-05)           (5.32e-06)        (0.00173)   (8.70e-05)  (0.000166)   (5.86e-05)
 Constant              0.109   -0.706***                -0.206         0.458***       -0.334      -0.222      0.141
                      (0.181)    (0.118)               (0.129)          (0.171)      (0.211)     (0.235)     (0.653)
 Observations        334,471     334,471              334,471           334,471      87,775      35,204      34,084
 R-squared             0.064      0.019                  0.044           0.003         0.037       0.019      0.126
 Time FE                 Y          Y                      Y               Y             Y           Y          Y
 Industry FE             Y          Y                      Y               Y             Y           Y          Y




                                                                42
Table 4: Robustness Checks: Output per Worker & Tax-Adjusted
Income
This table presents the robustness test results for the baseline sample of firms in MSCI developed and emerging market
countries. Size is the inflation-adjusted book value of firm assets in U.S. dollars, and leverage is the ratio between the book
value of liabilities and assets. Price-to-book measures the ratio between the market and the book value of the firm's equity.
Time fixed effects and industry fixed effects for the 48 Fama-French industries are included in all regressions. Robust standard
errors are reported in the parenthesis. Columns (1) through (4) show the regression result when output per unit labor is
measured using purchasing power parity adjusted GDP per employed. Columns (5) through (8) present regression results
from tax-adjusted ROA and IRR. (*), (**), and (***) refer to the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels of significance, respectively.


                     (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)           (5)             (6)           (7)           (8)
 Variables          ROA            ROA            IRR          IRR           ROA             ROA           IRR           IRR
                    97-14      11-14 (IFRS)      97-14     11-14 (IFRS)      97-14       11-14 (IFRS)     97-14      11-14 (IFRS)
 Log(PEGDP)      -0.0203***     -0.0300***     -0.00491       0.0296
                  (0.00273)      (0.00609)     (0.0206)      (0.0305)
 Log(PCGDP)                                                                -0.00543***     -0.00311*       -0.0132        0.0220
                                                                             (0.00167)     (0.00177)      (0.0225)      (0.0213)
 Log(size)        0.0138***     0.0197***       0.00269      -0.000658     -0.00352***   -0.00356***    -0.00511**    -0.0119***
                  (0.000655)     (0.00192)     (0.00238)     (0.00432)      (0.000276)    (0.000465)     (0.00260)     (0.00281)
 Leverage        -0.0435***     -0.0354***     -0.125***     -0.119***      -0.0368***    -0.0317***    -0.0909***    -0.0911***
                   (0.00388)      (0.0121)      (0.0184)      (0.0410)       (0.00246)     (0.00436)      (0.0221)      (0.0218)
 Price-to-Book   -1.77e-05**   -5.29e-05***   0.000213**    0.000422**    -0.000240***   -0.00230***    0.00396***     0.0319***
                  (7.69e-06)    (1.93e-05)    (8.43e-05)    (0.000166)      (7.56e-05)    (0.000335)     (0.00146)     (0.00377)
 Constant          0.167***      0.175***         0.132         -0.297       0.196***      0.176***         0.226        -0.0940
                    (0.0294)      (0.0650)       (0.217)       (0.301)        (0.0176)      (0.0186)       (0.216)       (0.222)
 Observations       334,471        35,204       334,471        35,204         122,465        10,128       122,465         10,128
 R-squared           0.135         0.199          0.064          0.019          0.119         0.125         0.113          0.164
 Time FE               Y             Y              Y              Y              Y             Y             Y              Y
 Industry FE           Y             Y              Y              Y              Y             Y             Y              Y




                                                                43
Table 5: The Investment Returns Wedge and Investment-Capital
Ratios
This table presents baseline regression results for firm-level investment returns wedges for MSCI developed and emerging
market countries within the sample. RW is the investment returns wedge measured as the growth rate of firm-level capital
stocks at market prices. Size is the inflation-adjusted book value of the firm's assets in U.S. dollars, and leverage is the ratio
between the book value of liabilities and assets. Price-to-book measures the ratio between the market and the book value of
the firm's equity. Time fixed effects and fixed effects for the 48 Fama-French industries are included in all regressions.
Standard errors are reported in parenthesis.

                                                  2
   RWf,i,c,t =  + 1 Dt + 2 Fi + 1 IKf,i,c,t + 2 IKf,i,c,t + Xf,i,c,t +                                      f,i,c,t
                                                                            2                  2
   RWf,i,c,t =  + 1 Dt + 2 Fi + 1 IKf,i,c,t +                           2 IKf,i,c,t    +   3 IKf,i,c,t     Log (P CGDPc,t )
                 + Xf,i,c,t +         f,i,c,t

P CGDPc,t is the purchasing power parity adjusted real GDP per capita in country c in period t in 2011 US dollars. Dt and
Fi are time and industry dummies to control for global macroeconomic shocks and industry-specific effects. Xf,i,c,t is the
vector of firm-specific factors: size, price-to-book and leverage. (*), (**), and (***) refer to the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels of
significance, respectively.

                                  (1)            (2)          (3)            (4)              (5)            (6)         (7)            (8)
                                 97-14      11-14 (IFRS)     97-14      11-14 (IFRS)         97-14     11-14 (IFRS)     97-14      11-14 (IFRS)
 IK                            1.152***       1.031***                                     1.164***      1.039***
                               (0.0251)       (0.0429)                                     (0.0243)      (0.0468)
 IK 2                          0.200***       0.200***                                      -0.382*        -0.672
                               (0.0159)       (0.0288)                                      (0.197)       (0.711)
 capexIK                                                    1.148***       0.531*                                     1.206***        0.560*
                                                             (0.122)       (0.284)                                     (0.110)       (0.295)
 capexIK 2                                                  2.924***      4.419***                                    -6.187***      -0.0165
                                                             (0.410)       (1.070)                                     (2.150)       (15.25)
 IK 2  Log (P CGDP )                                                                       0.0552***      0.0816
                                                                                            (0.0195)     (0.0680)
 capexIK 2  Log (P CGDP )                                                                                              0.893***         0.411
                                                                                                                         (0.226)       (1.448)
 Log(size)                    -0.00961***    -0.0171***      -0.00143      -0.00389    -0.00994***      -0.0173***      -0.00180      -0.00393
                                (0.00244)     (0.00531)     (0.00241)     (0.00422)      (0.00244)       (0.00538)     (0.00240)     (0.00430)
 Leverage                      -0.0692***       -0.0524    -0.0814***       -0.0811     -0.0681***         -0.0522    -0.0782***       -0.0811
                                 (0.0177)      (0.0410)      (0.0203)      (0.0492)       (0.0175)        (0.0408)      (0.0199)      (0.0491)
 Price-to-Book                0.000257**     0.000543**    0.000232**     0.00116*      0.000257**      0.000543**    0.000232**     0.00116*
                               (0.000101)    (0.000211)    (0.000104)    (0.000677)     (0.000101)      (0.000211)    (0.000104)    (0.000678)
 Constant                         0.0688         0.106        0.0854*       0.0951         0.0742           0.109       0.0879*        0.0948
                                 (0.0456)      (0.0964)      (0.0464)       (0.106)       (0.0453)        (0.0976)      (0.0459)       (0.106)
 Observations                    334,471         35,204       327,107        34,394       334,471           35,204       327,107        34,394
 R-squared                        0.412          0.428         0.109         0.096          0.413           0.428         0.110         0.096
 Time FE                            Y              Y             Y             Y              Y               Y             Y             Y
 Industry FE                        Y              Y             Y             Y              Y               Y             Y             Y




                                                                        44
A       Online Appendix

                    Figure A.1: Countries with IFRS Standards
MSCI developed and emerging market countries in the sample are highlighted in red and green. Countries colored in red had
adopted IFRS accounting standard by 2017.




                                                           45
                                                                         Table A.1: Summary of Variables
     The table summarizes variables used in the analysis. Macroeconomic variables are from Penn World Table 9.0. and firm-level data are from Worldscope Datastream.

             Variable              Description                                    Equations                                      Data Code                                           Data Source
             Macro
                                   Output-side real GDP at                                                                                                                           Penn World Tables
             GDP                                                                                                                 Real GDP (rgdpo)
                                   chained PPPs (in mil. 2011US$)                                                                                                                    9.0.
                                                                                                                                                                                     Penn World Tables
             Population            Population (in millions)                                                                      Population (pop)
                                                                                                                                                                                     9.0.
                                                                                                                                                                                     Penn World Tables
             Employed              Number of persons engaged (in millions)                                                       Number of employed (emp)
                                                                                                                                                                                     9.0.
                                   Purchasing power parity (PPP) adjusted            GDP                                                                                             Penn World Tables 9.0
             P CGDPc,t                                                            P opulation
                                   real per capita GDP                                                                                                                               and own calc.
                                   Purchasing power parity (PPP) adjusted          GDP                                                                                               Penn World Tables 9.0
             P EGDPc,t                                                            Employed
                                   real per employed GDP                                                                                                                             and own calc.
46




             Firm
                                                                                                                                 Sum of EBITDA after extraordinary items (WC18198)
                                   Earnings before interest, tax, depreciation,
             EBIT DAf,i,c,t                                                                                                      and extraordinary cost (WC01254)                    Datastream and own calc.
                                   and amortization before extraordinary items
                                                                                                                                 minus extraordinary credit (WC01253)
             M Vf,i,c,t            Market value of equity                                                                        Market Value (WC08001)                              Datastream
             Debtf,i,c,t           Book value of debt                                                                            Total Liabilities (WC03351)                         Datastream
             BV Af,i,c,t           Book value of assets                                                                          Total Assets (WC02999)                              Datastream
             depreciationf,i,c,t   Depreciation and amortization                                                                 Depreciation/Depletion/Amortization (WC01151)       Datastream
             Capexf,i,c,t          Capital expenditure                                                                           Capital Expenditure (WC04601)                       Datastream
             M V Af,i,c,t          Market value of assets                         Debtf,i,c,t + M Vf,i,c,t                                                                           Datastream and own calc.
             BV Aadj  f,i,c,t      Change in asset net of depreciation            BV Af,i,c,t + depreciationf,i,c,t                                                                  Datastream and own calc.
                                                                                  EBIT DAf,i,c,t
             ROAf,i,c,t            Return on Assets                               M V Af,i,c,t-1
                                                                                                                                                                                     Datastream and own calc.
                                                                                  EBIT DAf,i,c,t +[M V Af,i,c,t -BV AAdj
                                                                                                                     f,i,c,t ]
             IRRf,i,c,t            Financial Return                                              M V Af,i,c,t-1
                                                                                                                                                                                     Datastream and own calc.
                                                                                  M V Af,i,c,t
             M Kf,i,c,t            Change in market value of assets               M V Af,i,c,t-1
                                                                                                                                                                                     Datastream and own calc.
                                                                                  BV AAdjf,i,c,t
             IKf,i,c,t             Investment-to-Capital Ratio                    M V Af,i,c,t-1
                                                                                                                                                                                     Datastream and own calc.
                                                                                   Capexf,i,c,t
             CapexIKf,i,c,t        Capex-to-Capital Ratio                         M V Af,i,c,t-1
                                                                                                                                                                                     Datastream and own calc.
     Table A.2: Accounting Standards and IFRS Adoption Dates
This table presents the accounting standard and IFRS adoption date for MSCI developed and emerging market countries in
the analysis.

                Country                       Accounting Standard                  IFRS Adoption Date
                Australia                             IFRS                               2005
                Austria                               IFRS                               2005
                Belgium                               IFRS                               2005
                Brazil                                IFRS                               2010
                Canada                                IFRS                               2011
                Chile                                 IFRS                               2010
                China                     Chinese Accounting Standards                    NA
                Colombia                              IFRS                               2015
                Czech Republic                        IFRS                               2005
                Denmark                               IFRS                               2005
                Finland                               IFRS                               2005
                France                                IFRS                               2005
                Germany                               IFRS                               2005
                Greece                                IFRS                               2005
                Hong Kong                             IFRS                               2005
                Hungary                               IFRS                               2005
                India                      India accounting standards                     NA
                Indonesia                  Indonesian national GAAP                       NA
                Ireland                               IFRS                               2005
                Israel                                IFRS                               2008
                Italy                                 IFRS                               2005
                Japan                    Japanese Accounting Standards                    NA
                Malaysia                              IFRS                               2017
                Mexico                                IFRS                               2012
                Netherlands                           IFRS                               2005
                New Zealand                           IFRS                               2007
                Norway                                IFRS                               2005
                Peru                                  IFRS                               2012
                Philippines                           IFRS                               2005
                Poland                                IFRS                               2005
                Portugal                              IFRS                               2005
                Russia                                IFRS                               2012
                Singapore        Singapore Financial Reporting Standards (SFRS)           NA
                South Africa                          IFRS                               2011
                South Korea                           IFRS                               2011
                Spain                                 IFRS                               2005
                Sweden                                IFRS                               2005
                Switzerland                       Swiss GAAP                              NA
                Thailand                   Thai Accounting Standards                      NA
                Turkey                                IFRS                               2005
                UK                                    IFRS                               2005
                US                                  US GAAP                               NA




                                                          47
Table A.3: The Relationship Between Industry Returns on Assets
and Per Capita GDP
This table presents the regression results from industry-by-industry regression for each of the 48 Fama-French industries (44
excluding financial industries). Size is the inflation-adjusted book value of the firm's asset in U.S. dollars, and leverage is the
ratio between the book value of liability and assets. Price-to-book measures the ratio between the market and the book value
of the firm's equity. Time fixed effects are included in the regression but are not reported. (*), (**), and (***) refer to the
10%, 5%, and 1% levels of significance, respectively.


   Fama-French Industries                 log(PCGDP)        log(size)    Leverage Price-to-Book       Observations    R-squared
   Agriculture                              -0.0216***     0.0144***    -0.0623***    -0.000257          4,145          0.091
   Food Products                            -0.0161***    0.00657***    -0.0858*** -0.000247**           9,753          0.099
   Candy & Soda                             -0.0183***    0.00901***    -0.0477***    -0.000215          2,141          0.107
   Beer & Liquor                            -0.0119***    0.00471***    -0.0437***   -0.00135**          2,757          0.083
   Tobacco Products                           0.000411    0.00711***    -0.0691***   -0.000392*           481           0.180
   Recreation                                 0.000403    0.00994***    -0.0929*** -7.86e-05***          2,990          0.090
   Entertainment                            -0.0125***     0.0140***    -0.0237***    -0.000106          5,172          0.063
   Printing and Publishing                  -0.0111***    0.00853***    -0.0466*** -0.000476***          3,756          0.087
   Consumer Goods                           -0.0144***    0.00861***    -0.0826***   -0.00101**          7,320          0.085
   Apparel                                  -0.0216***    0.00817***     -0.135***  -0.000403**          4,111          0.128
   Healthcare                               -0.0302***     0.0122***       0.00433  -0.00145***          3,151          0.120
   Medical Equipment                        -0.0625***     0.0280***    -0.0382*** -3.76e-05***          5,590          0.228
   Pharmaceutical Products                  -0.0537***     0.0239***    -0.0441***    -1.92e-05         10,888          0.255
   Chemicals                                -0.0221***     0.0109***    -0.0899***    -3.62e-05         12,388          0.098
   Rubber and Plastic Products              -0.0209***    0.00723***    -0.0901*** -0.000512**           3,533          0.095
   Textiles                                 -0.0254***    0.00860***    -0.0837*** -0.000709***          5,259          0.098
   Construction Materials                   -0.0143***    0.00765***    -0.0904*** -0.000395***         13,180          0.086
   Construction                              -0.00482*    0.00564***    -0.0661***    -1.84e-05         17,799          0.044
   Steel Works                              -0.0164***    0.00676***    -0.0981*** -0.000666***         10,213          0.121
   Fabricated Products                      -0.0107***    0.00829***    -0.0955*** -0.00567***           1,530          0.116
   Machinery                                -0.0155***    0.00752***    -0.0590*** -0.000510**          14,777          0.062
   Electrical Equipment                     -0.0151***    0.00925***    -0.0462***   -0.000918*          5,411          0.068
   Automobiles                              -0.0174***    0.00795***    -0.0727*** -0.000159***          8,900          0.076
   Aircraft                                  0.0133***       0.00158     -0.0273**    -0.000165          1,190          0.067
   Shipbuilding, Railroad Equipment           0.00106      -0.000131    -0.0910***     -0.00286           867           0.090
   Defense                                  -0.0681***    0.00945***     -0.103***   -0.00526**           325           0.170
   Precious Metals                          -0.0302***     0.0371***       -0.0142  2.92e-05***          5,036          0.254
   Non-Metallic and Industrial Mining       -0.0517***     0.0317***      -0.00443  -0.000109**          5,832          0.336
   Coal                                     -0.0390***     0.0276***        0.0286    -1.69e-06          1,902          0.268
   Petroleum and Natural Gas                -0.00564**     0.0223***      -0.00982    -0.000152         11,754          0.225
   Utilities                                -0.0161***    0.00901***    -0.0503***    -2.87e-05          9,841          0.091
   Communication                            -0.0221***     0.0171***    -0.0403***    -8.48e-06          9,283          0.183
   Personal Services                        -0.0255***     0.0159***      -0.0155*  -0.000646**          3,370          0.103
   Business Services                        -0.0348***     0.0186***     0.000422     -6.66e-06         36,652          0.129
   Computers                                -0.0252***     0.0149***    -0.0400***    -7.47e-05          8,760          0.117
   Electronic Equipment                     -0.0188***     0.0164***    -0.0248***    -3.49e-05         15,711          0.100
   Measuring and Control Equipment           -0.0147**     0.0144***    -0.0405***   -0.000162*          4,433          0.093
   Business Supplies                        -0.0185***    0.00536***     -0.108*** -1.78e-05***          5,242          0.121
   Shipping Containers                     -0.00843***    0.00594***    -0.0940***    -0.000352          1,665          0.092
   Transportation                            -0.00412*    0.00300***    -0.0463***    -1.67e-05         12,377          0.029
   Wholesale                                -0.0145***     0.0110***    -0.0687***    -2.05e-05         17,701          0.071
   Retail                                    -0.00449*    0.00761***    -0.0601***    -3.90e-05         17,253          0.056
   Restaurants, Hotels                      -0.00506**    0.00318***    -0.0298***    -1.91e-05          7,915          0.022
   Other                                    -0.0196***     0.0170***    -0.0287***   -0.000309*          2,117          0.136




                                                                48
Table A.4: The Relationship Between Firm-Level Returns on As-
sets and Per Capita GDP, By Year
This table presents the regression results of year-by-year analysis using the firm-level ROA of MSCI developed and emerging
market countries in the sample. Size is the inflation-adjusted book value of the firm's assets in U.S. dollars, and leverage is the
ratio between the book value of liability and assets. Price-to-book measures the ratio between the market and the book value
of the firm's equity. Industry fixed effects are included in the regression but are not reported. (*), (**), and (***) refer to the
10%, 5%, and 1% levels of significance, respectively.


           log(PCGDP)             log(Size)          Leverage Price-to-Book                   Observations          R-squared
 1997        -0.0103***          0.00657***         -0.0376***   -1.27e-05*                     11,701                0.084
 1998        -0.0129***          0.00810***         -0.0372*** -0.000100***                     12,081                0.091
 1999        -0.0271***          0.0110***          -0.0543***  -2.99e-05**                     13,588                0.132
 2000        -0.0196***          0.0117***          -0.0367***    -6.81e-05                     14,348                0.139
 2001        -0.0265***          0.0137***          -0.0401*** -0.000246***                     15,990                0.168
 2002        -0.0329***          0.0154***          -0.0451***    -4.50e-06                     16,742                0.178
 2003        -0.0198***          0.0161***          -0.0512***    -2.59e-05                     17,543                0.152
 2004        -0.0184***          0.0151***          -0.0513***    6.75e-08                      17,796                0.150
 2005        -0.0171***          0.0152***          -0.0447*** -0.000251***                     18,433                0.168
 2006        -0.0209***          0.0165***          -0.0348***    -2.34e-05                     19,892                0.179
 2007        -0.0259***          0.0150***          -0.0357***    -2.42e-05                     21,530                0.168
 2008        -0.0217***          0.0127***          -0.0382***   -1.84e-05*                     22,130                0.141
 2009        -0.0273***          0.0174***          -0.0781*** -0.000701***                     22,184                0.160
 2010        -0.0286***          0.0148***           -0.0314**  -0.000128**                     22,012                0.156
 2011        -0.0171***          0.0134***          -0.0386***  -2.57e-05**                     22,502                0.141
 2012        -0.0170***          0.0145***          -0.0521*** -4.17e-05***                     22,348                0.141
 2013        -0.0170***          0.0138***          -0.0550***    -7.82e-06                     21,856                0.148
 2014        -0.0201***          0.0134***          -0.0411***    -5.86e-05                     21,795                0.151




                                                                49
Table A.5: The Relationship Between Industry Internal Rates of
Return and Per Capita GDP
This table presents the regression results from industry-by-industry regression for each of the 48 Fama-French industries (44
excluding financial industries). Size is the inflation adjusted book value of the firm's assets in U.S. dollars, and leverage is the
ratio between the book value of liability and assets. Price-to-book measures the ratio between the market and the book value
of the firm's equity. Time fixed effects are included in the regression but are not reported. (*), (**), and (***) refer to the
10%, 5%, and 1% levels of significance, respectively.


   Fama-French Industries                 log(PCGDP)    log(size)        Leverage Price-to-Book       Observations    R-squared
   Agriculture                                -0.0193  0.0220***         -0.115***     0.00126           4,145          0.096
   Food Products                             -0.00521    0.00380         -0.160***     0.00191           9,753          0.064
   Candy & Soda                               -0.0105   -0.00378           -0.0609   -0.000281           2,141          0.092
   Beer & Liquor                              -0.0391  0.00725*          -0.197***   0.0203***           2,757          0.141
   Tobacco Products                           -0.0401     0.0169           -0.0407   0.00378**            481           0.109
   Recreation                                  0.0195   -0.00146         -0.157***    8.66e-05           2,990          0.063
   Entertainment                             -0.00125    0.00556         -0.124***    0.000736           5,172          0.042
   Printing and Publishing                    0.00659    0.00192         -0.130***    0.000959           3,756          0.096
   Consumer Goods                             -0.0126  0.00815**         -0.204***   0.00799**           7,320          0.093
   Apparel                                     0.0131    0.00398         -0.202***  0.00822***           4,111          0.108
   Healthcare                                -0.00594    0.00561         -0.184***   0.00835**           3,151          0.077
   Medical Equipment                          -0.0342    0.00909         -0.149*** 0.000337***           5,590          0.101
   Pharmaceutical Products                    -0.0197   0.0131**         -0.171***    0.000378          10,888          0.091
   Chemicals                                  -0.0113  0.00907**         -0.117***    0.000140          12,388          0.084
   Rubber and Plastic Products                0.00925    0.00463         -0.161***     0.00270           3,533          0.092
   Textiles                                    0.0143    0.00337          -0.104**    0.00478*           5,259          0.072
   Construction Materials                   -0.000676 0.00870***         -0.127***  0.00762***          13,180          0.116
   Construction                              -0.00234   -0.00581         -0.0767**   0.000519*          17,799          0.088
   Steel Works                               -0.00179    0.00765         -0.117***  0.00626***          10,213          0.121
   Fabricated Products                        -0.0288   0.0166**         -0.288***   0.0467***           1,530          0.208
   Machinery                                  -0.0200  0.00807**         -0.112***   0.00558**          14,777          0.124
   Electrical Equipment                       -0.0179   0.0129**         -0.135***     0.00389           5,411          0.097
   Automobiles                                -0.0128  0.00773**         -0.131***  0.000583**           8,900          0.103
   Aircraft                                   -0.0189  -0.00912*           -0.0826    0.000554           1,190          0.160
   Shipbuilding, Railroad Equipment            0.0345    0.00954         -0.363***   0.0652***            867           0.325
   Defense                                   -0.114**    0.0226*          -0.346**   0.0579***            325           0.212
   Precious Metals                            -0.0247    0.00490          -0.163** 0.000292***           5,036          0.120
   Non-Metallic and Industrial Mining        -0.00374    0.00780         -0.340***    0.000895           5,832          0.120
   Coal                                       -0.0228    0.00103          -0.275**   -1.09e-05           1,902          0.110
   Petroleum and Natural Gas                   0.0105    0.00158         -0.291***  0.00332***          11,754          0.109
   Utilities                                  0.00757   -0.00103        -0.0897***    0.000185           9,841          0.081
   Communication                               0.0158   -0.00248         -0.0694**   6.89e-05*           9,283          0.128
   Personal Services                          0.00147    0.00252         -0.150***    0.0106**           3,370          0.079
   Business Services                         -0.00338    0.00532         -0.100***    7.53e-05          36,652          0.080
   Computers                                 -0.00347    0.00390         -0.135***  0.00164***           8,760          0.114
   Electronic Equipment                        0.0101    0.00173         -0.164***    0.000328          15,711          0.135
   Measuring and Control Equipment             0.0114    0.00470          -0.103**    0.000756           4,433          0.119
   Business Supplies                          0.00214  0.00685**         -0.141*** 0.000475***           5,242          0.123
   Shipping Containers                         0.0238    0.00355          -0.0967*     0.00513           1,665          0.106
   Transportation                             0.00168   0.000402         -0.127***  0.000245**          12,377          0.091
   Wholesale                                 -0.00218   6.98e-06         -0.107***    0.000234          17,701          0.051
   Retail                                    -0.00279    0.00423         -0.129***   0.00107**          17,253          0.066
   Restaurants, Hotels                        0.0245* -0.00803**        -0.0795***   0.000388*           7,915          0.070
   Other                                      -0.0187    0.00621         -0.202***  0.000884**           2,117          0.074




                                                                50
Table A.6: The Relationship Between Firm-Level Internal Rates of
Return and Per Capita GDP, By Year
This table presents the regression results of year-by-year analysis using the firm-level IRR of MSCI developed and emerging
market countries in the sample. Size is the inflation-adjusted book value of the firm's assets in U.S. dollars, and leverage is the
ratio between the book value of liability and assets. Price-to-book measures the ratio between the market and the book value
of the firm's equity. Industry fixed effects are included in the regression but are not reported. (*), (**), and (***) refer to the
10%, 5%, and 1% levels of significance, respectively.


           log(PCGDP) log(Size)     Leverage Price-to-Book                                    Observations          R-squared
 1997         0.0772***   0.00276  -0.0793***   9.05e-05*                                       11,701                0.044
 1998         0.0506***  0.0143***    0.0255   0.00171***                                       12,081                0.067
 1999        -0.0360*** -0.0204*** -0.445***  0.000587***                                       13,588                0.088
 2000        -0.0282*** 0.0147*** -0.0791***    0.000479                                        14,348                0.031
 2001         0.0183***  0.0115***    -0.0256 0.000952***                                       15,990                0.038
 2002        -0.0200***   0.00197      0.0131  0.000163*                                        16,742                0.084
 2003         0.0851*** -0.0103*** -0.300***     0.000236                                       17,543                0.072
 2004         0.0500*** -0.0102*** -0.212***     2.98e-05                                       17,796                0.041
 2005         0.0104**   0.00431** -0.0953***    0.000737                                       18,433                0.033
 2006        -0.0809*** 0.0134*** -0.180***   0.000954***                                       19,892                0.057
 2007         -0.109*** 0.00664*** -0.280***   0.000543**                                       21,530                0.086
 2008        -0.0264***   -0.00146  0.148***     5.85e-05                                       22,130                0.028
 2009          0.00370   0.0354*** -0.363***   0.00967***                                       22,184                0.062
 2010        -0.0705***   -0.00360   -0.145**   0.00123**                                       22,012                0.046
 2011         0.0528*** -0.0128***     0.0189    9.51e-05                                       22,502                0.035
 2012         0.0248***  0.0110*** -0.0477*** 0.000267***                                       22,348                0.034
 2013         0.0787*** 0.00653*** -0.165***     3.82e-05                                       21,856                0.090
 2014        -0.0437***   -0.00154  -0.170***   0.000500                                        21,795                0.025




                                                                51
Table A.7: Fixed Effect Analysis: Return on Assets and Internal
Rates of Return
The table reports regression result with country and firm fixed-effects for the base sample. Columns (1) and (4) replicate the
results reported in column (1) of Table 2 and 3, respectively, and the other four columns show the result with country or firm
fixed effects. Size is the inflation-adjusted book value of the firm's assets in U.S. dollars, and leverage is the ratio between the
book value of liability and assets. Price-to-book measures the ratio between the market and the book value of the firm's
equity. Time fixed effects are included in all regressions. Standard error is reported in the parenthesis. (*), (**), and (***)
refer to the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels of significance, respectively.


               (1)                       (2)               (3)                 (4)               (5)              (6)
 Variables     ROA                       ROA               ROA                 IRR               IRR              IRR
               97-14                     97-14             97-14               97-14             97-14            97-14
 log(PCGDP) -0.0218***                   -0.0316***        -0.0450***          -0.00289          -0.0256          0.0662***
               (0.00220)                 (0.00889)         (0.00207)           (0.0184)          (0.0744)         (0.00777)
 log(Size)     0.0141***                 0.0148***         0.0191***           0.00262           0.00257          -0.0777***
               (0.000636)                (0.000573)        (0.000577)          (0.00234)         (0.00197)        (0.00268)
 Leverage      -0.0443***                -0.0508***        -0.0796***          -0.125***         -0.114***        -0.0611***
               (0.00386)                 (0.00389)         (0.00214)           (0.0183)          (0.0168)         (0.0102)
 Price-to-Book -1.75e-05**               -1.47e-05**       4.12e-06            0.000213**        0.000209**       0.000344***
               (7.63e-06)                (6.83e-06)        (3.24e-06)          (8.43e-05)        (8.24e-05)       (0.000106)
 Constant      0.163***                  0.224**           0.347***            0.109             0.403            0.369***
               (0.0221)                  (0.0935)          (0.0203)            (0.181)           (0.772)          (0.0758)
 Observations 334,471                    334,471           334,471             334,471           334,471          334,471
 R-squared     0.139                     0.168             0.037               0.064             0.068            0.070
 Firm FE       N                         N                 Y                   N                 N                Y
 Country FE    N                         Y                 -                   N                 Y                -
 Industry FE   Y                         Y                 -                   Y                 Y                -
 Time FE       Y                         Y                 Y                   Y                 Y                Y




                                                                52
Table A.8: Country Clustered Errors: Return on Assets and Inter-
nal Rates of Return
The table report regression result for the main sample when errors are clustered at a country level. Size is the
inflation-adjusted book value of the firm's assets in U.S. dollars, and leverage is the ratio between the book value of liability
and assets. Price-to-book measures the ratio between the market and the book value of the firm's equity. Time fixed effects
and industry fixed effects for the 48 Fama-French industries are included in all regressions. Standard errors are reported in the
parenthesis. (*), (**), and (***) refer to the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels of significance, respectively.


                            (1)                           (2)                   (3)                    (4)
              Variables     ROA                           ROA                   IRR                    IRR
                            97-14                         11-14                 97-14                  11-14
              log(PCGDP) -0.0218***                       -0.0176*              -0.00289               0.0300**
                            (0.00739)                     (0.00890)             (0.00719)              (0.0122)
              log(size)     0.0141***                     0.0138***             0.00262                0.000562
                            (0.00218)                     (0.00285)             (0.00164)              (0.00233)
              Leverage      -0.0443***                    -0.0463***            -0.125***              -0.0911***
                            (0.0110)                      (0.0127)              (0.0131)               (0.0126)
              Price-to-Book -1.75e-05***                  -1.95e-05             0.000213***            0.000103
                            (6.26e-06)                    (1.23e-05)            (7.68e-05)             (8.55e-05)
              Constant      0.163**                       0.105                 0.109*                 -0.334***
                            (0.0696)                      (0.0850)              (0.0630)               (0.122)
              Observations 334,471                        87,775                334,471                87,775
              R-squared     0.139                         0.144                 0.064                  0.037
              Time FE       Y                             Y                     Y                      Y
              Industry FE   Y                             Y                     Y                      Y




                                                               53
Table A.9: Robustness Check: log(PCGDP) vs. log(PEGDP) vs.
log(PHGDP)
This table reports regression results using different measures of output per capita. PCGDP is GDP per capita, PEGDP is
GDP per employed, and PHGDP is GDP per hour employed. Size is the inflation-adjusted book value of the firm's assets in
U.S. dollars, and leverage is the ratio between the book value of liability and assets. Price-to-book measures the ratio between
the market and the book value of the firm's equity. Time fixed effects and industry fixed effects for the 48 Fama-French
industries are included in all regressions. Standard errors are reported in the parenthesis. (*), (**), and (***) refer to the
10%, 5%, and 1% levels of significance, respectively.


                           (1)                (2)                 (3)              (4)                 (5)              (6)
 Variables                ROA                IRR                 ROA              IRR                 ROA              IRR
                          97-14              97-14               97-14            97-14               97-14           97-14
 log(PCGDP)            -0.0218***          -0.00289
                        (0.00739)         (0.00719)
 log(PEGDP)                                                  -0.0203***         -0.00491
                                                              (0.00273)         (0.0206)
 log(PHGDP)                                                                                       -0.0292***         0.00307
                                                                                                    (0.00136)        (0.0153)
 log(size)            0.0141***           0.00262             0.0138***         0.00269            0.0150***         0.00179
                       (0.00218)         (0.00164)            (0.000655)       (0.00238)           (0.000602)       (0.00202)
 Leverage             -0.0443***         -0.125***           -0.0435***        -0.125***          -0.0447***        -0.123***
                        (0.0110)          (0.0131)             (0.00388)        (0.0184)            (0.00405)        (0.0177)
 Price-to-Book       -1.75e-05***       0.000213***          -1.77e-05**      0.000213**          -1.54e-05**      0.000198**
                      (6.26e-06)         (7.68e-05)           (7.69e-06)      (8.43e-05)           (6.94e-06)      (7.99e-05)
 Constant               0.163**            0.109*              0.167***           0.132            0.0316***          0.0805
                        (0.0696)          (0.0630)              (0.0294)         (0.217)             (0.0111)        (0.0654)
 Observations           334,471           334,471               334,471         334,471              314,381         314,381
 R-squared               0.139              0.064                0.135            0.064               0.154           0.059
 Time FE                   Y                  Y                    Y                Y                   Y               Y
 Industry FE               Y                  Y                    Y                Y                   Y               Y




                                                               54
Table A.10: Investment Returns Wedge and Investment-Capital
Ratio
This table presents summary statistics for the firm-level investment returns wedge (RW), and investment-to-capital ratio (IK)
estimates across MSCI developed and emerging market countries within the sample. The table also includes unweighted
average and the median for developed and emerging market countries, respectively.


                                        Firm-years    Returns Wedge (RW )      Investment-Capital Ratio (IK )
                                                      Mean Median SD           Mean Median          SD
              Australia      AUS        14,839        0.330   0.014 1.234      0.139   0.057       0.488
              Austria        AUT        1,147         0.064   0.019 0.337      0.093   0.070       0.190
              Brazil         BRA        1,450         0.055   0.017 0.344      0.087   0.067       0.179
              Belgium        BEL        3,250         0.115   0.034 0.423      0.147   0.104       0.220
              Canada         CAN        12,624        0.228   0.032 0.865      0.155   0.081       0.386
              Chile          CHL        2,080         0.081   0.023 0.336      0.118   0.089       0.206
              China          CHN        20,090        0.198   0.049 0.636      0.112   0.071       0.181
              Colombia       COL        365           0.114   0.030 0.360      0.187   0.126       0.265
              Czech Republic CZE        436          (0.001) (0.027) 0.249     0.104   0.089       0.171
              Denmark        DNK        1,890         0.077   0.011 0.401      0.087   0.059       0.202
              Finland        FIN        1,929         0.076   0.018 0.389      0.079   0.054       0.185
              France         FRA        8,621         0.080   0.024 0.376      0.096   0.067       0.181
              Germany        DEU        9,039         0.064   0.014 0.415      0.079   0.058       0.212
              Greece         GRC        3,643         0.152 (0.033) 0.939      0.095   0.062       0.225
              Hong Kong      HKG        11,342        0.276   0.035 1.056      0.175   0.091       0.507
              Hungary        HUN        423           0.011 (0.033) 0.389      0.117   0.095       0.246
              India          IND        17,621        0.109 (0.008) 0.533      0.163   0.110       0.250
              Indonesia      IDN        3,826         0.143   0.006 0.630      0.172   0.103       0.324
              Ireland        IRL        782           0.169   0.056 0.677      0.104   0.071       0.254
              Israel         ISR        3,189         0.104   0.013 0.512      0.082   0.056       0.236
              Italy          ITA        3,141         0.050   0.003 0.338      0.092   0.059       0.212
              Japan          JPN        52,501        0.025 (0.013) 0.282      0.049   0.043       0.124
              Malaysia       MYS        11,428        0.055 (0.002) 0.378      0.096   0.070       0.211
              Mexico         MEX        1,470         0.077   0.030 0.335      0.113   0.099       0.178
              Netherlands    NLD        2,120         0.083   0.029 0.396      0.089   0.064       0.197
              New Zealand    NZL        1,380         0.081   0.012 0.409      0.086   0.055       0.240
              Norway         NOR        2,260         0.153   0.029 0.624      0.134   0.081       0.320
              Peru           PER        986           0.153   0.041 0.550      0.148   0.093       0.259
              Philippines    PHL        1,706         0.137   0.015 0.582      0.121   0.075       0.284
              Poland         POL        3,053         0.123   0.002 0.580      0.133   0.085       0.307
              Portugal       PRT        812           0.058   0.006 0.271      0.109   0.068       0.214
              Russia         RUS        1,869         0.082   0.014 0.491      0.192   0.147       0.261
              Singapore      SGP        7,146         0.096   0.006 0.489      0.110   0.074       0.250
              South Africa   ZAF        3,621         0.117   0.026 0.561      0.139   0.095       0.345
              South Korea    KOR        16,905        0.120   0.020 0.495      0.138   0.094       0.284
              Spain          ESP        1,883         0.099   0.035 0.374      0.110   0.069       0.227
              Sweden         SWE        4,761         0.154   0.035 0.618      0.100   0.056       0.277
              Switzerland    CHE        2,936         0.073   0.029 0.373      0.057   0.044       0.168
              Thailand       THA        5,740         0.118   0.026 0.446      0.106   0.078       0.191
              Turkey         TUR        2,907         0.101   0.010 0.612      0.187   0.131       0.257
              United Kingdom GBR        18,822        0.133   0.015 0.647      0.107   0.060       0.296
              United States  USA        68,438        0.138   0.029 0.621      0.089   0.059       0.231
              MSCI                      334,471       0.111   0.017 0.514      0.117   0.078       0.249
              MSCI Developed                          0.119   0.021 0.527      0.103   0.065       0.253
              MSCI Emerging                           0.102   0.011 0.497      0.133   0.094       0.243




                                                             55
