                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      PATENTING INVENTIONS OR INVENTING PATENTS? STRATEGIC USE OF
                     CONTINUATIONS AT THE USPTO

                                           Cesare Righi
                                         Timothy Simcoe

                                       Working Paper 27686
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27686


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020




We thank Justus Baron, Rudi Bekkers, Lorenz Brachtendorf, Iain Cockburn, Jorge Contreras,
Fabian Gaessler, Mark Lemley, Michael Meurer, Earl Nied, Valerio Sterzi, Emanuele Tarantino
and Andrea Vezzulli for helpful comments and conversations. We thank Justus Baron for access
to the Searle Center Database on technology standards and standard setting organizations, and
Evgeny Klochikhin for access to the PatentsView patent applications database. We also thank
conference and seminar participants at the BU Technology and Policy Research Initiative IP day
and BU Questrom Strategy and Innovation department brown bag seminar. The authors also
thank Google, Inc. and Intel Corp. for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27686.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Cesare Righi and Timothy Simcoe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Patenting Inventions or Inventing Patents? Strategic Use of Continuations at the USPTO
Cesare Righi and Timothy Simcoe
NBER Working Paper No. 27686
August 2020
JEL No. K11,L15,O34

                                          ABSTRACT

Continuations allow inventors to claim technology developed after the original filing date of their
patent, leading to concerns about inadvertent infringement and hold-up. We use the link between
patents and standards created by the disclosure of standard essential patents (SEPs) to analyze the
relationship between standard publication - a key observable milestone in technology
development - and continuations. More than half of the SEPs in our data are filed after standard
publication. Consistent with opportunistic behavior by patentees, there is a large increase in
continuations immediately after standard publication. Keywords in the claims of SEPs linked to
the same standard also become more similar after that standard is published.


Cesare Righi
Boston University
School of Law
Technology & Policy Research Initiative
765 Commonwealth Avenue
Boston, MA 02215
crighi@bu.edu

Timothy Simcoe
Boston University
Questrom School of Business
595 Commonwealth Avenue
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
tsimcoe@bu.edu
1       Introduction
An inventor who plans to seek patent protection faces a dynamic trade-off. She can file her
application immediately to gain priority, or she can delay filing to strengthen her claims
and extend the period of exclusivity. Continuations are a unique feature of the U.S. patent
system that relaxes this tradeoff by allowing applicants to file early, but delay the drafting
of claims that define the legal scope of their invention.1
    Every continuation is the "child" of a previous patent application that protects the same
invention disclosed in its "parent" but adds new claims. Importantly, the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office (USPTO) evaluates these new claims using the priority date of the parent
application. In principle, this option encourages early disclosure of the underlying invention,
and allows inventors to draft new claims when they have a better understanding of the
technology and its commercial embodiments. In practice, continuations are controversial
because they allow inventors to tailor their patent claims to cover products or technologies
developed by others after the original disclosure.
    Opportunistic use of continuations is widely discussed among patent attorneys and a
frequent topic in patent policy debates. For example, in 2003 the U.S. Federal Trade Com-
mission proposed creating "intervening or prior user rights" to protect parties from infringing
claims arising from continuations (FTC 2003). In 2007, the USPTO proposed new rules that
would sharply limit the use of continuations, but eventually withdrew the proposed changes
after receiving substantial pushback from patent owners.2
    Although these policy debates produced many examples, there is little statistical evi-
dence on the opportunistic use of continuations. The lack of systematic evidence reflects two
fundamental measurement challenges: (i) it is hard to link patents to potentially infringing
technologies, and (ii) it is difficult to observe clear milestones in the development of those
technologies that provide incentives for patent applicants to seek new claims. We address
these challenges by exploiting two features of the Information and Communications Tech-
nology (ICT) standardization process. First, several large Standard Setting Organizations
(SSOs) encourage or require participants to disclose patents that might be infringed by a
proposed standard, creating a link between patents and potentially infringing technology.

    1
      Claims are synonymous with scope because a patentee's exclusive right to make, use or sell extends
only to whatever is specifically described in the claims of their patent (35 U.S.C. §100 and §112).
    2
      Comments received by the USPTO are available at https://www.uspto.gov/patent/
laws-and-regulations/comments-public/comments-regarding-continuation-practice                        (ac-
cessed May 8, 2020).        For examples of the practitioner literature on continuation practice, see
Michael T. Moore, "Use Strategic Continuation Practice to Monetize IP"' (Law360, April 3,
2015) or Michael Henry, "How to Slow Down Patent Prosecution with the USPTO" (https:
//www.henrypatentfirm.com/blog/slow-down-patent-prosecution, accessed May 8, 2020).


                                                   1
Second, the publication of a standard provides an observable proxy for the date when un-
certainty about product design is resolved. This study leverages these unique features of
Standard Essential Patent (SEP) prosecution to provide systematic evidence on the use of
"late claiming" via continuations.
    We assemble data on the prosecution history of SEPs and similar technologies. In these
data, 46% of SEPs are filed as continuations, and more than half of all SEPs are filed after the
relevant standard was published. We also estimate difference-in-differences (DID) regressions
that compare the probability of filing a continuation for SEPs relative to matched controls
before and after the publication of a standard. The results indicate that standardization leads
to a 80-121% increase in the probability of filing a continuation. This impact of standard
publication on continuation filings varies with the SEP owner's business model and is largest
for firms that collect most of their revenue through licensing of Intellectual Property (IP).
    We interpret our DID results as evidence that patent applicants use continuations to op-
portunistically draft claims that cover industry standards. Unfortunately, we cannot easily
compare these new claims to the text of the relevant standards. In the final step of our anal-
ysis, however, we examine claim-similarity among continuations that share a common stan-
dard. Specifically, we construct a sample of post-standard continuations with pre-standard
parents and then show that the pairwise textual similarity of claims in the continuations is
greater than the textual similarity of claims in their parent applications. We take this con-
vergence in claim language as further evidence that applicants are using the delays provided
by the continuation process to tailor their claims to cover related standards.
    Prior literature on continuations explains how they can undermine invention disclosure,
create opportunities for hold up, and more generally reallocate rents from downstream inno-
vators to an initial patentee (Glazier 2003, Lemley & Moore 2004, Lemley & Shapiro 2005).
Early empirical studies document the prevalence of continuations (Graham 2004), the types
of applicants and technologies that use them (Hegde, Mowery & Graham 2009), and how
they fit into patterns of patent prosecution (Graham & Mowery 2004). More recently, vari-
ous authors have shown how continuations are associated with distortions in patent quality
(Frakes & Wasserman 2015) and increased litigation (Marco & Miller 2019, Righi 2019).
Relative to this prior literature, we innovate by identifying a setting where patents can be
linked to a potentially infringing technology, and by proposing a strategy to identify how
reduced uncertainty about infringement affects the propensity to file continuations.
    This study also contributes to a literature on strategic patenting (Levin, Klevorick, Nel-
son, Winter, Gilbert & Griliches 1987, Cohen, Nelson & Walsh 2000, Hall & Ziedonis 2001,
Ziedonis 2004) and specifically strategic behavior in SEP prosecution. Firms benefit from
incorporating patented technology into standards because standardization eliminates com-


                                               2
petition from substitutes (Rysman & Simcoe 2008, Lerner & Tirole 2015). This naturally
leads to rent seeking in patent prosecution. Kang & Bekkers (2015) and Kang & Motohashi
(2015) show that firms often file patent applications just before standardization meetings
and negotiate their inclusion into standards. Berger, Blind & Thumm (2012) find that a
sample of declared SEPs filed at the European Patent Office (EPO) were amended more
often than a set of matched control patents. Nagaoka, Tsukada & Shimbo (2009) show that
a significant share of U.S. SEPs related to the MPEG2, DVD and W-CDMA standards are
filed using continuations after the standards are set. Relative to this literature, our paper is
more focused on the use of continuations, and is the first to propose an identification strategy
for estimating the impact of standard publication on continuation filing. We employ a larger
sample of standards and SEPs, and are also the first to examine similarity in claim language.
    Finally, we contribute to a literature on patent scope and invention disclosure. Menell
& Meurer (2013) outline a general theory of "notice externalities" in patent prosecution,
and a 2011 report by the U.S. Federal Trade Commission expressed many similar concerns
(FTC 2011). In a series of empirical papers, Kuhn (2016), Kuhn & Thompson (2019) and
Marco, Sarnoff & deGrazia (2019) use new data, measures and methods to investigate the
determinants of patent scope, and its relation to commercial value. We show how companies
use continuations not only to broaden the scope of protection, but to increase the probability
that subsequently developed technology will infringe.
    In the next section of the paper, we provide more information on continuations and the
standardization process. Section 3 describes the data, provides descriptive statistics on the
timing of SEP filings, and describes our empirical strategy to estimate the impact of standard
publication on SEP continuations. Sections 4 and 5 report the results of our analysis. Section
6 discusses policy implications and offers concluding remarks.


2     Institutional Setting
Inventors want patents that are valid yet broad, meaning they will withstand legal challenge
and also cover as many uses of the invention as possible. To achieve these goals at reasonable
cost, the basic strategy is to file early and delay claim drafting as long as possible. Filing early
creates a favorable priority date (i.e., the date a patent examiner uses to assess novelty and
non-obviousness). Claims are not rejected based on technology disclosed after the priority
date. Delayed claim drafting has several advantages. First, because most patent offices
charge by the claim, the option to abandon is valuable to the applicant (Harhoff 2016).
Second, when there is uncertainty about how an invention will be used, delay allows the
applicant to draft claims corresponding to the most important uses of the invention. Third,

                                                 3
delay allows applicants to tailor their claims to cover products or technology introduced
by others during the pendency of the application, thereby increasing the probability of
infringement.
     The U.S. patent system provides several mechanisms for delayed claim drafting. A provi-
sional patent application establishes priority, and provides applicants with up to one year to
file a non-provisional application with specific claims. Applicants can also use international
applications filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) to amend the claims in their
US patent application for up to 30 months. Reissuance allows the patent owner to correct
mistakes in an issued patent and to enlarge the scope of its claims if filed within two years
from the original grant date. Our analysis will focus on continuations -- a fourth option
that allows for substantially more delay.
     Applicants can file a continuation at any time during the pendency of its parent appli-
cation or during the pendency of that parent's previous children. Thus, by filing a "chain"
of continuations, an inventor may seek new claims many years after the priority date of the
original invention. For example, among utility patents filed after 2000, the 99th percentile of
the time-lag between priority date and continuation filing is 15 years. The main limitations
on this tactic are the roughly $6,500 cost of filing a continuation and the statutory patent
term of 20 years from the priority date (which limits the useful life of any new claims).3
     In principle, the USPTO will grant the claims in a continuation application only if they
are supported by the disclosure in its parent. Specifically, the parent application must
provide enough information for a "person having ordinary skill in the art" (PHOSITA)
to make and use the claimed invention.4 However, many observers are skeptical of the
ability of a PHOSITA to forecast all the claims that could be based on the disclosure in
the parent application (FTC 2003, Glazier 2003, Chiang 2010).5 This is because the written
description of the invention on many patent applications uses ambiguous or opaque language
and provides little technical information that a PHOSITA could use to predict the ultimate
scope of the claims (Roin 2005, Seymore 2009).6 When continuations lead to unexpected
change in claim scope, they become a means for applicants to "invent patents" that read on
technology developed by others. This reduces incentives to avoid infringement and creates

    3
      The precise cost of filing a continuation will depend on a number of factors, but several web sites suggest
that attorney's fees will range from $3,000 to $6,000, while USPTO fees will amount to roughly $2,000.
    4
      In patent law, this is called the "enablement" requirement: 35 U.S.C. §112(a).
    5
      This forecasting problem was especially severe before the American Inventor Protection Act (AIPA,
1999), which instituted publication of pending patent applications after 18 months.
    6
      In one famous example, Chiron filed a patent application covering monoclonal antibodies in 1984 and
used a string of continuations to expand its claims to cover types and uses of antibodies that were not
understood at that time. It eventually asserted a patent based on a continuation application filed in 1999.
See Chiron Corp. v. Genentech, Inc., 268 F. Supp. 2d 1148 (E.D. Cal. 2002).


                                                       4
a hold-up threat that may hinder follow-on innovation.
    This study will not reveal whether the USPTO is striking the optimal balance in its
effort to enforce the enablement and written description requirements. Instead, we provide
evidence that continuations are used opportunistically in at least one important context:
standardization.
    In the ICT sector, SSOs provide a forum where parties coordinate their R&D efforts and
seek consensus on the design of standards that promote product interoperability. To avoid
hold-up problems when standards incorporate patented technology, most SSOs have IP po-
lices that either encourage or require participants to disclose patents that might be infringed
by a proposed standard, and to license their essential patents on fair reasonable and non-
discriminatory (FRAND) terms (Shapiro 2001, Lemley 2002, Bekkers, Catalini, Martinelli,
Righi & Simcoe 2017).7 We use these disclosures to link patent applications to a potentially
infringing technology (the standard). This link is not perfect. Some disclosed patents are not
truly essential, and some essential patents may not be disclosed. It is reasonable, however,
to assume that most SSO participants would like their patents to become essential, because
it provides a number of benefits in both licensing and implementation.8
    Formal approval and publication is a key event in the standard setting process. Publica-
tion indicates that a draft specification has become stable, and signals to implementers that
they can safely commit to that design in their products (Layne-Farrar 2011, Simcoe 2012).
In practice, some uncertainty will be resolved in technical meetings that predate formal pub-
lication. If one looks over a multi-year period, however, publication provides a good proxy
for the moment when there is a sharp drop in uncertainty about the contents of a stan-
dard, and therefore the probability that a particular patent is essential. If SSO participants
use continuations to opportunistically draft claims that cover the standard, this is when we
should see a jump in that activity.
    We use the term "opportunism" to describe any effort to change the scope of a patent
after the formation of consensus on a standard so that later-developed technology infringes.
Some readers may argue that no legal prosecution strategy can be opportunistic, or that
opportunism requires any new claims to exceed the boundaries of the original disclosure.
Regarding the first point, there is nothing illegal about this prosecution strategy, and indeed,
some U.S. Courts even appear to view it favorably.9 Regarding the second point, the late-
   7
       Although most SEPs in our study were disclosed to the European Telecommunications Standards Insti-
tute (ETSI), which has a policy of mandatory disclosure, a number of patents were disclosed to other SSOs
where it is possible to offer FRAND licensing commitments without identifying specific patents.
     8
       For licensing, essentiality provides a large addressable market and a simple way to prove infringement
(i.e., by charting the patent against the standard). For implementation, using homegrown technology in the
standard can yield lower costs and product development lead times.
     9
       For example, in Kingsdown Medical Consultants v. Hollister (863 F.2d 867, Fed. Cir. 1988) the court


                                                     5
claiming behavior we document below establishes a necessary but not sufficient condition
under that stricter definition of opportunism.10 All of these arguments, however, beg the
question of whose idea was embodied in the new claims, and why those claims were not part
of the original application? In a highly collaborative context, such as an SSO, it seems likely
that continuations filed after publication of a standard often claim ideas for which others
deserve at least a share of the credit. Moreover, some SSOs (including ETSI) encourage
early disclosure of patents and specify procedures for removing or designing around patented
technology when a FRAND commitment cannot be obtained. Such policies suggest that
SSOs would prefer more clarity about claim scope during the specification drafting process
-- a goal that is undermined by continuations filed after standards are published.


3     Data and Methods
3.1     Data sources and sample construction
Our main data source for information on SEPs is the Searle Center Database on technol-
ogy standards and standard setting organizations (SCDB) (Baron & Gupta 2018, Baron &
Pohlmann 2018, Baron & Spulber 2018). This database contains patents and patent appli-
cations declared essential to seventeen SSOs and thirteen patent pools.11 For data on appli-
cation characteristics, we use the 2017 release of the Patent Examination Research Dataset
(Patex) (Graham, Marco & Miller 2018), which provides information on the applications in
the Public Patent Application Information Retrieval system (Public PAIR) and covers filing
activity through July 2018. We keep in our sample only utility patent applications.
    Licensing commitments to SSOs usually cover all the members of a patent family (i.e., all
applications sharing a common priority filing). We therefore define as SEPs the 22,869 U.S.
utility patent applications from Patex that match to the SCDB dataset, along with all of

writes, "there is nothing improper, illegal or inequitable in... amend[ing] or insert[ing] claims intended to
cover a competitor's product the applicant's attorney has learned about during the prosecution of a patent
application." See also Gentry Gallery, Inc. v. Berkline Corp. (134 F.3d 1473, Fed. Cir. 1998) or Rambus,
Inc. v. FTC (522 F.3d 456, D.C. Cir. 2008) where this prosecution tactic was employed in the standard-
setting context.
   10
      It is not clear how we could measure whether a new claim was unanticipated, short of a case by case
review. Prior research indicates that patent offices lacking access to SSO records struggle to identify relevant
prior art (Bekkers, Martinelli & Tamagni 2020), and that some SSO participants have successfully patented
ideas introduced by others (Granstrand 1999, p. 204). These findings do not speak directly to enablement,
but do raise further questions about SEP validity and opportunism.
   11
      The SSOs covered by the SCDB are ANSI, ARIB, ATIS, Broadband Forum, CEN, DMTF, ECMA,
ETSI, IEC, IEEE, IETF, ISO, ITUR, ITUT, OASIS, OMA and TIA. The patent pools include 3GPP-
GERAN, AMRWB+, ATSC, AVC, BluRay, DVB-T, DVB-T2, DVD, MPEG DASH, MPEG Visual, SIPRO,
VC1, and displayport.


                                                       6
their domestic family members, for a total of 31,943 applications. We link each family to a
standard using the best match between disclosure letters and standards provided by Baron &
Pohlmann (2018).12 This yields complete information on the standard publication date (year
and month) for 23,609 SEPs. Our analysis sample is restricted to SEPs filed in the post-
AIPA period, which represents roughly 90% of the matches with a standard publication date.
To identify the business model of the company making a SEP disclosure, we use company
names to match these data to the Disclosed Standard Essential Patents (dSEP) Database
(Bekkers et al. 2017). We also retrieve information on the claims of applications published
between 2001 and 2014 from the Patent Claims Research Dataset (Marco et al. 2019) and
the text of the claims from the PatentsView patent application database, which provides
information on published applications as of July 15, 2016.


3.2     Descriptive statistics
Figure 1 provides an initial look at the relationship between standards and continuations in
our dataset. To create the figure, we divide all SEPs into three groups based on the type
of application: continuations (CON); applications that are not continuations, continuations-
in-part, divisionals or reissues of another filing (Original); and a residual category (Other)
for continuations-in-part, divisionals and reissues.13 Within each group, we also divide the
SEPs into those filed before versus after the earliest standard publication date associated
with their patent family. Finally, as a point of comparison, we show the relative size of the
three groups for all non-SEP applications examined by the Computers and Communication
area of the USPTO. These three Technology Centers (2100, 2400 and 2600) examine roughly
90% of the SEPs in our sample.
    Figure 1 reveals two important facts. First, SEPs are more likely to be continuations
than a typical computer/communication application. Specifically, 46% of the SEPs are
continuations, compared to only 18% of the Computers and Communications reference group.
One explanation is that standardization creates opportunities for strategic continuation filing
that do not necessarily exist for non-SEPs. Second, many SEPs are filed after standard

   12
      The link between patents and standards documents is described in detail in Section 3.3 of Baron &
Pohlmann (2018). They provide both a document ID and a version number, because SSOs often publish
several iterations of a given technical specification.
   13
      Continuations-in-part are applications that contain new claims on the invention disclosed in the parent
application but also disclose new subject matter. Divisionals are applications filed because the original filing
discloses more than one invention. Applications with a complex priority chain may be classified in more than
one group. When an application is a continuation and a divisional, a continuation and a continuation-in-
part, or a continuation and a reissue, we classify it as a continuation. Continuations that are also divisionals,
continuations-in-part or reissues are respectively 6.2% of the SEPs and 2.3% of the applications in the
Computers and Communications area of the USPTO used for Figure 1.


                                                       7
                       Figure 1: Frequency and timing of SEP continuations


                                     SEPs
              ORIGINAL
                            COMP/COMM


                                     SEPs
                    CON
                            COMP/COMM


                                     SEPs
                 OTHER
                            COMP/COMM

                                            0        20         40        60         80        100
                                                                      %

                                                             SEPs filed before standard
                                                             SEPs filed after standard
                                                             Applications in COMP/COMM


Notes: The sample contains utility patent applications filed on or after November 29, 2000. Percentages
based on 21,199 SEPs and 1,447,286 (non-SEP) applications processed by Technology Centers 2100, 2400
and 2600. SEPs include U.S. utility patent applications declared essential for a standard, as well as all their
parent and child applications. Pre- and post-standard SEPs defined using the earliest standard linked to a
family of SEPs. Non-SEP applications are U.S. utility patent applications that are not in the patent family
of a declared SEP.



publication. For SEPs filed as continuations, 84% post-date standard publication. For
Original applications, 30% are filed after the standard is published, indicating substantial
use of provisional and PCT applications or of the 12-month grace period between invention
disclosure and patent application filing allowed by U.S. patent law. Overall, 58% of SEPs
are filed after the relevant standard is published.
    Figure A2 in the appendix shows the percentage of SEPs filed after standard publication
(or filed as continuations) for all companies in our sample that own at least 100 SEPs.14
We find substantial variation in "late filing" behavior by individual firms, with the share of
SEPs filed after standard publication ranging from 27 to almost 80%. Many of the large
SEP holders in our data file more than half of their SEPs after publication of the standard.15

  14
       These companies collectively own about 90% of the SEPs in our sample.
  15
       Figures A1 and A3 show similar results using an alternative definition of SEP that includes only the


                                                      8
3.3     Empirical strategy
In an experimental setting, one might randomly match pending patent applications with
standards to ensure that potential outcomes are uncorrelated with SEP status. In practice,
SEPs are not randomly chosen. SEPs are highly concentrated in ICT-related fields (Baron
& Pohlmann 2018) and also selected for ex ante quality (Rysman & Simcoe 2008). Because
more valuable patents are associated with larger families and more complex prosecution
histories, this creates concerns about omitted variable bias in a simple regression of continu-
ation filing on SEP status (Putnam 1996, Harhoff, Scherer & Vopel 2003). To address these
concerns, we use a combination of matching and DID regression.
    We begin by identifying the earliest U.S. utility patent application in each family of SEPs,
and keep only those whose U.S. patent family is still under examination in the quarter of
publication of the earliest standard linked to the family. To construct a control group, we
start with all non-SEP applications filed in the same quarter as a SEP identified at the pre-
vious step, excluding any application that claims priority to a previous U.S. utility patent
application. To identify applications that cover similar technology to SEPs, we exploit the
technological specialization of art-units and patent examiners within the USPTO. Specifi-
cally, we retain all applications in any filing-quarter-art-unit-examiner strata with at least
one SEP and one control application.16 This procedure leaves us with 53,112 applications
(5,487 SEPs and 47,625 controls).
    Applicants can file continuations as long as their original application or any of its children
are pending. So, for each application in our sample, we retain information on continuations
between its filing quarter and the quarter of disposal of its U.S. patent family (using data
until the end of year 2016 to minimize truncation concerns related to delays in publication).
This leaves a total of 959,733 application-quarter observations, in which the mean probability
of continuation filing is 1.2%. About 14% of the applications in this sample have one or more
continuations during the sample period. The mean number of continuations per application
is 0.77 for the SEPs and 0.18 for the controls.
    In addition to this baseline sample, we create a second matched control sample where the


patents and patent applications that are specifically mentioned in SSO disclosure letters (i.e. excluding
undeclared U.S. family members of declared SEPs). Different versions of Figure 1 that use only granted
patents or a 1-to-1 match between SEPs and control applications on filing month and technology center are
almost identical to the figure reported in the text. For the latter version, we do not limit the control group to
patents in Computers and Communications and pick a control at random if multiple controls are available.
   16
      Art-units are groups of examiners who process relatively similar technologies, and within art-units
examiners often specialize in certain technological areas (Cockburn, Kortum & Stern 2002, Lemley & Sampat
2012, Righi & Simcoe 2019). Comparing applications assigned to the same art-unit and examiner also reduces
the possible influence of systematic differences in examination style that may be related to the eventual
inclusion of a technology into a standard (Kuhn & Thompson 2019).


                                                       9
number of continuation filings prior to standard publication is the same for SEPs and controls
by construction. Specifically, for each SEP we randomly select a single control application
in the same filing-quarter-art-unit-examiner stratum having a pending family with the same
cumulative number of continuations filed in the quarter before standard publication.17
     Our baseline empirical specification is a linear probability model. For application i with
filing-quarter-art-unit-examiner j we estimate

           CONit = P ostStandardit × SEPi  + SEPi  + j (i) + t + f (ageit ) + it                          (1)

where the outcome CONit is an indicator equal to one if application i has a continuation filed
in quarter t, SEPi is an indicator equal to one for SEPs, and P ostStandardit is an indicator
equal to one starting in the quarter of publication of the earliest standard linked to the patent
family of application i. When using the sample matched on pre-standard continuations, we
also add the main effect of P ostStandardit to Equation 1, using the standard publication
date of the matched SEP to define this variable for each control.18
    We consider three variants of Equation (1). The first variant is a pooled cross-sectional
model with calendar-quarter effects, t , to control for common trends, and a full set of
application-age (i.e., calendar quarter minus filing quarter) effects to control for the baseline
hazard of continuation filing. In the second variant, we add art-unit-examiner-filing-quarter
effects, j , and because age is co-linear with filing and calendar quarter, replace the age
effects with the non-linear terms of a fourth-order polynomial f (·) in age. The third variant
replaces j with a full set of application effects i to control for any time-invariant differences
across applications (e.g. technology value or technological field).19 In all of our models, we
cluster the residual term, it , by application and we multiply CONit by 100 so the coefficient
 represents a percentage point change in the probability of continuation filing.
    Under a parallel trends assumption, the coefficient  in Equation (1) measures the impact
of standard publication on the probability of filing a continuation. In order to test the parallel
trends assumption on pre-standard data and examine the dynamic treatment effects, we also
estimate an event study version of this DID model using the following OLS regression

                                    8
                      CONit =            ( +  SEPi ) + i + t + f (agea ) + it                             (2)
                                   =-8

  17
      We match without replacement and break ties at random.
  18
      Although we could model the outcome as a count variable, it is extremely rare for an application to
spawn multiple continuations in the same quarter.
   19
      In principle, CONit is a repeated outcome, so the true DID model with application effects is identified.
In practice, most applications have no continuations, and very few have more than one. That is the primary
reason why we consider models that make greater use of the cross-sectional variation.


                                                     10
where, using the sample matched on pre-standard continuations and assigning the standard
publication date of the matched SEP to each control, the  's are dummies equal to one
 quarters before/after standard publication. The coefficients  measure the difference in
the probability of continuation filing between SEPs and controls before ( < 0) and after
(  0) standard publication. For both  's and the  's, the omitted category is the quarter
before standard publication ( = -1), and we focus on a four-year window around standard
publication, using a single indicator for   -8 and a single indicator for   8. When we
use the baseline sample to estimate this equation, we omit the  's because the controls do
not have an associated standard publication date. All other variables are defined above.20


4         Results
4.1         Graphical evidence
Figure 2 provides graphical evidence of the link between standard publication and continua-
tion filing. Specifically, we plot the quarterly probability of continuation filing for both SEPs
and controls in a four-year window around standard publication. In order to assign a publi-
cation date to the controls, we match each SEP to a single control and use the publication
date for the matched SEP's standard. For panel (a), we randomly match each SEP with a
control filed in the same quarter and assigned to the same examiner in the same art-unit.21
For panel (b), we use the 1-to-1 match described above, which ensures that SEPs and control
have the same cumulative number of pre-standard continuations.
     Panel (a) in Figure 2 shows that the baseline probability of continuation filing increases
over time for both SEPs and controls. Although SEPs are more likely to generate a con-
tinuation both before and after standardization, the difference clearly increases in the post-
standard time-period. In fact, it appears that the relative rate of continuation filings for
SEPs starts to increase a year or more before publication, consistent with the idea that key
design commitments actually occur prior to formal approval and publication of the standard.
Participants in the standardization process may also anticipate the final design and begin to
file continuations before a standard is formally approved.
     Panel (b) of Figure 2 shows that after matching SEPs and controls on the number of pre-
standard continuations, the two groups are on the same trend before standard publication,
and there is still a substantial increase in the probability of continuation filings for the SEPs
after standard publication. Next, we analyze these patterns in a regression framework.

    20
         We estimate all models that include fixed effects using the estimator described in Correia (2016).
    21
         We match without replacement and break ties at random.


                                                        11
                                  Figure 2: Continuation filings around standard publication
                   (a) Controls picked randomly                                       (b) Controls matched on continuation filings
        Probability of CON filing (p.p.)                                                  Probability of CON filing (p.p.)
    4                                                                                 4



    3                                                                                 3



    2                                                                                 2



    1                                                                                 1



    0                                                                                 0
        -8        -6        -4        -2         0        2          4   6   8            -8        -6        -4        -2         0        2          4   6   8
                             Quarter relative to standard publication                                          Quarter relative to standard publication

                                           SEPs            Controls                                                          SEPs            Controls




Notes. This figure plots the average probability of continuation filing for SEPs and controls in each quarter in
a 4-year window around standard publication (for controls, we use the publication date of the matched SEP).
A SEP is the earliest U.S. utility patent application of a domestic patent family that contains at least one U.S.
utility patent application declared essential for a standard. A control application is the earliest U.S. utility
patent application of a domestic patent family that does not contain any U.S. utility patent applications
declared essential for a standard. The quarter of standard publication is the quarter of publication of the
earliest standard linked to a family of SEPs. In panel A we use as control for each SEP an application in
the same art-unit-examiner-filing-quarter group picked at random. In panel B we use as control for each
SEP an application in the same art-unit-examiner-filing-quarter group with a pending family and the same
cumulative number of CONs filed in the quarter before standard publication. An application is included in
the sample from its filing quarter to the quarter of family disposal or the end of year 2016 if its family is
still pending.



4.2          Difference in differences estimates
Table 1 shows coefficient estimates from our DID models, using the two samples described
above. The first column is based on a pooled cross-sectional regression. The coefficients
indicate that the quarterly probability of continuation filing is 0.8 percentage points higher
for SEPs before standard publication. The DID estimate indicates that standardization
produces a 1.13 percentage point increase in the probability of filing a continuation, which
corresponds to a 93% increase in the baseline probability. In the second column, we add art-
unit-examiner-filing-quarter effects to control for technological heterogeneity and differences
among cohorts, and find similar estimates. The third column adds application effects, which
absorb the SEP indicator. In this specification, the DID estimate grows to 1.5 percentage
points, more than doubling the baseline probability.
    Columns (4) through (6) of Table 1 report estimates from similar models, using the
matched sample and adding the main effect of the standard publication dummy. The mean

                                                                                 12
outcome in this sample is about 50% larger, and the coefficient on the SEP indicator is ap-
proximately zero by construction. The DID coefficient in all three specifications is roughly 2,
which corresponds to an increase in the probability of a continuation filing by about 100%.22
Overall, the DID estimates uniformly indicate that there is an economically and statistically
significant increase in SEP continuations filed after standards are published.

                  Table 1: Difference in differences models of continuation filing

 Outcome                                                          CON × 100
 Specification                                                      OLS
                                                                              SEPs and controls matched
 Sample                               SEPs and controls
                                                                                on pre-standard CONs
 Model                      pooled         tech &           FE            pooled        tech &          FE
                             cross-        cohort                          cross-       cohort
                            section                                       section
                              (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)           (6)


 PostStandard × SEP         1.13***        0.98***        1.48***        2.03***       1.90***       1.97***
                             (0.09)         (0.09)         (0.09)         (0.11)        (0.09)        (0.11)

 SEP                        0.80***        0.91***                         0.00          0.00
                             (0.05)         (0.05)                        (0.05)        (0.04)

 Quarter FE
 Age FE
 AU-E-FQ FE
 Age2 , age3 & age4
 Application FE
 PostStandard

 Observations               959,733        959,733        959,733        211,265       211,265       211,265
 R-squared                    0.02          0.03            0.07          0.02           0.05         0.07
 Applications                53,112        53,112          53,112        10,050         10,050       10,050
 Mean of outcome              1.22          1.22            1.22          1.91           1.91         1.91
 Notes. The unit of observation is an application-quarter. An application is included in the sample from its
filing quarter to the quarter of family disposal or the end of year 2016 if its family is still pending. A SEP is
the earliest U.S. utility patent application of a domestic patent family that contains at least one U.S. utility
patent application declared essential for a standard. A control application is the earliest U.S. utility patent
application of a domestic patent family that does not contain any U.S. utility patent applications declared
essential for a standard. The sample for models (1)-(3) contains SEPs whose family is pending at standard
publication and control applications in art-unit-examiner-filing-quarter groups with at least one SEP and one
control. The sample for models (4)-(6) contains SEPs whose family is still pending at standard publication
and control applications whose family is still pending in the quarter before standard publication matched
on filing quarter, art unit, examiner and cumulative number of continuations in the quarter before standard
publication. The quarter of standard publication is the quarter of publication of the earliest standard linked
to a family of SEPs. Standard errors clustered by application in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1
   22
     Chab´
         e-Ferret (2017) shows that including unit fixed effects in DID models after matching on pre-
treatment outcomes may introduce bias. Our estimates suggest this is not a concern in our analysis.


                                                       13
4.3     Event studies
Event study models can provide a closer look at the precise timing of the increase in SEP
continuation filings. Figure 3 plots the  's from four versions of Equation (2). The top row
shows results for the baseline sample, using either the indicator SEPi and a full set of age
effects (panel a), or application fixed effects and an age polynomial (panel b). The bottom
row graphs estimates for similar models, using the sample of SEPs and controls matched on
pre-standard continuations, and adding the  's to the regressions.
    All four models show a sharp jump in the probability of a SEP continuation filing im-
mediately after standard publication. Panels (a) and (b) also show a clear increasing trend
in the probability of SEP continuations prior to standard publication. Indeed, an F-test
of the hypothesis that the pre-publication coefficients are jointly equal to zero rejects the
parallel-trends assumption for both models (p-values equal to 0.05 and 0.00, respectively).
As we described above, this may reflect the resolution of some uncertainty about the design
of the standard prior to publication.
    In panels (c) and (d) we remove the divergent pre-trends by matching on the cumulative
number of pre-publication continuations (which, in practice, is typically zero or one). For
this sample, we cannot reject the hypothesis of parallel pre-trends.23 Following standard
publication, we continue to find a sharp increase in the probability of a continuation filing.
We interpret the matched sample event study results as strong evidence of opportunistic use
of the continuation procedure to seek claims covering technology that has been included in a
standard. Our findings do not, however, imply that this prosecution strategy works. Indeed,
Lemley & Simcoe (2019) find that the rate of infringement for SEPs and non-SEPs is very
similar in a sample of U.S. lawsuits that reached a judgment on the merits.24




   23
      F-tests cannot reject the null hypothesis that the pre-standard coefficients for the SEPs are jointly equal
to zero, with p-value=0.47 for panel C and p-value=0.52 for panel D.
   24
      There are several ways to reconcile the two papers' findings including selection into litigation, assertion
of patents that cover optional features within a standard, or implementations that are not 100% compliant.


                                                       14
                   Figure 3: Continuation filings around standard publication, DID models
                          (a) SEPs and controls                                                               (b) SEPs and controls (FE)
         Probability of CON filing (p.p.)                                                         Probability of CON filing (p.p.)
                                                                                             2
   1.5


    1
                                                                                             1

    .5
                                                                                             0
    0


   -.5                                                                                       -1


    -1
                                                                                             -2
         -8         -6        -4        -2         0        2         4         6   8             -8        -6        -4        -2         0        2         4          6   8
                               Quarter relative to standard publication                                                Quarter relative to standard publication

                               coefficient             95% confidence interval                                         coefficient             95% confidence interval




              (c) SEPs and CON matched controls                                               (d) SEPs and CON matched controls (FE)
         Probability of CON filing (p.p.)                                                         Probability of CON filing (p.p.)
    3                                                                                        3



    2                                                                                        2



    1                                                                                        1



    0                                                                                        0



   -1                                                                                        -1
         -8        -6        -4        -2         0        2         4          6   8             -8        -6        -4        -2         0        2         4          6   8
                              Quarter relative to standard publication                                                 Quarter relative to standard publication

                              coefficient             95% confidence interval                                          coefficient             95% confidence interval




Notes. Each panel plots the  's (solid line) and their 95% confidence intervals (shaded area) from OLS
regressions based on Equation 2. Models for panels (a) and (b) are estimated on the sample for models (1)-
(3) in Table 1. Models for panels (c) and (d) are estimated on the sample for models (4)-(6) in Table 1.
Panels (a) and (c) report the estimates for pooled cross-sectional models. Panels (b) and (d) report the
estimates for the models with application fixed effects.




4.4           Business models
If continuations are used to obtain SEPs, it is natural to ask what sort of patent applicants
are doing so. The dSEP database classifies SEP-owner business models into nine categories.
We focus on the largest three in our sample: (i) product suppliers, product vendors and
system integrators (3,516 SEPs); (ii) components (942 SEPs); (iii) pure upstream knowledge
developer or patent holding company (415 SEPs). We pool together all of the smaller
categories, along with SEPs that we cannot match to dSEP, into a residual category (614
SEPs). We then re-estimate the models in Table 1, interacting P ostStandardit × SEPi and

                                                                                        15
SEPi with a dummy for each business model category. The results are in Table 2.25
    The results in columns (1) and (2) show that SEPs have a higher pre-publication rate
of continuation filings than the controls across all business model types. Patent holding
companies, which base their business model on licensing of IP, have the highest baseline rate
of continuation filings, although we cannot reject the hypothesis that any of the baseline
SEP continuation rates are equal at a 5% significance level.
    Across all four models, the two groups with the highest correlation between standard
publication and continuation filing are patent holding companies and product suppliers.26
Patent holding companies have the largest DID coefficient in all models, and the differ-
ence between patent holding companies and product suppliers is statistically significant at
conventional levels in models (3)-(6).27 Patent holding companies have incentives to use
continuations strategically to increase their licensing revenues. Interestingly, and perhaps
surprisingly given the importance of IP to their business models, the correlation between
standard publication and the probability of continuation filing is negative or not statistically
different from zero for producers of components. This result suggests that different types
of "upstream" players have different strategies regarding continuations. A plausible expla-
nation for the relatively large coefficient for product suppliers is that downstream players
have an incentive to inflate their SEP portfolios to protect their investments from hold-up
risks, increase their bargaining power in cross-licensing negotiations, and obtain freedom to
operate (Hall & Ziedonis 2001, Shapiro 2001, Ziedonis 2004).




   25
      If a SEP is associated with multiple companies, we use the business model of the first company in
alphabetical order. There are only 40 SEPs potentially associated with multiple companies, and the results
are robust to excluding these observations.
   26
      Statistical tests reject the equality of those coefficients with the coefficients of standard publication for
components and the residual category "other" at least at 10% in all models.
   27
      The p-values for a test of the null hypothesis that the two coefficients are equal are 0.18 for model (1),
0.19 for model (2), and lower than 0.02 in the other models.


                                                        16
                        Table 2: Heterogenous effects by business model

 Outcome                                                           CON × 100
 Specification                                                       OLS
                                                                               SEPs and controls matched
 Sample                                SEPs and controls
                                                                                 on pre-standard CONs
 Model                       pooled         tech &           FE           pooled        tech &       FE
                              cross-        cohort                         cross-       cohort
                             section                                      section
                               (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)        (6)


 PostStandard × SEP ×        2.08***        1.89***        2.97***        3.29***       3.24***    3.61***
 patent holding company       (0.32)         (0.28)         (0.34)         (0.29)        (0.29)     (0.34)

 PostStandard × SEP ×       -1.08***       -1.19***        -0.50***       -0.41***     -0.45***      -0.23
 components                  (0.16)         (0.14)          (0.16)         (0.15)       (0.14)      (0.16)

 PostStandard × SEP ×        1.62***        1.49***        1.90***        2.57***       2.43***    2.50***
 products                     (0.12)         (0.11)         (0.12)         (0.13)        (0.11)     (0.13)

 PostStandard × SEP ×        0.68***        0.58***        1.37***        1.40***       1.33***    1.52***
 other                        (0.24)         (0.23)         (0.26)         (0.24)        (0.22)     (0.25)

 SEP ×                       1.06***        1.00***                         0.12         -0.26
 patent holding company       (0.24)         (0.19)                        (0.16)       (0.21)

 SEP ×                       0.68***        0.82***                         0.01         0.12
 components                   (0.12)         (0.10)                        (0.09)       (0.08)

 SEP ×                       0.85***        0.94***                         0.02         0.02
 products                     (0.07)         (0.06)                        (0.05)       (0.06)

 SEP ×                       0.58***        0.70***                       -0.16**        -0.18
 other                        (0.14)         (0.14)                        (0.07)       (0.12)

 Quarter FE
 Age FE
 AU-E-FQ FE
 Age2 , age3 & age4
 Application FE
 PostStandard

 Observations                959,733        959,733        959,733        211,265       211,265    211,265
 R-squared                    0.02            0.03          0.07            0.03          0.05      0.07
 Applications                53,112          53,112        53,112          10,050        10,050    10,050
 Mean of outcome              1.22            1.22          1.22            1.91          1.91      1.91
Notes. The unit of observation is an application-quarter. See Table 1 for the description of the samples.
Standard errors clustered by application in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                      17
4.5     Robustness checks
We conduct a series of robustness checks, reporting all results in the appendix. First, we
consider an alternative way to define the sample (Table A2). Instead of defining SEPs
to include all U.S. family members (i.e. applications sharing a common priority) of any
patent declared to an SSO, we limit the definition of SEP to include only patents or patent
applications explicitly mentioned in a disclosure letter to an SSO. Our main results also
keep applications in the sample until the last member of their U.S. patent family is pending,
so applications with more children are at risk of continuation for longer. In the robustness
check, we use only the focal application's pendency at the patent office to define the time
at risk of continuations, discarding the pendency of its children. Similarly, we use only the
pendency of the earliest filing of each non-SEP patent family for the control group. In this
alternative sample, the coefficients on P ostStandardit × SEPi are similar to those in our
main results.
    Second, instead of matching on pre-standard trends, we control for the anticipation effects
of standard publication, using the baseline samples of SEPs and controls for Tables 1 and A2.
Specifically, we include in our regressions four leads of an indicator equal to one for the SEPs
in the quarter of standard publication. Under the assumption that standard publication is
exogenous, these leads capture the anticipation effects (Malani & Reif 2015). The results
are in Table A3, and show that, while there are relatively large anticipation effects in the
quarter before standard publication, the coefficients on P ostStandardit × SEPi are similar
to those in our main analysis.
    Third, because continuations are a rare outcome -- many applications have zero or one
continuation -- we estimate a series of piecewise constant hazard regressions on samples
similar to that for the main analysis and for Table A2. In these regressions, the outcome is
the probability of continuation conditional on not having any prior continuations.28 In all
models, SEPs have a higher baseline hazard of continuation and standard publication has a
positive and large correlation with the probability of filing the first continuation.
    Fourth, we estimate all models in the main analysis and in the previous robustness checks
using samples that contain only SEPs filed before standard publication (Tables A6 and A7).
That is, we discard the control group and estimate models that are identified based on
variation in the timing of standard publication within the SEP sample. The coefficients of

  28
     The sample for Table A4 is contructed using the definition of SEP used in the main analysis, and contains
all SEPs filed before the quarter of standard publication and controls in the same art-unit-examiner-filing-
quarter group of the SEPs. We keep applications in the sample until the earliest of (i) the filing of the first
continuation, (ii) family disposal, or (iii) the end of year 2016. The sample for Table A5 is similar but, as
in Table A2, uses the narrower definition of SEP and information on standards and pendency of the earliest
application in each family.


                                                      18
P ostStandardit are smaller in magnitude and sometimes estimated less precisely than those
in the rest of the analysis. Nevertheless, standard publication is associated with an increase
in continuation filings statistically significant at conventional levels in all but one of these
specifications.


5        Claim language convergence
Up to this point, our evidence that patent applicants are using continuations opportunis-
tically is based on the timing of those applications. Ideally, one might read the original
disclosure, the new claims and the relevant standards to see whether there is evidence of
opportunistic claiming. Unfortunately, that is a very time-intensive process requiring access
to the text of standards and also expertise in interpreting patent claims.29 As an alternative,
we measure the similarity of claims across pairs of applications linked to the same standard,
and compare the similarity of claims filed before versus after standard publication. If appli-
cants are drafting claims that read on the standard, our hypothesis is that claim language
should converge after the standard is published.30
    Suppose k indexes pairs of continuations essential for the same standard, both contin-
uations are filed after standard publication, and each has a parent application filed before
standard publication. Our measure of claim similarity is a Jaccard index (Arts, Cassiman
& Gomez 2018), which equals the number of common keywords in the claims of the two
applications divided by the number of total keywords, multiplied by 100. For each applica-
                                                post
tion pair k we define two similarity scores: Jk      is the similarity of the two post-standard
                      pre
continuations, and Jk is the similarity of the two pre-standard parent applications.31 We
retain all pairs where the two continuations and their parents have at least 10 keywords and
drop all pairs where the two continuations claim priority to the same parent. This leaves us
with a sample of 661,789 pairs.
                                                            pre                             post
    For this sample of application-pairs, the mean of Jk        is 13.17 and the mean of Jk
                              pre      post
is 15.34. Pooling together Jk     and Jk    , we find that the difference in means is equal to
0.31 standard deviations of Jk (t-stat=295). We also create a sample with two observations
for each pair k -- one observation for the post-standard continuations and one for their
pre-standard parents -- and compare the Jaccard similarities using OLS regressions.
    29
      Brachtendorf, Gaessler & Harhoff (2019) pursues a similar approach based on automated text matching.
    30
      We do not have strong priors as to whether the claims in a continuation would be "broader" or "nar-
rower" than the claims in its parent: this likely depends on the (unobserved) relationship of the original
claims to the standard. For this reason, we do not analyze text-based measures of claim scope.
   31
      We use all the families of SEPs in our data and adapt the procedure described in Arts et al. (2018) to
extract a set of unique keywords from the claims of each application. We also use all standards in our data,
but drop duplicates when the same pair is related to multiple standards.


                                                    19
                         Table 3: Regression models of Jaccard similarity

 Outcome                                                  Jaccard similarity
 Specification                                                  OLS
 Model                            no controls                  pair FE                 application
                                                                                      characteristics
                                      (1)                        (2)                       (3)


 Post-standard CONs                 2.17***                    2.17***                   0.61***
                                     (0.01)                     (0.01)                    (0.06)

 Pair FE
 Claims, technology, year

 Observations                      1,323,578                  1,323,578                  419,142
 R-squared                            0.02                       0.82                      0.83
 Pairs                              661,789                    661,789                   209,571
 Mean of outcome                     14.26                      14.26                     12.51
 Notes. The sample contains two observations for each pair of post-standard continuations, one for the two
continuations and one for their parents. The control variables for model (3) are defined at the application
level, i.e. measured separately for the two applications of each observation. Controls include filing year
effects, art-unit-by-examiner effects, number of independent claims and number of words per independent
claim. Standard errors clustered by pair in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


    The first column in Table 3 regresses Jaccard similarity against a dummy equal to one for
the post-standard continuations. In the second column, we add pair fixed effects to control for
all common characteristics of the pre- and post-standard applications in a pair. In the third
column, we control for several observable application characteristics (independent claims,
words per independent claim, art-unit-by-examiner effects and filing-year effects), which
reduces the sample size because of missing data. All three models confirm that the claims
of post-standard continuations are more similar than those of their pre-standard parents.
Although it is difficult to interpret the magnitude of this finding, we take the convergence in
claim language as further evidence that SEP owners use continuations to draft claims that
cover standards.


6     Conclusion
We study the strategic use of continuations to patent technologies developed after the original
filing date of a patent. Although continuations have featured prominently in patent policy
debates, empirical evidence of this behavior was limited due to measurement challenges.
We exploit the disclosure of SEPs during the ICT standardization process to link patents
with standards, and to measure the association between the resolution of uncertainty on
standard design and the use of continuations. Consistent with the idea that companies use

                                                    20
continuations to cover standards after consensus forms around a specific design, we find that
a large share of SEPs are continuations filed after standard publication, and that there is a
large increase in the continuations of SEPs immediately after a standard is published. We
also show that claims in continuations filed post-standard are more similar to each other
than the claims of their pre-standard parent applications.
    From a patent policy perspective, continuations present a complex tradeoff. The option to
abandon some claims and refine others is especially valuable to applicants facing high levels
of uncertainty, such as startups or inventors of very novel technologies. On the other hand,
continuations are problematic because they increase uncertainty about the actual scope of
patent protection. Unexpected changes in patent scope increase the likelihood of inadvertent
infringement, reduce incentives to invent around patents, and create a hold-up threat that
can increase the costs of technology adoption.
    The USPTO could address the downsides of continuation practice by increasing fees,
restricting the use of lengthy continuation "chains" (e.g. by capping the number of links), or
by creating intervening-user rights that reduce incentives for opportunistic claiming. With
respect to SEPs, SSOs could adopt similar rules as part of their intellectual property policies.
It is not easy, however, to predict the behavior of patentees and standards developers under
these counterfactual policies. Without continuations, we might see more vague claims, or a
surge in last-minute applications filed just before standards are finalized. On the other hand,
if patent scope were more predictable, standards developers would have stronger incentives
to consider infringement when making design decisions instead of (as some observers claim)
leaving the entire problem for patent attorneys to sort out ex post.
    A full accounting of the costs and benefits of continuation lies beyond the scope of this
paper, and presents an interesting topic for future research. Moreover, it is important to
recognize that continuations are not the only way to delay claim drafting and issuance. U.S.
applicants can use other tools, such as provisional applications or requests for continued
examination. In jurisdictions where continuations are not available, applicants can use divi-
sionals or deferred examination. Further research might study how inventors use all of these
tools, individually and in combination, to manage the tradeoff between filing early to obtain
priority and delaying in order to draft stronger claims.




                                              21
References
Arts, S., Cassiman, B. & Gomez, J. C. (2018), `Text matching to measure patent similarity', Strategic
     Management Journal 39(1), 62­84.

Baron, J. & Gupta, K. (2018), `Unpacking 3gpp standards', Journal of Economics and Management Strategy
    27(3).

Baron, J. & Pohlmann, T. (2018), `Mapping standards to patents using declarations of standard-essential
    patents', Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 27(3).

Baron, J. & Spulber, D. (2018), `Technology standards and standard setting organizations: Introduction to
    the searle center database', Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 27(3).

Bekkers, R., Catalini, C., Martinelli, A., Righi, C. & Simcoe, T. (2017), `Disclosure rules and declared
    essential patents', NBER Working Paper 23627 .

Bekkers, R., Martinelli, A. & Tamagni, F. (2020), `The impact of including standards-related documentation
    in patent prior art: Evidence from an EPO policy change', Research Policy 49(7), 104007.

Berger, F., Blind, K. & Thumm, N. (2012), `Filing behaviour regarding essential patents in industry stan-
    dards', Research Policy 41(1), 216­225.

Brachtendorf, L., Gaessler, F. & Harhoff, D. (2019), `Approximating the standard essentiality of patents ­ a
    semantics-based analysis', Working Paper .

Chab´
    e-Ferret, S. (2017), `Should we combine difference in differences with conditioning on pre-treatment
    outcomes?', Working Paper .

Chiang, T.-J. (2010), `Fixing patent boundaries', Michigan Law Review 108(4), 523­576.

Cockburn, I. M., Kortum, S. & Stern, S. (2002), `Are all patent examiners equal? the impact of examiner
    characteristics', NBER Working Paper 8980 .

Cohen, W. M., Nelson, R. R. & Walsh, J. P. (2000), `Protecting their intellectual assets: Appropriability
    conditions and why U.S. manufacturing firms patent (or not)', NBER Working Paper 7552 .

Correia, S. (2016), `Linear models with high-dimensional fixed effects: An efficient and feasible estimator',
    Working Paper .

Frakes, M. D. & Wasserman, M. F. (2015), `Does the US patent and trademark office grant too many bad
     patents: Evidence from a quasi-experiment', Stanford Law Review 67(3), 613­676.

FTC (2003), To promote innovation: a proper balance of competition and patent law and policy, Report,
   U.S. Federal Trade Commission.

FTC (2011), The evolving IP marketplace: Aligning patent notice and remedies with competition, Technical
   report, U.S. Federal Trade Commission.

Glazier, S. C. (2003), Patent Strategies for Business, LBI Law & Business Institute, Washington D.C.

Graham, S. J. (2004), `Behind the patent's veil: Innovators' uses of patent continuation practice, 1975-2002',
    Working Paper .




                                                     22
Graham, S. J., Marco, A. C. & Miller, R. (2018), `The USPTO patent examination research dataset: A
    window on patent processing', Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 27(3), 554­578.

Graham, S. J. & Mowery, D. C. (2004), `Submarines in software? continuations in us software patenting in
    the 1980s and 1990s', Economics of Innovation and New Technology 13(5), 443­456.

Granstrand, O. (1999), The Economics and Management of Intellectual Property: Towards Intellectual Cap-
    italism, Edward Elgar.

Hall, B. H. & Ziedonis, R. H. (2001), `The patent paradox revisited: an empirical study of patenting in the
     US semiconductor industry, 1979-1995', RAND Journal of Economics 32(1), 101­128.

Harhoff, D. (2016), `Patent quality and examination in europe', American Economic Review: Papers &
    Proceedings 106(5), 193­97.

Harhoff, D., Scherer, F. M. & Vopel, K. (2003), `Citations, family size, opposition and the value of patent
    rights', Research Policy 32(8), 1343­1363.

Hegde, D., Mowery, D. C. & Graham, S. J. (2009), `Pioneering inventors or thicket builders: Which US firms
    use continuations in patenting?', Management Science 55(7), 1214­1226.

Kang, B. & Bekkers, R. (2015), `Just-in-time patents and the development of standards', Research Policy
    44(10), 1948­1961.

Kang, B. & Motohashi, K. (2015), `Essential intellectual property rights and inventors' involvement in
    standardization', Research Policy 44(2), 483­492.

Kuhn, J. M. (2016), `Property rights and frictions in the sale of patents', Working Paper .

Kuhn, J. M. & Thompson, N. C. (2019), `How to measure and draw causal inferences with patent scope',
    International Journal of the Economics of Business 26(1), 5­38.

Layne-Farrar, A. (2011), `Assessing IPR disclosure within standard setting: An ICT case study', Working
    Paper .

Lemley, M. A. (2002), `Intellectual property rights and standard-setting organizations', California Law Re-
    view 90, 1889­1980.

Lemley, M. A. & Moore, K. A. (2004), `Ending abuse of patent continuations', Boston University Law Review
    84(1), 63­123.

Lemley, M. A. & Sampat, B. (2012), `Examiner characteristics and patent office outcomes', Review of
    Economics and Statistics 94(3), 817­827.

Lemley, M. A. & Shapiro, C. (2005), `Probabilistic patents', Journal of Economic Perspectives 19(2), 75­98.

Lemley, M. A. & Simcoe, T. (2019), `How essential are standard-essential patents?', Cornell Law Review
    104, 607­641.

Lerner, J. & Tirole, J. (2015), `Standard-essential patents', Journal of Political Economy 123(3), 547­586.

Levin, R. C., Klevorick, A. K., Nelson, R. R., Winter, S. G., Gilbert, R. & Griliches, Z. (1987), `Appro-
     priating the returns from industrial research and development', Brookings papers on economic activity
     1987(3), 783­831.


                                                    23
Malani, A. & Reif, J. (2015), `Interpreting pre-trends as anticipation: Impact on estimated treatment effects
    from tort reform', Journal of Public Economics 124, 1­17.

Marco, A. C. & Miller, R. (2019), `Patent examination quality and litigation: Is there a link?', International
    Journal of the Economics of Business 26(1), 65­91.

Marco, A. C., Sarnoff, J. D. & deGrazia, C. (2019), `Patent claims and patent scope', Research Policy
    p. 103790.

Menell, P. & Meurer, M. (2013), `Notice failure and notice externalities', Journla of Legal Analysis 5(1), 1­59.

Nagaoka, S., Tsukada, N. & Shimbo, T. (2009), The structure and the emergence of essential patents for stan-
    dards: Lessons from three IT standards, in U. Cantner, J.-L. Gaffard & L. Nesta, eds, `Schumpeterian
    Perspectives on Innovation, Competition and Growth', Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 435­450.

Putnam, J. (1996), `The value of international patent protection', Unpublished Ph. D. Dissertation, Yale
    University .

Righi, C. (2019), `Do patent continuations increase litigation?', Working Paper .

Righi, C. & Simcoe, T. (2019), `Patent examiner specialization', Research Policy 48(1), 137­148.

Roin, B. N. (2005), `The disclosure function of the patent system (or lack thereof)', Harvard Law Review
    118(6), 2007­2028.

Rysman, M. & Simcoe, T. (2008), `Patents and the performance of voluntary standard-setting organizations',
    Management Science 54(11), 1920­1934.

Seymore, S. B. (2009), `The teaching function of patents', Notre Dame Law Review 85(2), 621­669.

Shapiro, C. (2001), Navigating the patent thicket: Cross licenses, patent pools, and standard setting, in A. B.
    Jaffe, J. Lerner & S. Stern, eds, `Innovation Policy and the Economy', Vol. 1, MIT press, Cambridge,
    MA, pp. 119­150.

Simcoe, T. (2012), `Standard setting committees: Consensus governance for shared technology platforms',
    American Economic Review 102(1), 305­36.

Ziedonis, R. H. (2004), `Don't fence me in: Fragmented markets for technology and the patent acquisition
     strategies of firms', Management Science 50(6), 804­820.




                                                      24
Appendix

    Figure A1: Frequency and timing of SEP continuations, narrower definition of SEP


                                   SEPs
           ORIGINAL
                          COMP/COMM


                                   SEPs
                  CON
                          COMP/COMM


                                   SEPs
               OTHER
                          COMP/COMM

                                          0       20        40         60        80       100
                                                                   %

                                                         SEPs filed before standard
                                                         SEPs filed after standard
                                                         Applications in COMP/COMM


Notes. The sample contains utility patent applications filed on or after November 29, 2000. Percentages
based on 15,695 SEPs and 1,447,286 (non-SEP) applications processed by Technology Centers 2100, 2400
and 2600. SEPs include U.S. utility patent applications declared essential for a standard. Pre- and post-
standard SEPs defined using the earliest standard linked to a SEP. Non-SEP applications are U.S. utility
patent applications that are not in the patent family of a declared SEP.




                                                   25
                  Figure A2: Owners of SEPs (declared SEPs and their family members)
                  (a) SEPs filed after standard                                                                (b) SEPs filed as CONs

                INNOVATIVE SONIC                                                                                    HUAWEI
                       PANASONIC                                                                                PANASONIC
    OPTIS CELLULAR TECHNOLOGY                                                                                         SONY
                           HUAWEI                                                                      INTERDIGITAL COMM
                            SHARP                                                            OPTIS CELLULAR TECHNOLOGY
                               NEC                                                                                   APPLE
                               NTT                                                                             BLACKBERRY
              INTERDIGITAL COMM                                                                            LG ELECTRONICS
                     ERICSSON AB                                                                                      INTEL
                             SONY                                                                                      ETRI
                            APPLE                                                                             ERICSSON AB
                  LG ELECTRONICS                                                                                        NEC
                  ALCATEL-LUCENT                                                                                  SAMSUNG
                   NOKIA SIEMENS                                                                      TEXAS INSTRUMENTS
                               ZTE                                                                                   SHARP
                             INTEL                                                                         ALCATEL-LUCENT
                              ETRI                                                                                      MML
                      BLACKBERRY                                                                                QUALCOMM
                         SAMSUNG                                                                                      NOKIA
                       QUALCOMM                                                                             NOKIA SIEMENS
                              CATT                                                                       INNOVATIVE SONIC
                             NOKIA                                                                              SIEMENS AG
                       SIEMENS AG                                                                   MOTOROLA SOLUTIONS
                               MML                                                                                     CATT
             TEXAS INSTRUMENTS                                                                                          NTT
           MOTOROLA SOLUTIONS                                                                                           ZTE

                                     0        20       40          60        80   100                                         0        20       40       60       80   100
                                                   % SEPs filed after standard                                                                % SEPs from CONs




Notes. The figure reports the percentage of SEPs owned by each company that are filed after standard pub-
lication (panel a) or that are filed as continuations (panel b). The sample contains utility patent applications
filed on or after November 29, 2000. SEPs include U.S. utility patent applications declared essential for a
standard, as well as all their parent and child applications. Pre- and post-standard SEPs defined using the
earliest standard linked to a family of SEPs. The figure reports only companies with at least 100 SEPs.




                                              Figure A3: Owners of SEPs (only declared SEPs)
                  (a) SEPs filed after standard                                                                (b) SEPs filed as CONs

        INNOVATIVE SONIC                                                                                    HUAWEI
                       NTT                                                                                    SONY
                   HUAWEI                                                                      INTERDIGITAL COMM
               PANASONIC                                                                               BLACKBERRY
                       ZTE                                                                              PANASONIC
                       NEC                                                                                   APPLE
      INTERDIGITAL COMM                                                                            LG ELECTRONICS
                    SHARP                                                                                     INTEL
                     SONY                                                                                      ETRI
           NOKIA SIEMENS                                                                                  SAMSUNG
                    APPLE                                                                     TEXAS INSTRUMENTS
             ERICSSON AB                                                                                QUALCOMM
                     INTEL                                                                                      NEC
               QUALCOMM                                                                                       NOKIA
          LG ELECTRONICS                                                                              ERICSSON AB
                     NOKIA                                                                                     MML
              BLACKBERRY                                                                         INNOVATIVE SONIC
                      ETRI                                                                                      NTT
                 SAMSUNG                                                                                     SHARP
                      MML                                                                    MOTOROLA SOLUTIONS
     TEXAS INSTRUMENTS                                                                              NOKIA SIEMENS
    MOTOROLA SOLUTIONS                                                                                          ZTE


                             0           20       40           60         80      100                                 0           20         40        60        80    100
                                              % SEPs filed after standard                                                                   % SEPs from CONs




Notes. The figure reports the percentage of SEPs owned by each company that are filed after standard pub-
lication (panel a) or that are filed as continuations (panel b). The sample contains utility patent applications
filed on or after November 29, 2000. SEPs include U.S. utility patent applications declared essential for a
standard. Pre- and post-standard SEPs defined using the earliest standard linked to a SEPs. The figure
reports only companies with at least 100 SEPs.




                                                                                        26
      Table A1: Summary statistics for SEPs and controls in the main analysis sample

                                N      Mean         SD        Min       1st Q    Median      3rd Q       Max
 CON                      959,733      0.012      0.110          0          0          0          0          1
 CONs                     959,733      0.013      0.166          0          0          0          0         98
 PostStandard × SEP       959,733      0.086      0.281          0          0          0          0          1
 SEP                      959,733      0.137      0.343          0          0          0          0          1
 Age                      959,733     10.425      8.580          0          4          9         15         64
 Notes. The unit of observation is an application-quarter. An application is included in the sample from
its filing quarter to the quarter of family disposal or the end of year 2016 if its family is still pending. A
SEP is the earliest U.S. utility patent application of a domestic patent family that contains at least one U.S.
utility patent application declared essential for a standard. A control application is the earliest U.S. utility
patent application of a domestic patent family that does not contain any U.S. utility patent applications
declared essential for a standard. The sample contains SEPs whose family is still pending in the quarter of
publication of the earliest standard linked to the family and control applications in art-unit-examiner-filing-
quarter groups with at least one SEP and one control. The sample contains 53,112 applications (5,487 SEPs
and 47,625 controls).




                                                      27
Table A2: Difference in differences models of continuation filing, declared SEPs and controls

 Outcome                                                          CON × 100
 Specification                                                      OLS
                                                                              SEPs and controls matched
 Sample                               SEPs and controls
                                                                                on pre-standard CONs
 Model                      pooled         tech &           FE            pooled        tech &          FE
                             cross-        cohort                          cross-       cohort
                            section                                       section
                              (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)           (6)


 PostStandard × SEP         1.73***        1.66***        2.09***        1.75***       1.77***       2.28***
                             (0.08)         (0.08)         (0.12)         (0.09)        (0.10)        (0.14)

 SEP                          -0.01        0.11***                         -0.00         0.00
                             (0.03)         (0.04)                        (0.02)        (0.04)

 Quarter FE
 Age FE
 AU-E-FQ FE
 Age2 , age3 & age4
 Application FE
 PostStandard

 Observations               758,930        758,930        758,930        168,883       168,883       168,883
 R-squared                    0.01          0.02            0.08           0.02          0.05          0.08
 Applications                46,919        46,919          46,919         9,446         9,446         9,446
 Mean of outcome              0.90          0.90            0.90           1.33          1.33          1.33
 Notes. The unit of observation is an application-quarter. An application is included in the sample from its
filing quarter to the quarter of disposal or the end of year 2016 if still pending. A SEP is the earliest U.S.
utility patent application of a domestic patent family that contains at least one U.S. utility patent application
declared essential for a standard. A control application is the earliest U.S. utility patent application of a
domestic patent family that does not contain any U.S. utility patent applications declared essential for a
standard. The sample for models (1)-(3) contains SEPs that are mentioned in patent disclosure letters
and are pending in the quarter of publication of the earliest standard linked to the application, and control
applications in art-unit-examiner-filing-quarter groups with at least one SEP and one control. The sample for
models (4)-(6) contains SEPs that are mentioned in patent disclosure letters and are pending in the quarter
of publication of the earliest standard linked to the application, and controls pending in the quarter before
standard publication matched on filing quarter, art unit, examiner and cumulative number of continuations
in the quarter before standard publication. Standard errors clustered by application in parentheses. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                       28
         Table A3: Difference in differences models of continuation filing, anticipation

 Outcome                                                         CON × 100
 Specification                                                     OLS
 Sample                          Info on the entire family             Info on first application in the family
 Model                      pooled        tech &           FE            pooled        tech &          FE
                             cross-       cohort                          cross-       cohort
                            section                                      section
                              (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)           (6)


 PostStandard × SEP         1.17***       1.05***       1.99***          1.74***       1.64***       2.08***
                             (0.10)        (0.09)        (0.12)           (0.08)        (0.08)        (0.15)

 Standard (t - 1)           0.57***       0.59***       1.28***          0.67***       0.60***       0.60***
                             (0.19)        (0.19)        (0.21)           (0.15)        (0.15)        (0.18)

 Standard (t - 2)            0.23           0.25        0.92***           -0.07         -0.13         -0.10
                            (0.18)         (0.18)        (0.20)          (0.08)        (0.09)        (0.12)

 Standard (t - 3)            0.23           0.26        0.88***           -0.06         -0.12         -0.10
                            (0.19)         (0.19)        (0.20)          (0.08)        (0.09)        (0.11)

 Standard (t - 4)            0.28           0.30        0.85***          -0.16**      -0.22***       -0.22**
                            (0.19)         (0.19)        (0.21)           (0.06)       (0.07)         (0.09)

 SEP                        0.66***       0.75***                       -0.07***       0.08**
                             (0.06)        (0.06)                        (0.03)        (0.04)

 Quarter FE
 Age FE
 AU-E-FQ FE
 Age2 , age3 & age4
 Application FE

 Observations               927,567       927,567       927,567          742,204       742,204       742,204
 R-squared                    0.02         0.03           0.07            0.01           0.02         0.08
 Applications                53,112       53,112         53,112          46,919         46,919       46,919
 Mean of outcome              1.12         1.12           1.12            0.85           0.85         0.85
 Notes. The unit of observation is an application-quarter. An application is included in the sample from
its filing quarter to the quarter of family disposal or the end of year 2016 if its family is still pending in
columns (1)-(3), and to the quarter of disposal or the end of year 2016 if still pending in columns (4)-(6). A
SEP is the earliest U.S. utility patent application of a domestic patent family that contains at least one U.S.
utility patent application declared essential for a standard. A control application is the earliest U.S. utility
patent application of a domestic patent family that does not contain any U.S. utility patent applications
declared essential for a standard. The sample for models (1)-(3) contains SEPs whose family is pending
in the quarter of publication of the earliest standard linked to the family and control applications in art-
unit-examiner-filing-quarter groups with at least one SEP and one control. The sample for models (4)-(6)
contains SEPs that are mentioned in patent disclosure letters and are pending in the quarter of publication
of the earliest standard linked to the application, and control applications in art-unit-examiner-filing-quarter
groups with at least one SEP and one control. Standard errors clustered by application in parentheses. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



                                                      29
                           Table A4: Hazard models of continuation filing

 Outcome                                                          CON × 100
 Specification                                                      OLS
 Models                                      Myopic                                     Quasi-myopic
 Model                          pooled            tech & cohort               pooled            tech & cohort
                             cross-section                                 cross-section
                                  (1)                    (2)                    (3)                     (4)


 PostStandard × SEP             1.02***               1.09***                 1.11***              1.20***
                                 (0.08)                (0.08)                  (0.08)               (0.08)

 Standard (t - 1)                                                             0.66***              0.74***
                                                                               (0.17)               (0.17)

 Standard (t - 2)                                                             0.47***              0.54***
                                                                               (0.17)               (0.17)

 Standard (t - 3)                                                              0.35**                  0.42**
                                                                               (0.17)                  (0.17)

 Standard (t - 4)                                                               0.15                    0.19
                                                                               (0.16)                  (0.16)

 SEP                            0.49***               0.53***                 0.36***              0.38***
                                 (0.04)                (0.04)                  (0.04)               (0.04)

 Quarter FE
 Age FE
 AU-E-FQ FE
 Age2 , age3 & age4

 Observations                  1,071,574              1,071,574               1,052,185           1,052,186
 R-squared                        0.01                   0.02                    0.01                0.02
 Applications                    65,486                65,486                   65,486              65,486
 Mean of outcome                  0.81                   0.81                    0.78                0.78
 Notes. The unit of observation is an application-quarter. An application is included in the sample from
its filing quarter to the earliest of the filing quarter of its first continuation, the quarter of family disposal
or the end of year 2016 if censored. A SEP is the earliest U.S. utility patent application of a domestic
patent family that contains at least one U.S. utility patent application declared essential for a standard. A
control application is the earliest U.S. utility patent application of a domestic patent family that does not
contain any U.S. utility patent applications declared essential for a standard. The sample contains SEPs
filed before the quarter of publication of the earliest standard linked to their family and control applications
in art-unit-examiner-filing-quarter groups with at least one SEP and one control. Standard errors clustered
by application in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                        30
          Table A5: Hazard models of continuation filing, declared SEPs and controls

 Outcome                                                           CON × 100
 Specification                                                       OLS
 Models                                       Myopic                                     Quasi-myopic
 Model                           pooled            tech & cohort                pooled            tech & cohort
                              cross-section                                  cross-section
                                   (1)                    (2)                     (3)                    (4)


 PostStandard × SEP              1.17***               1.24***                 1.23***               1.33***
                                  (0.08)                (0.08)                  (0.08)                (0.08)

 Standard (t - 1)                                                              0.77***               0.86***
                                                                                (0.18)                (0.18)

 Standard (t - 2)                                                               0.34**               0.42***
                                                                                (0.16)                (0.16)

 Standard (t - 3)                                                               0.32*                   0.39**
                                                                                (0.16)                  (0.17)

 Standard (t - 4)                                                                0.11                    0.15
                                                                                (0.15)                  (0.15)

 SEP                             0.44***               0.50***                 0.32***               0.35***
                                  (0.04)                (0.04)                  (0.04)                (0.04)

 Quarter FE
 Age FE
 AU-E-FQ FE
 Age2 , age3 & age4

 Observations                   1,004,990              1,004,995               988,569               988,570
 R-squared                         0.01                   0.02                  0.01                  0.02
 Applications                     63,158                63,158                 63,158                63,158
 Mean of outcome                   0.83                   0.83                  0.79                  0.79
 Notes. The unit of observation is an application-quarter. An application is included in the sample from its
filing quarter to the earliest of the filing quarter of its first continuation, the quarter of disposal or the end of
year 2016 if censored. A SEP is the earliest U.S. utility patent application of a domestic patent family that
contains at least one U.S. utility patent application declared essential for a standard. A control application
is the earliest U.S. utility patent application of a domestic patent family that does not contain any U.S.
utility patent applications declared essential for a standard. The sample contains SEPs that are mentioned
in patent disclosure letters and are filed before the quarter of publication of the earliest standard linked to
the application, and control applications in art-unit-examiner-filing-quarter groups with at least one SEP
and one control. Standard errors clustered by application in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                         31
                             Table A6: Difference in differences and hazard models of continuation filing, only SEPs

      Outcome                                                                          CON × 100
      Specification                                                                      OLS
      Models                           DID, myopic                          DID, quasi-myopic                  Hazard, myopic           Hazard, quasi-myopic
      Model                   cross-       tech         FE            cross-       tech         FE             cross-       tech           cross-      tech
                             section      cohort                     section      cohort                      section      cohort         section     cohort
                               (1)          (2)         (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)            (7)          (8)            (9)        (10)


      PostStandard           0.26***      0.20*         0.19         0.33***      0.47***     0.52***         0.15*       0.39***         0.21**      0.67***
                              (0.10)      (0.12)       (0.12)         (0.10)       (0.15)      (0.16)         (0.09)       (0.13)         (0.09)       (0.17)

      Standard (t - 1)                                                0.39**      0.58***     0.61***                                     0.31*       0.54***
                                                                      (0.18)       (0.20)      (0.21)                                     (0.17)       (0.20)

      Standard (t - 2)                                                 0.07         0.27        0.31                                       0.20       0.45**
                                                                      (0.17)       (0.19)      (0.19)                                     (0.17)      (0.20)

      Standard (t - 3)                                                 0.17       0.38**       0.42**                                      0.20       0.43**




32
                                                                      (0.17)      (0.20)       (0.20)                                     (0.17)      (0.19)

      Standard (t - 4)                                                 0.18        0.36*       0.41**                                      -0.03        0.14
                                                                      (0.18)       (0.19)      (0.19)                                     (0.16)       (0.17)

      Quarter FE
      Age FE
      AU-E-FQ FE
      Age2 , age3 & age4
      Application FE

      Observations           162,126     161,936      162,126        153,354      153,168     153,354        131,348      131,211        128,008      127,872
      R-squared                0.02        0.06         0.07           0.02         0.06        0.07          0.02          0.08          0.02         0.08
      Applications            7,019       7,012        7,019          7,019        7,012       7,019          7,019        7,003          7,019        7,003
      Mean of outcome          2.67        2.67         2.67          2.44          2.44        2.44          1.80          1.80          1.73         1.72
      Notes. The unit of observation is an application-quarter. An application is included in the sample from its filing quarter to the quarter of family
     disposal or the end of year 2016 if its family is still pending in columns (1)-(6), and to the earliest of the filing quarter of its first continuation, the
     quarter of family disposal or the end of year 2016 if censored in columns (7)-(10). A SEP is the earliest U.S. utility patent application of a domestic
     patent family that contains at least one U.S. utility patent application declared essential for a standard. The sample contains SEPs filed before the
     quarter of publication of the earliest standard linked to their family. Standard errors clustered by application in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
     * p<0.1
                       Table A7: Difference in differences and hazard models of continuation filing, only declared SEPs

      Outcome                                                                            CON × 100
      Specification                                                                        OLS
      Models                            DID, myopic                          DID, quasi-myopic                    Hazard, myopic           Hazard, quasi-myopic
      Model                    cross-       tech         FE             cross-       tech         FE             cross-       tech           cross-       tech
                              section      cohort                      section      cohort                      section      cohort         section      cohort
                                (1)          (2)         (3)             (4)          (5)         (6)             (7)          (8)            (9)         (10)


      PostStandard            0.22**      0.41***      0.38***        0.27***      0.72***      0.77***         0.15*       0.49***         0.19**       0.80***
                              (0.09)       (0.13)       (0.14)         (0.09)       (0.17)       (0.21)         (0.09)       (0.14)         (0.09)        (0.18)

      Standard (t - 1)                                                 0.37**      0.71***      0.74***                                     0.35**       0.70***
                                                                       (0.18)       (0.21)       (0.23)                                     (0.18)        (0.21)

      Standard (t - 2)                                                  0.07        0.39**      0.44**                                        0.02       0.39**
                                                                       (0.16)       (0.19)      (0.20)                                       (0.16)      (0.19)

      Standard (t - 3)                                                  0.12        0.40**      0.45**                                        0.12       0.45**




33
                                                                       (0.17)       (0.19)      (0.20)                                       (0.17)      (0.19)

      Standard (t - 4)                                                  -0.07        0.18         0.22                                        -0.09       0.16
                                                                       (0.16)       (0.18)       (0.18)                                      (0.16)      (0.17)

      Quarter FE
      Age FE
      AU-E-FQ FE
      Age2 , age3 & age4
      Application FE

      Observations           125,427      125,427      125,427        122,606      122,608      122,608         121,914     121,907         119,324      119,319
      R-squared                0.02         0.07         0.08           0.02         0.08         0.09           0.02         0.08           0.02         0.08
      Applications            6,834        6,834        6,834          6,834        6,834        6,834           6,834       6,827           6,834        6,827
      Mean of outcome          1.93         1.93         1.93          1.84          1.84         1.84           1.86         1.85           1.76         1.76
      Notes. The unit of observation is an application-quarter. Applications included in the sample from their filing quarter to the quarter of disposal or
     the end of year 2016 if still pending in columns (1)-(6), and to the earliest of the filing quarter of their first continuation, the quarter of disposal or the
     end of year 2016 if censored in columns (7)-(10). A SEP is the earliest U.S. utility patent application of a domestic patent family that contains at least
     one U.S. utility patent application declared essential for a standard. The sample contains SEPs that are mentioned in patent disclosure letters and
     are filed before the quarter of publication of the earliest standard linked to the application. Standard errors clustered by application in parentheses.
     *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
