                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             GENERALIZABLE AND ROBUST TV ADVERTISING EFFECTS

                                        Bradley Shapiro
                                        Günter J. Hitsch
                                        Anna Tuchman

                                      Working Paper 27684
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27684


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020




All three authors contributed equally although not listed in alphabetical order. We acknowledge
the superb research assistance of Jihong Song and Ningyin Xu. We thank Liran Einav, Paul
Ellickson, Jeremy Fox, Wes Hartmann, Carl Mela, Matt Shum, and Sha Yang for helpful
comments. We also benefited from the comments of seminar participants at Amazon, Bates
White, Columbia, CUHK, HKUST, Johns Hopkins, NUS, Rice, UNC, UCSD, Yale, Marketing
Science, the MSI Young Scholars Conference, the Wash U. Junior Faculty Development Forum,
the NYC Media Seminar, the (IO)2 Zoom Seminar and the 12th Workshop on the Economics
of Advertising and Marketing. Calculated (or derived) based on data from The Nielsen
Company (US), LLC and marketing databases provided by the Kilts Center for
Marketing Data Center at The University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The conclusions
drawn from the Nielsen data are those of the researchers and do not reflect the views of Nielsen,
nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Nielsen is not responsible for, had no role in,
and was not involved in analyzing and preparing the results reported herein.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Bradley Shapiro, Günter J. Hitsch, and Anna Tuchman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Generalizable and Robust TV Advertising Effects
Bradley Shapiro, Günter J. Hitsch, and Anna Tuchman
NBER Working Paper No. 27684
August 2020
JEL No. B41,C18,C52,C55,C81,L00,L15,L81,M31,M37

                                            ABSTRACT

We provide generalizable and robust results on the causal sales effect of TV advertising for a
large number of products in many categories. Such generalizable results provide a prior
distribution that can improve the advertising decisions made by firms and the analysis and
recommendations of policy makers. To provide generalizable results, we base our analysis on a
large number of products and clearly lay out the research protocol used to select the products. We
characterize the distribution of all estimates, irrespective of sign, size, or statistical significance.
To ensure generalizability, we document the robustness of the estimates. First, we examine the
sensitivity of the results to the assumptions made when constructing the data used in estimation.
Second, we document whether the estimated effects are sensitive to the identification strategies
that we use to claim causality based on observational data. Our results reveal substantially smaller
advertising elasticities compared to the results documented in the extant literature, as well as a
sizable percentage of statistically insignificant or negative estimates. Finally, we conduct an
analysis of return on investment (ROI). While our results show that many brands perform better
with their observed advertising than they would without advertising, we document considerable
over-investment in advertising at the margin.

Bradley Shapiro                                    Anna Tuchman
Booth School of Business                           Northwestern University
University of Chicago                              Kellogg School of Management
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                         2211 Campus Dr
Chicago, IL 60637                                  Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER                                           anna.tuchman@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Bradley.Shapiro@chicagobooth.edu

Günter J. Hitsch
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
guenter.hitsch@ChicagoBooth.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27684
A Online interactive results is available at https://advertising-effects.chicagobooth.edu/
1 Introduction
We study the causal eect of television advertising on sales, with a focus on the generalizability
of the results across products in dierent categories. Further, we document the robustness of
the results to dierent approaches to construct the data and to dierent empirical strategies to
obtain causal advertising eect estimates.
    Generalizable knowledge on the causal eect of advertising is of importance both to the
economic analysis of advertising and to business analytics. First, an important literature in
economics has investigated the eect of advertising on market structure, competition, and con-
centration. Sutton's (1991) endogenous sunk cost theory of market structure and concentration,
applied to the case when advertising creates vertical product dierentiation, assumes that adver-
tising aects consumer demand. The degree to which advertising is eective and has a long-run
impact on demand or brand equity (Borkovsky et al. 2017) determines if entry deterrence is
possible (Ellison and Ellison 2011, Bar and Haviv 2019). Second, a long line of research in
economics investigates if advertising is primarily persuasive, informative, or eectively a comple-
ment to product consumption (see the survey by Bagwell 2007). This study of the mechanism
by which advertising aects demand would be moot if advertising were ineective. Third, in
traditional broadcast markets content and advertising are bundled. As such, advertising acts as
a price paid by consumers for content, and the long-run viability of this business model depends
on the eectiveness of advertising (the estimates in Brynjolfsson et al. 2019 imply that consumers
would be willing to pay $135 billion per year to avoid losing TV access). The size of the industry
also speaks to its economic importance. Total U.S. advertising spending in 2019 was $256 billion,
with $66 billion spent on TV advertising.      1

    Furthermore, from a normative point of view, a key task for business and marketing ana-
lytics is to predict the protability or return on investment (ROI) from incremental advertising
spending in order to facilitate good advertising planning decisions.
To provide economists and industry practitioners with a general understanding of the eective-
ness of TV advertising, our study must ensure that the results are not driven by idiosyncratic
examples. Generalizable results ensure the external validity of the ndings and provide a prior
distribution for decision-making. In the case of advertising, a prior distribution of the advertis-
ing elasticity among similar products allows a rm or policy maker to assess a likely range of
advertising ROIs even without conducting its own analysis. Once specic advertising elasticity
estimates are obtained, for example using an internal analysis conducted by the rm's data sci-
ence team or using an external analysis by a marketing consulting rm, the prior serves as a
benchmark to assess the credibility of these estimates. An unbiased prior is important not only
to rms, but also to researchers. One of the basic goals of science is to create knowledge that can
be replicated and aggregated to form a broad understanding of what we have learned. Such an
aggregation of what we know informs subsequent research questions, methodological advances
  1
      Winterberry Group: The Outlook for Data Driven Advertising & Marketing 2020
                                                     2
and the search for new and better data.
      In this paper, we provide a generalizable distribution of television advertising elasticities and
estimates of advertising return on investment (ROI). The analysis is based on a sample of 288
consumer packaged goods (CPG) that are selected using a clear research protocol.2 We estimate
the advertising elasticities and ROIs brand by brand, carefully controlling for confounding factors.
We report all results, irrespective of size, sign, or statistical signicance. Because the data are
available for researchers through the Kilts Center for Marketing Data Center at The University
of Chicago Booth School of Business, the analysis can be replicated and the sample selection
process can be veried.
      We obtain generalizable results using this research process because it circumvents publication
bias. Most advertising research in empirical industrial organization and marketing has used a
case study approach. Generalizations are obtained either by using a systematic meta-analysis
or through a more informal summary of published results. However, if published results are not
representative due to publication bias, a meta-analysis will not yield an estimate of the true
population distribution of eects. If our knowledge-base is biased, rms could make sub-optimal
advertising investments and research could proceed in sub-optimal ways.

Robustness of the results to the specic assumptions and choices made in the analysis isin
addition to the research protocol used an important component to obtain generalizable results.
      To ensure robustness, we rst provide a detailed discussion of the approach and assumptions
made to construct the nal data, in particular the data on the intended advertising exposure
level, from the raw data sources. This part of our work should be of interest to other researchers
or analysts who use the Nielsen Ad Intel data as a source of advertising occurrence and exposure
measures.
      We intend to provide generalizable results on the causal eect of advertising on sales. In
general, advertising is not randomly assigned, and thus, in the presence of unmeasured con-
founders, the estimated advertising eects do not have a causal interpretation. We employ two
identication strategies that rely on the specic institutions of the ad-buying process. First, in
the baseline specication we posit that advertisers can target demand dierences across markets
or seasons and also aggregate, time-varying demand shocks. The geographic and seasonal de-
mand dierences in particular are relatively easy to predict. The identifying assumption is that
the residual variation in advertising is driven by slot availability and cost factors. We view this
assumption as plausible given the institutional features of the ad-buying and scheduling process.
This identifying assumption will be violated, however, if some advertising is targeted in a more
sophisticated way to local, transient demand factors. Hence, we also use a second approach,
the border strategy, which exploits the institutional constraint that local media markets (DMAs)
  2
    We focus on CPG products because CPG rms like Procter and Gamble are among the largest advertisers
on TV and because demand data on multiple products in other categories are not readily available. Based on
estimates from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, approximately 10% of personal consumption expenditures
are on CPG products.

                                                    3
are the smallest geographic unit at which ad-buys can be made. Assuming that consumers who
live close to a DMA border are similar, this constraint is the source of plausibly quasi-random
variation in advertising at a DMA border (Shapiro 2018).
      In addition, we conduct extensive sensitivity analyses to evaluate alternative modeling as-
sumptions. As it would be impractical to include all sensitivity checks in the paper, we created
an interactive web application that allows the reader to explore all model specications. The
web application is available at https://advertising-eects.chicagobooth.edu.

We estimate advertising stock elasticities, which are a form of long-run elasticity that represents
the percentage change in current period sales volume resulting from a one-percent increase in
current and past advertising. We nd that the mean and median of the distribution of estimated
long-run own-advertising elasticities are 0.025 and 0.014, respectively, and more than two thirds
of the elasticity estimates are not statistically dierent from zero. The main results are robust,
both to the main identication strategies and to the exact specications within each identication
strategy. In particular, the xed eects and border discontinuity strategies yield similar estimates
for the brands in our sample and virtually indistinguishable advertising eect distributions. The
results are robust to controls for own and competitor prices or feature and display advertising,
and the advertising eect distributions are similar whether a carryover parameter is assumed or
estimated. The estimates are also robust to functional form and do not appear to be driven by
measurement error.
      A key nding of this work is that the magnitudes of the estimated advertising elasticities are
considerably smaller compared to the results in the extant literature. This is consistent with
both publication bias and over-estimated elasticities in the literature due to confounding factors.
      The advertising elasticity estimates are not only small in comparison to results in the prior
literature, but also imply a negative return on investment (ROI) at the margin. In particular, the
ROI on advertising in a given week is -79.0% for the median brand and negative for more than
two-thirds of the brands in our sample.3 Hence, the majority of brands over-invest in advertising.
This result does not imply that all advertising is wasted: For many brands, the observed level
of advertising is more protable than not advertising at all.

This paper highlights the need for generalizable results and proposes a multi-product research
design that allows us to study the fundamental questions of ad eectiveness and ad protability
with a wide-angle lens. We rst discuss how our work relates to the existing literature in Section
2. Section 3 introduces the research design to estimate causal advertising eects. Section 4
describes the data used in the empirical analysis, and Section 5 provides summary statistics and
documents key variation in the data. In Section 6 we present the estimation results. Section 7
discusses the economic implications for prots and ROIs, and Section 8 concludes.
  3
      These results are obtained using plausible assumptions on retail and manufacturer gross margins.



                                                        4
2 Literature review
Our work is closely related to a set of papers that perform meta-analyses of published advertising
elasticities with the objective of drawing generalizable conclusions about advertising eectiveness.
While a variety of measures can be used to quantify advertising eectiveness, elasticities are
especially useful when drawing comparisons across studies and product categories because the
metric is unit-less. Assmus et al. (1984) analyzes 128 advertising elasticity estimates reported
in 22 studies published between 1962 and 1981. The average short-run elasticity is 0.22 with a
standard deviation of 0.26. In a more recent follow-up study, Sethuraman et al. (2011) augments
the sample used by Assmus et al. (1984) with additional studies of advertising eectiveness that
were published between 1981 and 2008. They report a mean short-run advertising elasticity
of 0.12 and a mean long-run elasticity of 0.24, concluding that advertising eectiveness has
decreased over time.4 Similarly, the meta-analysis by Henningsen et al. (2011) documents mean
short and long-run elasticities of 0.09 and 0.19, respectively.5
    This type of work has two main limitations. First, it relies on published estimates of adver-
tising eectiveness. Second, dierences in the analytic approach may create spurious dierences
across studies of ad eectiveness. In other words, the conclusions drawn from a meta-analysis
are only as strong as the quality and comparability of the underlying data and models. In our
study, we overcome this limitation by using a single source of data and the same model across
estimated TV ad elasticities.
    Most closely related to our study is the seminal work by Lodish et al. (1995), which sum-
marizes advertising elasticity estimates for 141 brands. The estimates are based on matched
household-level advertising exposure and purchase data from IRI's BehaviorScan household
panel. In the BehaviorScan markets, IRI conducted split-cable experiments in which adver-
tising treatments were randomized across households. For the 89 established products in the
tests, conducted between 1982 and 1988, Lodish et al. (1995) documents an average advertising
elasticity of 0.05 and reports that 33% of the elasticity estimates are statistically dierent from
zero using a one-tailed test at a 20% level.6 These results provide a relevant comparison to our
work, because (i) the Lodish et al. (1995) results were almost certainly not selected based on
size, sign or statistical signicance, (ii) robustness is ensured given the split-cable RCT design,
and (iii) the population of consumer packaged goods is likely similar to our population.7
   4
      Sethuraman et al. (2011) denes a long-term ad elasticity as the percentage change in a brand's current and
future period sales for a 1% change in the brand's current advertising. Some of the studies they analyze report
long-term elasticities directly. Others report the short-term elasticity and a carryover coecient on an included
lagged dependent variable, which they convert into a long-term elasticity by computing (short-term elasticity / (1
- carryover coecient)) (Clarke (1976)). As we discuss in Section 3.1 and Appendix A, the long-term elasticities
reported in Sethuraman et al. (2011) are comparable to our estimated advertising stock elasticity.
    5
      Henningsen et al. (2011) provide a database of published elasticity estimates.
    6
      Lodish et al. (1995) compute elasticities by dividing the estimated percentage change in brand volume over
the test year by the percentage change in GRP weight applied.
    7
      In a follow-up paper, Hu et al. (2007) analyze the results of 241 TV advertising tests carried out between
1989 and 2003. The authors document larger eects compared to Lodish et al. (1995), primarily due to the eect
sizes in tests conducted after 1995. We focus our discussion on Lodish et al. (1995) because we cannot rule out


                                                        5
    We aim to build on the work of Lodish et al. (1995) in several ways. First, the BehaviorScan
test markets are no longer in use and cannot be used for advertising measurement today. In
contrast, our work evaluates television advertising eects using currently available data and
methods that are widely employed in the industry and by researchers. Second, although not
reported by Lodish et al. (1995), the power of the tests was likely low. (Abraham and Lodish
(1990) reports a total of about 3,000 households in the BehaviorScan markets, and thus 3,000
is the maximum sample size in each test.) Compared to Lodish et al. (1995), our study covers
a longer time series and many more markets, through which we obtain better statistical power
and greater external validity.
    Our work is also complementary to some cross-category studies that relate television advertis-
ing to various outcomes using observational data. For example, Clark et al. (2009) and Du et al.
(2018) examine the relationship between advertising and survey measures of consumer brand
awareness and attitudes. Deng and Mela (2018) studies the eects of micro-targeting using a
model that jointly estimates the utility from television viewing with a purchase utility model.
Our work builds on these studies by focusing on the eect of advertising on sales as an outcome.
    Our work also relates to some recent multi-product studies of online advertising (Goldfarb
and Tucker (2011), Johnson et al. (2016), Kalyanam et al. (2018)). Just as these studies help
us assess the generalizability of online ad eects, our analysis extends our understanding of the
full distribution of TV ad eects. Further, while these studies may suer from selection bias
stemming from willingness to conduct experiments, our study has no such selection.
    Also related to this study of advertising is the work on pricing and promotion strategies in
retail grocery channels by Hitsch et al. (2019), which provides generalizable results by estimating
store-level price elasticities for the top 2,000 CPG brands (based on sales revenue).
3 Research design
3.1    Basic model structure
Our goal is to measure the eect of advertising on sales. For each product or brand, we specify
a constant elasticity model with advertising carryover. The basic model structure, not including
xed eects and other covariates that we will introduce below, is:
                        log(Q ) =  log(1 + A
                                   st
                                           T
                                                    ) +  log(p ) + .
                                                         d(s)t
                                                                     T
                                                                             st      st      (1)
Q is the quantity (measured in equivalent units) of the product sold in store s in week t. A                   d(s)t
is a vector of own and competitor advertising stocks, also referred to as goodwill, in DMA d(s)
  st



that the results in Hu et al. (2007) are aected by selection, in particular if advertisers who saw small advertising
eects in the earlier split-cable tests stopped testing. We are less concerned about such a form of selection in the
1982-1988 tests, because these tests were conducted immediately after the introduction of the BehaviorScan test
markets and before the overall small degree of advertising eectiveness was publicized in the Harvard Business
Review (Abraham and Lodish 1990) and in the academic work by Lodish et al. (1995).




                                                         6
in week        t. pst   is a corresponding vector of own and competitor prices. We specify the advertising

stock (goodwill) as:


                                                            t
                                               Ad(s)t =              t- ad(s) .                                       (2)

                                                           =t-L

ad(s)t ,    also a vector, is the ow of own and competitor advertising in DMA                  d(s)   in week    t,   and

   is the advertising carryover factor.            L   indicates the number of lags or past periods in which

advertising has an impact on current demand. In our empirical specication we set                        L = 52.       We

assume that             Ad(s)t   captures all dynamics associated with advertising, including the standard

carryover eect (current advertising causes future purchases) and structural state dependence

(current purchases caused by current advertising cause future purchases).                     Variation in current

advertising that aects future sales will be captured via the distributed lag structure in (2),

regardless of the specic mechanism.

         We measure own advertising using two           separate     variables. The rst own advertising variable

captures advertising messages that are specic to the focal product. Such advertising is likely to

have a non-negative eect on sales.
                                               8   The second own advertising variable captures advertising

messages for aliated products that, ex ante, could have either a positive eect through brand-

spillovers or a negative eect through business stealing. For example, an increase in advertising

for Coca-Cola soft drinks could increase demand for regular Coca-Cola, but it could also decrease

demand for regular Coca-Cola if suciently many consumers substitute to Coke Zero or Diet

Coke. We will discuss the corresponding data construction approach more thoroughly in Section

4. We also include advertising and prices for up to three competitors in the model.
                                                                                                       9

         As the demand function is specied as a log-log model,                    includes the own and cross-price

elasticities of demand. The coecients in                   have an approximate elasticity interpretation. For

simplicity, we drop the store and market indices and focus on one component of                          At ,   i.e., the

advertising stock for one specic product. The corresponding advertising stock elasticity is given

by
                                                Qt At     At
                                                      =         .                                                     (3)
                                                At Qt   1 + At
Thus,          is an approximation of the advertising stock elasticity.             As shown in Appendix A, the

advertising stock elasticity captures the long-run eect of a change in advertising on demand, and

in particular measures the percentage change in demand resulting from an increase in current and

past advertising by one percent. See Appendix A for alternative interpretations of the advertising

stock elasticity as a long-run advertising eect and its relationship to the short-run advertising

elasticity.

     8
         It is possible to construct models, such as the consideration set model in Sahni (2016), where an increase in
own advertising can reduce own demand.
     9
         The competing brands are selected based on size (total revenue). Not all brands are sold at all stores. Hence,
if a competing brand that is included in the model is not sold at a store, all observations for that store need to be
excluded from the analysis. Therefore, for each brand we determine the number of competitors that are included
in the model based on the percentage of observations that would be lost if we added one additional competitor.




                                                                7
    As our particular default specication may work better for some applications than others,
we provide robustness to the functional form specication, both allowing  to vary by brand and
allowing the shape of the ad response curve to vary by brand.
Demand model choice and functional form
To obtain generalizable and robust advertising eect estimates we need to scale the computations
to obtain the estimates across a large number of brands and a large number of dierent model
specications. The log-linear demand model makes these computations feasible (parallelized
across many nodes in a state-of-the-art computing cluster it takes approximately one month to
obtain all results).
    Absent these computational constraints, we would ideally estimate the relationship between
advertising and sales using a micro-founded, structural demand model, such Berry et al. (1995).
Indeed, for the purpose of specic policy evaluations, such as the eect of a merger on equilib-
rium prices (e.g., Nevo 2000) and advertising levels, or to assess the welfare eect of new product
introductions (e.g., Petrin 2002), a structural demand model would be indispensable. The main
goal of this paper, however, is to document the distribution of the overall eectiveness of TV
advertising across many brands, and we do not conduct policy evaluations that require a predic-
tion of the change in equilibrium advertising due to, for example, a merger or the entry of a new
competitor in a market. We consider our demand specication as a log-linear approximation to a
micro-founded, structural demand model. To assess the robustness of our results to the specic
functional form, we also present exible semi-parametric estimates that are regularized using the
Lasso. Our main results are unchanged by the additional exibility.
3.2   Identication strategies
The main challenge when estimating model (1) is that advertising is not randomly assigned.
Firms may target their advertising in DMAs and periods when they believe that advertising
will be most eective. Correspondingly, rms may advertise more in markets and periods where
consumers are positively disposed towards the product even in the absence of advertising. There
may also be unobserved and hence omitted factors that are correlated with both advertising and
sales. In the presence of such confounding factors, the statistical relationship between advertising
and sales does not have a causal interpretation. Hence, to ensure that we estimate the causal
eect of advertising on sales, we need a plausibly random source of variation in advertising.
3.2.1 Institutions of the ad-buying process
Our identication strategies utilize the particulars of the ad-buying process. Television ads are
purchased through negotiations between advertisers (or ad agencies) and television stations. As
much as 80% of advertising is purchased well in advance of the ad being aired in an upfront


                                                 8
market.10 In addition to being purchased in advance, there is considerable bulk buying. That is,
an agency will buy a large quantity of advertising to be divided between many clients in exchange
for discounts from the stations. The remaining advertising inventory is sold throughout the year.
The so-called scatter market allows for last minute purchases of individual ads, typically sold
at higher rates than upfronts (Hristakeva and Mortimer 2020). Additionally, local networks
sometimes sell unsold remnant advertising space to the national networks or other aggregators,
which bundle the ads and sell them to advertisers at a discount.
     These institutions of the ad-buying process make precise targeting dicult. In the upfront
market, advertisers may target demand based on dierences across local markets, seasonal factors,
and trends in demand that can be predicted in advance. Advertisers may also attempt to target
demand based on more concrete information about local demand factors that becomes available
over time. However, as the majority of inventory is sold up front, ad buys in the scatter and
bundled remnant markets close to a target date are constrained by slot availability. Hence,
if ad slots in a given week are unavailable in some local markets, the advertiser may buy air
time in a previous or subsequent week or not buy additional ad slots in these local markets
at all. Even if ad slots are available, the cost of advertising may dier across local markets.
In particular, in some local markets advertising inventory may be available in the relatively
cheap bundled remnant market, whereas in other markets ad slots may only be available in the
relatively expensive scatter market. Further, when purchasing in the bundled remnant market,
an advertiser may incidentally purchase an ad slot that was of little interest due to the fact that
it was bundled with a more desired ad slot. Because of these cost dierences, ad buys may occur
in the relatively cheap but not in the expensive markets.
     Variation in advertising over time or across markets may also occur due to technical or
scheduling factors that may cause ads to get displaced from their originally planned slots. For
example, a sporting event may go on longer or shorter than originally planned, altering the
planned schedule for ads both during and after the event.
     These institutions of the ad-buying process suggest two plausible sources of quasi-random
variation in advertising: (i) variation in the exact timing of advertising in a local market, and
(ii) variation in the amount of advertising across local markets within a time period. Among
our two main identication strategies, the baseline specication relies entirely on (i) and (ii).
The border strategy utilizes an additional source of quasi-random variation in advertising, the
institutional constraint that advertising is bought at the DMA level and hence cannot be targeted
to a smaller geography within a DMA.
3.2.2 Baseline specication
The baseline specication includes various xed eects and controls:
            log(Qst ) =  T log(1 + Ad(s)t ) + T log(pst ) + s + S (t) + T (t) +  T xst +   st .   (4)
 10
      https://digiday.com/marketing/upfrontses-wtf-upfronts/


                                                       9
s   is a store xed eect that subsumes persistent regional dierences in demand,                    S (t)   is a week-

of-year xed eect that captures seasonal eects, and              T (t)   captures aggregate changes or trends

in demand. In our preferred specication,            T (t)   is a month xed eect corresponding to week             t,
but we also estimate specications with quarter or week xed eects and a specication where

T (t)    represents a linear time trend.      xst   is a vector of other controls at the store-week level,

including feature and display advertising in some of the model specications.
                                                                                            11   Also, recall that

Ad(s)t   and   pst   are vectors that include the advertising stocks and prices of competing brands, s,

which may be correlated with the focal brand's advertising activity.

       Advertisers are likely to choose dierent levels of advertising across markets and seasons

based on systematic, predictable dierences in demand. The baseline specication incorporates

store and season xed eects to adjust for the corresponding confounds.                    Advertisers may also

predict more idiosyncratic uctuations or trends in demand at the aggregate, national level. We

adjust for the resulting confounds using the time xed eects or trend. Furthermore, advertising

campaigns may be coordinated with national or local feature and display advertising, and thus

we include data on displays and features in some of the model specications.

       The baseline specication allows for targeting of national demand uctuations, but assumes

that advertisers do not engage in more sophisticated targeting of transient demand shocks at the

local market level.       Under these assumptions, the residual variation in advertising, conditional

on all xed eects and controls, can plausibly be considered quasi-random, given the institutions

of the ad-buying process discussed above in Section 3.2.1 that result in variation in the exact

timing of advertising within and variation in the amount of advertising across local markets due

to costs and slot availability.
                                   12



3.2.3 Border strategy
The baseline specication assumes that advertisers can target aggregate, national demand uctu-

ations. However, advertisers may also target demand shocks that occur at the local market level

using ad buys in the scatter market and the bundled remnant market.                    If such micro-targeting

occurs and is systematically related to local, transient demand shocks, the time xed eects

or trends in the baseline specication will not be sucient to yield a causal advertising eect.

To address this challenge, we use the border strategy, a research design introduced by Shapiro

(2018).
          13

       The border strategy focuses on consumers who live on dierent sides and close to DMA

  11
     Feature and display advertising is only recorded for 17% of all stores in the data. Hence, our preferred
specications omit these variables. See (https://advertising-eects.chicagobooth.edu/) for the results that include
feature and display advertising.
  12
     The baseline specication results presented in this paper use monthly time xed eects, even though the data
are at the weekly level. We also estimated specications using week and quarter xed eects. Utilizing week xed
eects considerably decreases the statistical power for many brands, due to the large share of national advertising,
and it also makes the week-of-year dummies redundant.
  13
     Shapiro (2018) studies the eect of television advertising on antidepressant demand. The border strategy has
also been used in Tuchman (2019) to study e-cigarette advertising, as well as in Spenkuch and Toniatti (2018)
and Wang et al. (2018) to study political advertising.

                                                        10
borders. The central assumption is that these consumers are similar, in the sense that consumers
on dierent sides of a DMA border exhibit identical trends or transient uctuations in their
purchasing behavior. Essentially, this is an assumption of parallel trends.14 However, while the
consumers close to the DMA border are assumed to exhibit identical trends in their purchasing
behavior, the overall transient demand uctuations in each of the two bordering DMAs may be
dierent.
    The border strategy utilizes the institutional constraint that DMAs are the smallest geo-
graphic unit at which ad-buys can be made. Hence, advertising that is targeted to local, DMA-
specic demand shocks will be based on the overall, population-weighted average demand shocks
at the DMA level. Consequently, if the average demand shocks across two bordering DMAs dif-
fer, then advertising across the DMAs will dier, too. In particular, the level of advertising at
the border will generally be dierent from the optimal, equilibrium level of advertising that rms
would set if they could micro-target more locally within a DMA.
    The institutional constraint on ad-buying and the assumption of identical trends at the
DMA border imply that temporal dierences in advertising across the bordering DMAs are
not confounded with temporal dierences in border-specic demand shocks. In particular, if
we generalize the baseline strategy and allow for border-specic time xed eects, the residual
variation in advertising, conditional on all xed eects and controls, will be quasi-random.
    Additional identifying variation in advertising is provided by the institutions of the ad-buying
process that lead to variation in the incidence and timing of advertising across local markets,
as discussed in Section 3.2.1. The resulting quasi-random variation in advertising provides ro-
bustness, in particular in the extreme case where the average demand shocks across two DMAs
were identical in every period, resulting in identical optimal advertising levels on each side of the
DMA border. In this extreme case, absent the variation that is due to the ad-buying process
institutions, the residual variation in advertising at the border would be zero.
    The border strategy also requires the stable unit treatment value assumption (SUTVA) that
consumers who are exposed to advertising do not cross the border and purchase in the neighboring
DMA.15 If this assumption is violated, the advertising eect estimate will be biased towards zero.
This assumption has empirical support based on Tuchman (2019), who analyzes e-cigarette
purchases made by Nielsen Homescan panelists and only nds a 3% incidence of cross-DMA
transactions.
    The implementation of the border strategy has two components. First, we restrict our sample
to the set of stores that are located in counties that share a border with a county located in a
dierent DMA. In total, there are 183 borders between the 123 DMAs in the contiguous United
States where we observe each of the major television networks in the data. Figure 1 shows the
location of the borders and border counties on the U.S. map. Second, we adapt the baseline
  14
      Shapiro (2018) and Tuchman (2019) discuss the parallel trends assumption in the border strategy in detail
and provide evidence that the assumption is likely to hold in their empirical applications.
   15
      This assumption also needs to hold in the baseline specication, although it is less relevant when the sample
is not restricted to stores close to the border.


                                                       11
                                                                       DMA population percentile

                                                                           0.75

                                                                           0.50

                                                                           0.25

                                                                           0.00




                                                              B(s,t)


log(Qst ) =  T log(1 + Ad(s)t ) + T log(pst ) + s + S (t) + B(s,t) +  T xst +            st .




                                                                                        s
                                                                                    S (t)
strategy provides robustness against the possibility that there is local targeting of DMA-level
demand shocks. The variation in advertising due to the institutional ad-buying process provides
robustness against the possibility that there is no cross-border variation in advertising that is
driven by demand targeting.
    If advertising eects are geographically homogeneous, a comparison of the results of the
baseline and border approaches is informative as to the prevalence of local targeting of DMA-
level demand shocks.        In particular, if advertisers target local transient demand shocks, the
baseline strategy will be biased.
    If the baseline strategy is assumed to be valid, the comparison of the two specications is
instructive about potential geographic heterogeneity in advertising eects.17 Any dierences
between estimates in the baseline and border strategies can then be interpreted as dierences in
advertising eectiveness in the country as a whole and in the DMA border regions, in particular.


3.2.5 Standard error calculations
When estimating the regression models, standard errors are clustered to account for correlation in
the error terms. The clustering varies by specication as dierent specications induce dierent
forms of residual variation in advertising, which induces dierent correlation structures across
the error terms. In the baseline specication, where the monthly time xed eects correspond
to a dierent time interval than the weekly data, we two-way cluster the standard errors by
DMA and week. This accounts for (1) the serial correlation in error terms that can arise when
analyzing panel data with repeated observations over time and (2) the correlation in error terms
induced by correlation in the advertising treatment across markets. In particular, since time
xed eects are at the month level, there may be correlation within month and between weeks
induced by the fact that every market receives the same amount of national advertising. In the
border strategy specication, we two-way cluster standard errors by border-side and by week.


3.2.6 Statistical power
Using only observations from the border counties signicantly decreases the sample size. How-
ever, the net eect on statistical power is ambiguous. To see this, note that the border strategy
aects statistical power in three ways. First, each border-specic time xed eect is an addi-
tional control variable. This reduces residual variance in the dependent variable, which, all else
equal, increases statistical power.18 However, the additional xed eects also reduce the residual
variance in the advertising stock, which all else equal, reduces statistical power. Finally, focusing
on the border counties reduces the sample size, which reduces statistical power. Hence, the net
   17
      As a large majority of advertising is purchased in advance and micro targeting based on the residual inventory
is costly, we believe the assumptions underlying the baseline strategy are reasonable.
   18
      For example, demand for lotion during winter may increase more in the Northeast than in the South. The
border-specic time xed eects are able to explain these dierential trends, while common time xed eects
cannot.


                                                        13
eect of the border strategy on statistical power depends on the relative magnitudes of these
three factors.


3.3      Other identication strategies
Other papers have proposed identication strategies that use instrumental variables to estimate
a causal eect of advertising on sales. For example, Gordon and Hartmann (2013) uses market-
level advertising prices as instruments, and Sinkinson and Starc (2019) proposes to use the
timing of political campaigns as an exogenous shifter of brand advertising. Thomas (2020) and
Li et al. (2019) propose instrumental variables approaches that take advantage of the fact that
advertising decisions are made at a more aggregate level than the measurement of demand in
the data. Finally, Shashoua et al. (2018) analyzes household panel data and proposes using a
model with correlated random coecients and lagged purchase and advertising observations as
instruments to estimate causal advertising eects.
       We chose not to implement these strategies because instruments are case-specic and, hence,
impractical for a study that estimates advertising eects for 288 brands. Furthermore, whether
the instruments are suciently strong to avoid weak instruments bias will also vary across ap-
plications.19


4 Data
To estimate the eect of advertising on sales we use data on purchase volumes, advertising
intensities, and other components of marketing, in particular prices. We construct a data set by
merging market (DMA) level TV advertising data with retail sales and price data at the brand
level. The data and our matching procedure are described in more detail below. Our study is the
rst to provide generalizable and comprehensive results on the eectiveness of TV advertising
using the wealth of information in the Nielsen Ad Intel and RMS scanner data. Merging these two
large data sets is dicult. The brand identiers in the Ad Intel data do not match up perfectly
with the brand descriptions in the RMS data. Often the advertised brand name is either more
or less specic than the brand name associated with a UPC code. Another complication is that
the advertising data come from a number of measurement devices at the local and national level
that must be reconciled in order to produce a coherent television timeline. Appendix B shows,
in detail, how to re-create our data construction process.


4.1      RMS retail scanner data
The Nielsen RMS (Retail Measurement Services) data include weekly store-level information
on prices and quantities sold at the UPC level. The RMS data include information for about
40,000 stores, including grocery stores, drug stores, mass merchandisers, and convenience stores.
  19
    See, for example, Moshary et al. (2020), which shows that the strength of the rst stage varies tremendously
across product categories when using political advertising as an instrument for product advertising.


                                                      14
Despite covering a large number of stores and retailers, the data available for research from the
Kilts Center for Marketing constitute only a non-random subset of all retail chains in the U.S.
Typically, the data cover more than 50% of all market-level spending in grocery and drug stores
and one-third of all spending at mass merchandisers.20
    The sample used in our analysis includes data from 2010 to 2014. We focus our analysis on
the top 500 brands in terms of dollar sales. These brands account for 45.3% of the total observed
RMS revenue, even though there are more than 300,000 brands in the data.21 We dene a brand
as all forms of the same consumable end product, as indicated by the brand code or brand name in
the RMS data. That is, Coca-Cola Classic includes any UPC that was composed entirely of Coca-
Cola Classic, including twelve ounce cans, two-liter bottles, or otherwise. Because advertising is
generally at the brand level, rather than the UPC level, we aggregate across UPCs, calculating
total volume sold in equivalent units and average price per equivalent unit. After dropping some
smaller stores and stores that are located in counties that switch DMAs over time, we are left
with 12,671 stores in the nal estimation sample.
    The price of a UPC is only recorded in weeks when at least one unit of the UPC was sold. To
impute these prices that are missing from the data, we follow the approach detailed in Hitsch et al.
(2019). This approach uses an algorithm to infer the base price, i.e., regular, non-promoted shelf
price of a product, and assumes that weeks with zero sales occur in the absence of a promotion,
such that the unobserved price corresponds to the base price.
4.2    Homescan household panel data
The policy experiments and ROI calculations in Section 7 make use of the Nielsen Homescan
household panel data as an additional source of purchase information. The Homescan data
capture household-level transactions, including purchase quantities and prices paid. Data for
more than 60,000 households are available each year. Nielsen provides weights called projection
factors for each household. Using these weights, transactions can be aggregated across all
households to be representative at the national level, i.e., estimate a product's total purchase
volume for in-home use. We utilize these estimates of total sales for the policy experiments
and ROI calculations because the RMS data do not capture all transactions and would hence
underestimate the incremental value of advertising.
4.3    Advertising data
Product-level television advertising data for 20102014 come from the Nielsen Ad Intel database.
The advertising information is recorded at the occurrence level, where an occurrence is the
placement of an ad for a specic brand on a given channel, in a specic market, at a given day
and time. Four dierent TV media types are covered in the data: Cable, Network, Syndicated,
  20
     More details are provided in the Retail Scanner Data set Manual that is available from the Kilts Center for
Marketing.
  21
     See Hitsch et al. (2019) for a detailed analysis of the relationship between cumulative revenue and UPC rank.

                                                       15
and Spot. Occurrences for each of these dierent media types can be matched with viewership
data, which then yields an estimate of the number of impressions, or eyeballs, that viewed each
ad. In the top 25 DMAs, impressions are measured by set-top box recording devices. For all other
DMAs, impressions are measured using diaries lled out by Nielsen households. These diary data
are only recorded in the four sweeps months, February, May, July, and November. We impute
the impressions for all other months using a weighted average of the recorded impressions in the
two closest sweeps months.
   For Cable ads, which are aired nationally, viewership data are available only at the national
level. Spot ads are bought locally, and viewership measures are recorded locally, separately for
each DMA. Network and Syndicated ads are recorded in national occurrence les that can be
matched with local measures of viewership in each DMA. Thus, in our data, variation in a brand's
aggregate ad viewership across markets is due to both variation in occurrences across markets
(more Spot ads were aired in market A than in market B) and variation in impressions (eyeballs)
across markets (a Network or Syndicated ad aired in both markets A and B, but more people
saw the ad in market A than in market B).
   Using the occurrence and impressions data, we calculate gross rating points (GRPs), a widely
used measure of advertising exposure or intensity in the industry. We rst calculate the GRP for
a specic ad occurrence, dened as the number of impressions for the ad as a percentage of all
TV-viewing households in a DMA (measured on a scale from 0 to 100). To obtain the aggregate,
weekly GRPs in a given DMA, we obtain the sum of all occurrence-level GRPs for a brand in a
given week in the DMA.

4.4   Matching advertising and retail sales data
We merge the advertising and sales data sets at the store-brand-week level. Our merging proce-
dure warrants some discussion because the brand variables in the Ad Intel and RMS data sets
are not always specied at the same level. For example, we have to decide if an advertisement for
Coca-Cola should only be joined to the sales data of regular Coca-Cola or also to Diet Coke.
We include three types of advertising variables in our models. First, we include advertising that
directly corresponds to the RMS product in question. Second, we create a variable that captures
advertising for aliated brands, including potential substitutes, that may aect the focal RMS
product. Third, we include advertising for the top competitor. For example, for the Diet Coke
brand, own advertising includes ads for Diet Coke, whereas aliated advertising includes adver-
tising for Coca-Cola soft drinks, Coke Zero, Coca-Cola Classic, and Cherry Coke. Furthermore,
we include advertising for Diet Pepsi, the top competitor of Diet Coke.
   We separately estimate the eect of own brand and aliated brand advertising because own
brand advertising is likely to have a positive eect on sales, whereas the sign of the eect of
aliated brands' advertising is ambiguous. Hence, lumping own and aliated brand advertising
together might result in small and uninterpretable elasticity estimates.
   Full details of the matching approach are provided in Appendix B and the estimated aliated


                                               16
brand and competitor ad eects are reported in Appendix C.


5 Data description
5.1    Brand-level summary statistics
Using the process described in Section 4.4 and Appendix B, we were able to match 288 of the top
500 brands in the RMS data to TV advertising records in the Ad Intel database. These products
are typically established products, and hence the results from our empirical analysis need not
apply to new products.22
    Table 1 provides brand-level summary statistics. Total yearly revenue is larger when based
on the spending records in the Homescan data compared to the measured revenue in the RMS
retail sales data. This is expected, because the RMS data only contain information on a subset
of all retail chains, and furthermore, the reported RMS revenue is calculated using the subset of
stores used in our estimation sample. The Homescan revenue, on the other hand, is predicted
using the transaction records and household projection factors supplied in the Nielsen data, and
is thus designed to be representative of total national spending.
    The data reveal a large degree of heterogeneity in advertising spending. Total yearly TV
advertising spending for the median brand is 10.5 million dollars, with a 90% range of 2.2 to 61.3
million dollars. Table 1 and Figure 2 also document the variation across brands in average weekly
GRPs at the DMA level, calculated as a    ¯j = M1·T M m=1    t=1 ajmt , where M is the number of
                                                             T

DMAs and T the number of weeks. The median of this measure of advertising activity is 35.5,
with a 90% range from 4.7 to 184.8. A similar degree of cross-brand heterogeneity is evident in
the advertising/sales ratio, with a median of 2.8 and a 90% range from 0.5 to 17.8.23

5.2    Temporal and cross-sectional variation at the brand level
The degree of temporal and cross-sectional variation in brand-level advertising is of particular
relevance for the goal of estimating advertising eects on demand. The corresponding empirical
analysis relies on variation in advertising levels and ad stocks both across markets and over
time. We document the extent of this variation in the data. First, separately for each brand,
  22
     The results from the split-cable experiments in Lodish et al. (1995) indicate that new-product advertising is
typically much more eective than advertising for established products.
  23
     The Dorfman-Steiner theorem says that an optimizing rm should set its advertising-to-sales ratio equal
to the product of its gross-margin percentage times its advertising elasticity of demand (Dorfman and Steiner
(1954)). Thus, we can use the observed advertising-to-sales ratios and average industry margins to calibrate
expected elasticities assuming rms are advertising optimally. Because brand-specic gross-margins cannot be
inferred from our data, we utilize the following median gross margin percentages that are sourced from a technical
report prepared by the Grocery Manufacturers Association, the Food Products Association, and Pricewaterhouse-
Coopers: 34% for food companies, 44% for beverage companies, and 50% for companies selling household goods
and personal care products (). Plugging in the median advertising-to-sales ratio and the median gross margin
percentage for dierent classes of CPG products, if rms are advertising optimally, then the advertising elasticity
should be about A = 2.8%/34% = 0.08 for food companies, A = 2.8%/44% = 0.06 for beverage companies, and
A = 2.8%/50% = 0.06 for companies selling household goods and personal care products. These calculations
provide a benchmark against which we compare our estimates in Section 6.

                                                       17
                                        Table 1: Brand Level Summary Statistics
                         Median Mean                                 Percentiles
                                                         1% 5% 10% 25% 75% 90% 95% 99%
 RMS revenue                   113.1          170.8      28.8 51.2 61 75.4 190 332.4 522.4 698.9
 Homescan revenue               341           546.3      74.3 119.7 150.8 220 647.7 1046.3 1544.6 3190.4
 Advertising spending           10.5           18.6       0.9 2.2    3.6  5.9 22.2 44.7     61.3 106.7
 Mean weekly GRPs               35.5           59.4       2.2 4.7    8.4  19 71.8 149.7 184.8 333.8
 Adv./sales ratio (%)            2.8           5.3        0.2 0.5    0.8  1.4  5.6   12.4   17.8   33.6
 % of Adv. Spending
     Cable                         50.9       52.8       10         20.9      29.9     38.4    65.6          81    88.2   99.8
     Network                       34.5       34.1       0.9         4.2      8.6      19.6    47.5         56.6   66.6   82.4
     Spot                          3.7        8.7        0.1        0.4       0.7      1.5     8.6          20.9   37.8   82.5
     Syndicated                    5.3        6.6         0           0        0       1.6     9.8          16.6   19.1   22.9

Note: The sample includes 288 brands. Revenue and advertising spending are expressed in millions of dollars.
The advertising/sales ratio is calculated using Homescan revenue.




                                   20


                                              35.519



                                   15
                         Percent




                                   10




                                    5




                                    0

                                          0   50       100       150   200     250      300   350     400
                                                             Average GRP at brand-level


                  Figure 2: Variation in Advertising Intensity Across Brands
Note: Mean advertising is calculated as the average of GRPs across all DMAs and weeks, separately for
each brand.

                                                                     18
          75                                                                75

                        0.409                                                      0.03




          50                                                                50
Percent




                                                                  Percent
          25                                                                25




           0                                                                 0
               0.0      0.5         1.0           1.5     2.0                    0.0        0.5           1.0          1.5       2.0
                        Residual advertising variation                                    Residual advertising stock variation


                                      Figure 3: Residual Variation in Advertising
Note: The residual variation measures are based on the residuals from a regression of advertising or
advertising stock ( = 0.9) on DMA, time (month), and seasonal (week-of-year) xed eects, own and
competitor prices, and competitor advertising. The residual variation is the ratio of the standard devia-
tion of these residuals relative to the mean advertising or advertising stock. The measure is calculated
separately for each brand, and these graphs show the distribution across brands.

we regress weekly DMA-level advertising, measured in GRPs, on a set of DMA, week-of-year
(season), and month xed eects. Additional covariates included in this regression are own
and competitor prices, and competitor advertising. We then calculate the ratio of the residual
standard deviation from this regression relative to average DMA/week advertising. This measure
is similar to a coecient of variation and serves as a parsimonious way of quantifying the degree
of variation in advertising that is not explained by the xed eects and the other covariates.
     Figure 3 presents a histogram of the measure across brands. Figure 3 also shows an analogous
measure of the residual variation in advertising stock relative to the average DMA/week advertis-
ing stock.24 The advertising stock is calculated assuming a carryover parameter of  = 0.9. The
coecient of variation of advertising ows is 0.41 for the median brand. I.e., for the median
brand, the standard deviation of the residuals is 41% of average weekly advertising. Hence, we
observe relatively large deviations from average advertising levels for most brands. For adver-
tising stocks, on the other hand, the relative residual variation is substantially smaller. For the
median brand, the coecient of variation in advertising stocks is 0.03. This variation is smaller
than the corresponding variation in advertising levels because the advertising stock is a weighted
average of the advertising ows, and thus smooths out the variability in advertising levels. Due
to the small residual variation in advertising stocks it may be dicult to accurately measure the
advertising stock eect on demand.
    24
          In the regression used to obtain the residuals, advertising ows are replaced with advertising stocks.




                                                             19
                                         15


                                                        10.818

                                         12




                                          9


                               Percent

                                          6




                                          3




                                          0

                                                0           20          40           60          80             100
                                                           Mean absolute GRP difference across border


                            Figure 4: Weekly Absolute GRP Dierence Across Borders
Note: The graph shows the distribution of brand-level mean absolute GRP dierences across borders.

    The border strategy discussed in Section 3.2 utilizes cross-border variation in advertising
in a given period and thus imposes additional requirements on the advertising data generating
process. In particular, the regressions now include border/time xed eects, and there needs to
be a sucient degree of residual variation in the ad ows and ad stocks, net of these xed eects
and other covariates, to estimate the eect of advertising on demand. We provide two analyses
to examine if such variation is present in the data. First, in Figure 4, we show the distribution of
brand-level average absolute dierences in GRPs across borders, where the average is taken over
all border-week observations in the data.25 The average absolute dierence is about 14 GRPs,
which appears reasonably large relative to the average weekly GRPs documented in Table 1.
Second, in Figure 5, we report results on the net residual variation in advertising ows and
advertising stocks corresponding to the border strategy. These results are analogous to the
results in Figure 3, but the residuals are obtained from regressions where the time xed eects
are replaced by border-month xed eects. Notably, the net variation in residuals from the
border-strategy model is similar to the net variation in residuals from the more parsimonious
baseline model in Figure 3.
  25           1      B      T
       aj =   B ·T    b=1    t=1         |ajd1 t - ajd2 t |,   where   d1 = d1 (b)   and   d2 = d2 (b)   are indices for the two DMAs on each

side of border   b.




                                                                             20
          75                                                                       75

                           0.4                                                            0.027




          50                                                                       50
Percent




                                                                         Percent
          25                                                                       25




           0                                                                        0
               0.0          0.5         1.0           1.5         2.0                   0.0         0.5         1.0          1.5           2.0
                     Residual across-border advertising variation                         Residual across-border advertising stock variation


                              Figure 5: Residual Variation in Advertising: Border Strategy
Note: The residual variation measures are based on the residuals from a regression of advertising or
advertising stock ( = 0.9) on border-month and seasonal (week-of-year) xed eects, own and competitor
prices, and competitor advertising. The residual variation is the ratio of the standard deviation of these
residuals relative to mean advertising or advertising stock. The measure is calculated separately for each
brand, and these graphs show the distribution across brands.

6 Results
We rst present the results of the two main specications discussed in Section 3.2, the baseline
specication (model (4)) and the border strategy (model (5)). Recall that both models include
store and week-of-year (season) xed eects, but the baseline model includes common month xed
eects, while the border strategy includes border-specic month xed eects. The estimation
results are initially obtained assuming a carryover parameter  = 0.9, which is similar to other
specications in the literature.26
    In Section 6.2, we examine the robustness of the results to the exact specication and iden-
tication strategy, and show when the estimates stabilize, in the sense that the advertising
eect estimates do not change signicantly when we include additional covariates in the model.
Specically, we start with a naive specication, which contains no xed eects, and we show how
the distribution of the estimated advertising eects changes as we incrementally add controls for
dierent potential confounders.27 We also discuss the robustness of the results to calibrating and
estimating the carryover parameter, .
    The results discussed in this section are only a subset of all the models we have estimated.
Please see https://advertising-eects.chicagobooth.edu/ to explore the sensitivity of the results
 26
    For example, Dubé et al. (2005) estimate an advertising decay parameter of  = 0.9 using data on weekly ad
GRPs for brands in the frozen entree category.
 27
    The naive model includes own price, competitor price, and advertising as covariates.

                                                                    21
to alternative modeling choices.


6.1      Main results
We present the estimation results for the own-advertising stock elasticities, i.e., the coecients
corresponding to the focal brand in the vector  .28 As we discussed in Section 3.1, the advertising
stock elasticities can be interpreted as a form of long-run advertising elasticity. For the sake
of brevity, from now on we will refer to the own-advertising stock elasticities as advertising
elasticities or advertising eects.
       Summary statistics for the naive, baseline, and border strategy model estimates are provided
in Table 2, and the full distributions are displayed in Figure 6. The left panel in Figure 6 shows
the histogram of advertising elasticities from the baseline specication with store, month and
week-of-year (season) xed eects. The right panel displays the results when we employ the
border strategy.
       Based on the naive model with no xed eects, the median long-run advertising elasticity
across brands is 0.0299, and the mean is 0.0415. 19.4% of estimates are negative and statistically
signicant, and 38.9% are not statistically dierent from zero. Using the baseline specication,
which adjusts for potential confounders using a rich set of xed eects, the median shrinks
considerably to 0.0140, and the mean shrinks to 0.0233. Negative and signicant results are
reduced to 7.3% of the estimates, and 66.3% of the estimates are not statistically distinguishable
from zero. The results using the border strategy are similar to the results from the baseline
specication.      The median of the estimates is 0.0136, and the mean is 0.0258.                 Furthermore,
7.3% of the estimates are negative and statistically signicant, and 68.4% of the estimates are
not statistically distinguishable from zero. Figure 6 shows that the distributions of advertising
elasticities from the baseline specication and border strategy are nearly identical.


Discussion
We draw a few key take-aways from the analysis in this section. First, the mean of the estimated
advertising elasticities is small. In particular, it is substantially smaller than the mean long-run
elasticity of 0.24 reported in Sethuraman et al. (2011)'s meta-analysis of advertising eects and
roughly half the size of the most comparable prior study, Lodish et al. (1995), which used data
from the 1980s.29 Second, the estimated advertising eects are not statistically dierent from
zero for two-thirds of the brands in our sample. In the following section, we explore whether
the relatively small eect magnitudes and high frequency of null eects are driven by a lack of
statistical power, measurement error or specic modeling decisions.
  28
    Appendix C discusses the estimated aliated brand and cross-advertising elasticities.
  29
    Furthermore, comparing our results to the predictions from the Dorman-Steiner formula reported in footnote
23, the mean estimated elasticity is also roughly half the size of the elasticities we would expect to see if rms
were advertising optimally.



                                                       22
                               Table 2: Own-Advertising Stock Elasticity Estimates
                                    Median Mean          % p  0.05 % p < 0.05                      Percentiles
                                                                        >0      0        10%       25% 75% 90%
 Main Results
      Naive                         0.0299     0.0415       38.89       41.67   19.44   -0.0713   -0.0178   0.0833    0.1827
      + Store FE                    0.0218     0.0467       33.68       50.69   15.62   -0.0349   -0.0051   0.0682    0.1494
      + Season FE                   0.0152     0.0251       28.82       51.04   20.14   -0.0454   -0.0107   0.0534    0.1051
      + Time trend                  0.0110     0.0171       41.67       42.36   15.97   -0.0360   -0.0053   0.0381    0.0772
      Baseline specication          0.0140     0.0233       66.32       26.39    7.29   -0.0406   -0.0082   0.0426    0.0919
      Border strategy               0.0136     0.0258       68.40       24.31    7.29   -0.0321   -0.0055   0.0472    0.1015
 Robustness
      Prices excluded               0.0158     0.0275       73.26       21.53   5.21    -0.0498   -0.0133   0.0597    0.1396
      + Own price                   0.0128     0.0243       68.40       25.35   6.25    -0.0341   -0.0070   0.0418    0.0992
      + Top 1 competitors           0.0124     0.0253       69.10       24.31   6.60    -0.0312   -0.0078   0.0411    0.0993
      + Up to top 2 competitors     0.0134     0.0254       68.75       24.31   6.94    -0.0301   -0.0067   0.0415    0.0996
      Feature & display included    0.0107     0.0215       73.96       19.79   6.25    -0.0335   -0.0069   0.0369    0.0943
      50% power to detect 0.05      0.0073     0.0083       69.43       21.02   9.55    -0.0215   -0.0047   0.0214    0.0367
      Lasso                         0.0181     0.0313         -           -       -     -0.0550   -0.0159   0.0700    0.1253
Note: Descriptive statistics of estimated advertising elasticities reported for 288 brands. The naive model includes own and
competitor advertising stocks and prices but no additional controls. The baseline model includes store, week-of-year (season),
and month xed eects. The border strategy restricts the sample to stores in border counties and includes store, week-of-year
(season), and border-month xed eects. All robustness results are obtained using the border strategy. Standard errors are
two-way clustered at the DMA and week level in the naive and baseline specications, and two-way clustered at the border-
side and week level in the border strategy.




                                                             23
          30                                                                          30

                                           0.014                                                                     0.0136




          20                                                                          20
Percent




                                                                            Percent
          10                                                                          10




           0                                                                           0
               -0.3   -0.2     -0.1    0.0     0.1     0.2     0.3   0.4                   -0.3   -0.2 -0.1      0.0       0.1    0.2    0.3   0.4
                             Advertising Elasticity (Baseline)                                     Advertising Elasticitiy (Border Strategy)


                       Figure 6: Main Estimation Results: Own-Advertising Stock Elasticities
Note: The estimates are obtained assuming a carryover parameter  = 0.9. Bars highlighted in blue
indicate statistically signicant estimates. The vertical red line denotes the median of the distribution.

6.2            Robustness
6.2.1 Incremental adjustment for confounders
In this section, starting with the naive specication, we incrementally add controls (xed eects)
to the model. The purpose of this analysis is to evaluate whether any of our models is suciently
rich, such that the results are stable and robust to the inclusion of additional controls. We assess
stability in terms of the overall distribution and in terms of the individual brand-level estimates.
    The results are presented in Figures 7 and 8, and Table 2 contains additional details. The left
column in the gures displays histograms of the estimated elasticities for each specication. To
the right of each histogram is a scatter plot, with each point representing a brand. In each row,
the scatter plot shows the estimated elasticities for the specication shown in the histogram on
the y-axis, and the estimates from the specication in the row above on the x-axis. The forty-
ve-degree line makes it easy to compare the elasticity estimates between two adjacent model
specications. Each of the specications is estimated using the assumed advertising carryover
factor of  = 0.9.
    We draw several lessons from this analysis. First, the distribution of estimated advertising
elasticities stabilizes once market and week-of-year xed eects are included in the model. Al-
lowing for a parametric or exible time trend has little eect on the median of the distribution,
although the distributions become tighter. This evidence is consistent with rms adjusting their
advertising spending and targeting predictable demand dierences at the market- and season-
level. On the other hand, there is little evidence that rms are targeting their advertising to


                                                                       24
more specic temporal demand shocks, as additional xed eects do not shift the distribution.
    Second, the baseline specication and border strategy yield very similar estimates of not only
the distributions but also the brand-level advertising elasticities. These results do not indicate
that rms engage in micro-targeting of advertising to idiosyncratic, local demand shocks. The
results also alleviate any concerns that consumers who live at the DMA borders dier from the
overall population in their response to advertising.
    The analysis in this section indicates that both the baseline specication and border strategy
advertising elasticity estimates are robust. The evidence does not point to remaining confounding
that either of these strategies cannot capture. Hence, subject to the estimated model being an
adequate approximation of reality, the estimated advertising eects have a causal interpretation.
6.2.2 Robustness to other modeling choices
We also explore the robustness of the estimates along other dimensions and nd that the results
are robust to the inclusion or exclusion of various covariates, the treatment of the carryover
parameter, , and functional form considerations. For the sake of brevity, we present the results
only for the border strategy. The full set of results, including results for the baseline specication,
is available at https://advertising-eects.chicagobooth.edu/. See the bottom panel of Table 2
for the medians, means and quantiles of the distributions depending on inclusion or exclusion of
various covariates. In all variations, the estimated distributions are very similar.
Own price     The basic model includes own prices. However, it is possible that changes in prices
are an outcome of advertising, making them bad controls. It is also possible that net of the
xed eects in the model, residual prices are correlated both with the error term and with ad
stock. We nd that the distribution of ad eects is similar if we do not control for prices. We
show in Appendix D that this should be expected, as net of the xed eects in the model, price
and advertising are uncorrelated.30
Included competitor prices       In our main specications, we include the prices of up to three
competing products that have the largest total sales revenue in the category.31 The results are
unchanged whether we include one, two or three of the largest competitors. Hence, we conclude
that the omission of additional competitor prices is unlikely to bias the results.
Feature and display advertising             Feature and in-store display advertising by retail chains is
typically funded by the brand manufacturers and may hence be coordinated with the advertising
campaigns. Our main specications do not include display and feature because these data are
only recorded for a subset of 17% of stores in the RMS data. The results are unchanged when we
include feature and display advertising. We show in Appendix D that this should be expected,
as net of the xed eects in the model, feature, display and advertising are uncorrelated.
  30
     We show this is true for temporary promotions as well as general price changes.
  31
     Categories are dened based on the Nielsen product module code.
                                                  25
          40


                                          0.0299
          30
Percent




          20




          10




           0

               -0.3   -0.2   -0.1   0.0      0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4
                                      Naive


          40                                                                                0.4


                                          0.0218
          30                                                         Store Fixed Effect     0.2
Percent




          20                                                                                0.0




          10                                                                               -0.2




           0                                                                               -0.4

               -0.3   -0.2   -0.1   0.0      0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4                                -0.4   -0.2          0.0           0.2   0.4
                                Store Fixed Effect                                                                    Naive


          40                                                                                0.4


                                          0.0152
          30                                                                                0.2
                                                                     Store + Seasonal FE
Percent




          20                                                                                0.0




          10                                                                               -0.2




           0                                                                               -0.4

               -0.3   -0.2   -0.1   0.0      0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4                                -0.4   -0.2          0.0           0.2   0.4
                              Store + Seasonal FE                                                               Store Fixed Effect




                                                                                                            = 0. 9
          40                                                                                                   0.4




                                                                           Store + Seasonal FE + Time Trend
                                             0.011
          30                                                                                                   0.2
Percent




          20                                                                                                   0.0




          10                                                                                                  -0.2




           0                                                                                                  -0.4

               -0.3   -0.2   -0.1      0.0       0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4                                               -0.4      -0.2       0.0        0.2       0.4
                       Store + Seasonal FE + Time Trend                                                                           Store + Seasonal FE


          40                                                                                                   0.4


                                             0.014
          30                                                               Baseline                            0.2
Percent




          20                                                                                                   0.0




          10                                                                                                  -0.2




           0                                                                                                  -0.4

               -0.3   -0.2   -0.1      0.0       0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4                                               -0.4      -0.2       0.0        0.2       0.4
                                       Baseline                                                                             Store + Seasonal FE + Time Trend


          40                                                                                                   0.4


                                             0.0136
          30                                                                                                   0.2
                                                                         Border-Strategy
Percent




          20                                                                                                   0.0




          10                                                                                                  -0.2




           0                                                                                                  -0.4

               -0.3   -0.2   -0.1      0.0       0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4                                               -0.4      -0.2       0.0        0.2       0.4
                                    Border-Strategy                                                                                     Baseline




                                                                                                        = 0. 9
Statistical power         157 of the 288 brands have at least 50% ex ante power to detect an adver-
tising elasticity of 0.05 at the 5% level.32 Within this set, the median advertising elasticity is
0.0073, and the mean is 0.0083. 69.4% of the elasticities are not statistically signicant. Hence,
the large incidence of estimates that are not statistically signicant in the full sample of brands
is not simply due to noise. The distribution of advertising eects in the smaller set of 157 brands
is compressedall estimates are less than 0.1 in absolute value. The 90th percentile of the dis-
tribution is 0.0367, compared to 0.1015 in the full sample. Hence, the large estimates in the full
sample seem to indicate a signicant degree of noise rather than a truly large advertising eect.

Calibration of carryover parameter                    Table 3 presents the estimation results for various
values of the carry-over parameter,  = 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 0.9, 0.95, 1. The mean and median
of the estimated coecients change when we change the assumed  . However, the percentage
of statistically insignicant coecients, the percentage of positive and statistically signicant
coecients, and the percentage of negative coecients is robust to any of the assumed  s.

Estimation of carryover parameter                    In our main specication we assume the carry over
parameter,  = 0.9. Here we estimate  using a grid search, using a grid from 0 to 1 in increments
of 0.05. For each point in the grid, we calculate the advertising stock using equation (2) and
then estimate the remaining model parameters via OLS. For each brand, the estimated  is
the carryover parameter that minimizes the predicted mean squared error.33 The results are
reported in Table 3. The distribution has a similar mean and median but exhibits a larger
spread compared to the case when we set  = 0.9. This is evidenced by the fact that the
10th and 90th percentiles take on more extreme values and the percentage of both positive and
negative statistically signicant estimates is larger when we estimate, not calibrate,  .

Functional form          We allow for a exible functional relationship between each component Aj
of the advertising stock vector A and sales using a linear basis expansion. The basis includes
polynomials of Aj and log(1+ Aj ) of degree up to 10, and basis B-splines of order 4 on an interval
with 9 interior knots. This basis includes the main parametric model specication and a cubic
B-spline as special cases. To prevent over-tting, we estimate the model using a cross-validated
Lasso. For each brand we calculate a summary measure of the advertising elasticity that we can
compare to the elasticity estimates from the main parametric model specication. In particular,
we rst calculate the elasticity at each percentile between the 25th and 75th percentiles of the ad
  32
      Specically, we identify the set of brands for which the standard error of the brand's estimated ad eect is
less than or equal to 0.05/1.96 (Gelman and Hill, 2007).
   33
      Estimating  will yield more accurate advertising eects if the assumption that  = 0.9 is false or if there is
heterogeneity across brands in the degree of advertising carryover. A downside is that if the advertising elasticity is
zero ( = 0), then  is not identied. In this case, if  is not restricted, the estimates will be uniformly distributed
on (-, ). However, since we impose the constraint that 0    1, the estimated carryover parameter will
likely be at the bounds of the grid,  = 0, 1. Similarly, in cases where the advertising elasticity  is not precisely
estimated, it is likely that  is also hard to pin down and takes values on the bounds of the grid.



                                                         28
                     Table 3: Own-Advertising Stock Elasticities by Carryover, 
                             Median Mean           % p  0.05 % p < 0.05                       Percentiles
                                                                   >0      0        10%       25% 75% 90%
 Border Strategy
      Specied  0.00           0.0019     0.0029       78.47       16.67    4.86    -0.0078   -0.0022    0.0069   0.0127
                 0.25         0.0036     0.0040       75.35       19.44    5.21    -0.0103   -0.0022    0.0096   0.0153
                 0.50         0.0054     0.0059       72.57       21.88    5.56    -0.0133   -0.0040    0.0127   0.0229
                 0.75         0.0073     0.0112       68.40       23.61    7.99    -0.0169   -0.0043    0.0214   0.0414
                 0.90         0.0136     0.0258       68.40       24.31    7.29    -0.0321   -0.0055    0.0472   0.1015
                 0.95         0.0147     0.0381       67.71       23.61    8.68    -0.0560   -0.0079    0.0708   0.1519
                 1.00         0.0115     0.0358       76.04       15.97    7.99    -0.0708   -0.0085    0.0817   0.1845
      Estimated               0.0111     0.0263       48.96       38.54   12.50    -0.0364   -0.0066    0.0420   0.1324
Note: Descriptive statistics of estimated advertising elasticities reported for two model specications and 288 brands.
Elasticities derived from regressions of log quantity on log advertising GRP stock (own and competitor) and log prices
(own and competitor). The baseline model includes store, month, and week-of-year xed eects. The border strategy
i) restricts the sample to those stores that are located in a county that shares a border with a dierent DMA and ii)
includes store, border-month, and week-of-year xed eects. Regressions are estimated separately for each brand. The
unit of observation in each regression model is a store-brand-week. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the DMA
level and the week level in the naive and baseline specications. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the border-
side level and the week level in the border strategy specication.


stock and then summarize the overall advertising elasticity using the median of these values.34
    The distribution of the elasticities from the exible model and a comparison to the paramet-
ric model results are shown in Figure 9. The advertising elasticity estimates from the exible
and parametric model specications are highly correlated. The exible model makes the ex-
treme negative estimates more negative and the extreme positive estimates more positive, i.e.,
it magnies those elasticity estimates that, as we documented above, are particularly noisy.35

6.2.3 Measurement error
If there is classical measurement error in advertising net of xed eects, the advertising elasticity
estimates will be biased towards zero. We measure advertising using GRPs, which are constructed
from advertising occurrences and the corresponding television viewership, i.e., number of house-
holds who watched the program where an ad was aired. Nielsen uses an automated process
involving pattern recognition technology to measure occurrences. Correspondingly, advertising
   34
      Alternatively, we could calculate the advertising elasticity at the mean or median of the observed advertising
stock. However, this approach yields noisy results due to wiggles in the estimated advertising response function,
i.e. deviations from the overall slope that are local around the mean and median of the advertising stock that do
not   reect the slope of the overall advertising response curve.
   35
      Appendix E compares the results for two example brands. In both cases, the log(1 + A) function appears to
provide a reasonable approximation.

                                                        29
          30                                                                                                         0.4


                                              0.018




                                                                            Adstock Elasticity (Parametric Model)
                                                                                                                     0.2

          20
Percent




                                                                                                                     0.0



          10

                                                                                                                    -0.2




           0                                                                                                        -0.4

               -0.4      -0.2               0.0             0.2       0.4                                                  -0.4      -0.2               0.0            0.2        0.4
                      Adstock Elasticity (Flexible Functional Form)                                                               Adstock Elasticity (Flexible Functional Form)
            Table 4: Measurement Error Analysis: Own-Advertising Stock Elasticities
                                     Median Mean            % p  0.05 % p < 0.05                     Percentiles
                                                                          >0      0        10%       25% 75% 90%
 Border Strategy
      GRP stock                      0.0136      0.0258       68.40      24.31 7.29 -0.0321 -0.0055 0.0472 0.1015
      Occurrence stock               0.0160      0.0327       68.06      24.65 7.29 -0.0367 -0.0072 0.0516 0.1270
      1-week-lagged GRP stock        0.0111      0.0165       72.92      21.18 5.90 -0.0400 -0.0091 0.0365 0.0867
 Baseline Specication
      GRP, All markets, Time FE      0.0140      0.0233       66.32      26.39     7.29   -0.0406   -0.0082   0.0426    0.0919
      Occurrence                     0.0170      0.0315       63.89      29.51    6.60    -0.0390   -0.0079   0.0482    0.1289
      LPM markets                    0.0118      0.0224       74.65      19.79     5.56   -0.0388   -0.0090   0.0428    0.1030
      Time Trend                     0.0110      0.0171       41.67      42.36    15.97   -0.0360   -0.0053   0.0381    0.0772
Note: Descriptive statistics of estimated advertising elasticities reported for six model specications and 288 brands. Elastici-
ties derived from regressions of log quantity on log advertising stock (own and competitor) and log prices (own and competitor).


using only the 25 LPM (Local People Meter) markets. The estimates are similar compared to
the estimates using all markets.

Fixed eects and measurement error Fixed eects may exacerbate attenuation due to
classical measurement error (Griliches and Hausman 1986). In Section 6.2.1 we discussed how
the estimates change when we incrementally add xed eects to the model. The most granular
xed eects are the time xed eects and in particular the border/time xed eects in the border
strategy. The inclusion of these xed eects does not yield smaller estimates (Table 2, Figure 8).

One-week-lagged advertising stock We estimate the model using advertising stocks that
are lagged by one week. This ensures that all advertising exposures occur before a shopping trip.
To obtain elasticities that are comparable to the original estimates, we divide the coecient on
the lagged ad stock by 0.9 to account for the one-week decay. The results are similar to the
original estimates.
Based on these analyses, we conclude that the robust small magnitudes of estimated ad elasticities
are unlikely due to measurement error.

6.3    Systematic patterns in advertising elasticities
While a distribution of ad eects serves as a useful prior, many managers and researchers may
want to know if advertising elasticities are systematically predictable given data on brand or

                                                       31
                       0.4


                       0.3



Advertising Effects    0.2


                       0.1


                       0.0


                      -0.1


                      -0.2


                      -0.3

                             0       100            200   300
                                           Brands




                                      = 0.9




                                                                x
                                 y
limited in our data.




7 Economic Implications
We now discuss the implications of the reported advertising elasticities for the economic value of

advertising.   Specically, for each brand we conduct policy experiments to evaluate the change

in prots that results from a change in advertising.              We report the impact on protability as

the return on investment (ROI) that results from a modication of the brand manufacturer's

advertising policy.

    Note that we do not attempt to address by how much advertising should be reduced, and how

the corresponding advertising schedule should change. Answering this question requires solving

for the dynamically optimal advertising schedule, such as in Dubé et al. (2005), which is beyond

the scope of this paper.

    Full technical details of how we compute ROI and the data that go into those calculations

are presented in Appendix G.
                                   38



7.1    ROI results
We consider two policy experiments. First, we compute the average ROI of advertising in a given

week. This metric is meant to capture whether rms are (roughly) setting the correct advertising

quantity, on the margin. Second, we compute the overall ROI of the observed advertising invest-

ment. This analysis is meant to capture how much better or worse o rms are from advertising

versus not advertising at all. The results reported below are based on the estimated elasticities

from the border strategy with carryover parameter              = 0.9.39    Standard errors in each case are

computed using the delta method.




7.1.1 Average ROI of weekly advertising
The goal of the rst policy experiment is to estimate the average ROI of each brand's observed

level of advertising in a given week. For a given brand and week             t,   we set advertising to 0 across

all markets.      We predict the total ROI from this change according to the approach detailed in

Appendix G. We repeat this process for each week with positive advertising and then average

the ROIs across all weeks to compute the average ROI of weekly advertising. We then report the

negative, i.e.,   -1 times the predicted ROI. This reported ROI predicts the return of the observed
  38
     Note that we scale our quantities to national totals using the Nielsen Homescan data. For products where
on-site purchase and consumption are commonplace (for example at a fast food restaurant or at a sporting event),
the Homescan data will understate total quantity. Beer and soft drinks are particularly likely to be aected by
this, while other products are much less so. Separating out the 24 beer and soft drink brands does not signicantly
alter the distribution of ROI that is ultimately estimated. The results are available by request.
  39
     We also calculated the ROIs using dierent model specications and carryover parameters. As the estimates
of the advertising elasticities are quite robust to the dierent assumptions, we focus on a single specication here.



                                                        33
advertising investment relative to a counterfactual with no advertising in a given week, holding
the rest of the advertising schedule xed.40
         Figure 11 shows the distribution of the predicted ROIs. The three panels show the results
separately over a range of assumed manufacturer margin-factors, m, between 20% and 40%,
where m represents the manufacturer's dollar margin as a percentage of the retail price.41 The
estimates are shaded by whether the ROI estimate is statistically dierent from 0. While the
distributions change slightly depending on the margin, the results are broadly consistent and
show that the ROI of advertising in a typical week is negative for most of the brands. Table
5 provides further details on the results. At the margin m = 0.3, the median ROI is 87.8%,
and only 1.1% of brands have a positive and statistically signicant ROI (29% of brands include
positive ROIs in their condence interval). If we restrict the sample to the subset of brands with
sucient power to detect an eect of 0.05 at the 5% level, we nd that 1.3% of brands have
a positive and signicant ROI (24% include positive ROI values in their condence interval).
Furthermore, the large percentage of brands with negative ROIs is not exclusively due to brands
that are estimated to have a negative advertising eect. Among the brands with a positive
advertising eect, 61.8% of the brands have a negative and statistically signicant ROI, and the
median ROI for these brands is 70.3%.
         Table 5 also provides a sensitivity analysis, where we reduce the estimated advertising costs
by 20%. The reduction in ad costs has only a small impact on the results. At the margin m = 0.3,
the reduction increases the median ROI from 87.8% to 84.8%, and the incidence of negative
ROIs is reduced from 71.2% to 62.8%. Hence, measurement error in advertising costs does not
appear to have a signicant impact on the results.
         Thus far we documented that there is a large percentage of brands with negative ROIs of
advertising in an average week, even amongst brands with a positive ad elasticity estimate. In
Appendix G.3, we assess how much larger the TV advertising eects would need to be for the
observed level of weekly advertising to be protable. We nd that for the median brand, the
estimated advertising eect would have to be more than 6 times larger in order for the observed
level of weekly advertising to be protable (assuming m = 0.3).
    40
         In all ROI calculations, we hold constant observed prices, as well as advertising for aliated and competitor
brands.
    41
         Because we do not observe wholesale prices and manufacturing costs for individual brands, we need to make
assumptions on what margins the manufacturers earn. The considered range corresponds to a range of manufac-
turer gross margins between 25% and 55% and retail gross margins between 20% and 30%. To see this, note that
m   can be expressed as the product of the manufacturer margin and 1 minus the retail margin:

                                                     w - mc             p-w         w - mc
                                               m=                1-             =          .
                                                       w                 p             p
Here,      p   is the retail price,   w   is the wholesale price, and   mc   is the marginal cost of production. The range of
manufacturer gross margins that we consider aligns with industry reports of median manufacturer gross margins
of 34% for food companies, 44% for beverage companies, and 50% for companies selling household goods and
personal care products (Grocery Manufacturers Association and PricewaterhouseCoopers 2006).




                                                                  34
                                    Margin m = 0.2                                    Margin m = 0.3                                               Margin m = 0.4
                 50
                                        -91.892                                              -87.837                                                   -83.783
                 40


                 30
       Percent




                 20


                 10


                  0
                      -500   -250         0          250   500 -500            -250          0              250        500 -500             -250         0            250          500
                                                                                           ROI (%)

                                                              CI includes ROI > 0        Negative + Significant    Positive + Significant




                                    Figure 11: Distribution of Average ROI of Weekly Advertising




                                                  Table 5: Average ROI of Weekly Advertising

                                              Median Mean Insig. (%)                          Signicant (%)                                   Percentiles
                                                                                             ROI > 0 ROI < 0 10%                              25% 75% 90%
 Main results
    20% Margin                                    -91.89   -81.98          17.19                 0.35             82.46         -122.78      -102.88         -68.03     -28.05
    30% Margin                                    -87.84   -72.97          27.72                 1.05             71.23         -134.16      -104.32         -52.05         7.93
    40% Margin                                    -83.78   -63.97          36.49                 1.75             61.75         -145.55      -105.76         -36.06     43.91

 30% Margin
    Brands with 50% power to                      -88.37   -82.28          23.08                 1.28             75.64         -136.00      -103.96         -61.73     -5.84
    detect elasticity = 0.05
    Brands with positive ad                       -70.32   -34.28          36.65                 1.57             61.78          -95.22       -88.00         -23.40     35.77
    elasticity
    Main results with 80% of the                  -84.80   -66.22          35.44                 1.75             62.81         -142.71      -105.40         -40.06     34.91
    estimated advertising cost


Note: The estimates are obtained using the border strategy and assuming a carryover parameter  = 0.9.



                                                                                    35
                             Margin m = 0.2                                  Margin m = 0.3                                              Margin m = 0.4
          30
                                 -71.179                                              -56.769                                                  -42.359


          20
Percent




          10




           0
               -500   -250         0          250   500 -500          -250          0              250       500 -500             -250         0          250   500
                                                                                  ROI (%)

                                                     CI includes ROI > 0        Negative + Significant   Positive + Significant




                               Figure 12: Distribution of ROI of All Observed Advertising

7.1.2 ROI of all observed advertising
In the previous section we showed that for a large percentage of brands, the return on advertising
is negative. This statement holds for advertising at the margin ; in particular, for the actual
advertising spending in a given week conditional on the rm's observed advertising in the other
weeks. We now conduct a dierent policy experiment to ask if the overall observed advertising
schedule has a positive or negative return. Thus, we calculate the ROI of the observed advertising
schedule relative to a counterfactual baseline with zero advertising in all periods. Note that
relative to the analysis of average weekly ROIs above, the results in this section rely more
heavily on the assumed functional form by which the advertising stock aects sales.
    Figure 12 shows the distribution of the ROIs of all observed advertising, again separately for
the dierent assumed manufacturer margins in the 20% to 40% range. Table 6 provides further
details and summary statistics. The results indicate larger ROIs compared to the the weekly
advertising returns. Assuming that the manufacturer's margin is 30% (m = 0.3), the median
ROI is 56.8%, and 11.2% of all brands have a positive and signicant ROI. More than two-
thirds of brands include positive ROI values in their condence interval. Furthermore, among
the brands with positive advertising elasticities, the median ROI is 3.4%, 16.8% of the brands
have a positive and signicant predicted return on advertising, and more than 80% of brands
include positive ROI values in their condence interval.
    These results show that despite the small advertising elasticities that we documented in
Section 6, the observed level of advertising could still be protable for many brands in the
sample.




                                                                           36
                                      Table 6: ROI of All Observed Advertising
                                   Median Mean Insig. (%)        Signicant (%)                    Percentiles
                                                                ROI > 0 ROI < 0 10%              25% 75% 90%
 Main results
    20% Margin                     -71.18   -84.40    50.53        7.37      42.11    -177.66   -115.35   -1.75    132.98
    30% Margin                     -56.77   -76.59    57.54       11.23      31.23    -216.49   -123.03   47.37    249.47
    40% Margin                     -42.36   -68.79    62.81       13.68      23.51    -255.32   -130.70   96.50    365.97

 30% Margin
    Brands with 50% power to       -66.74   -61.48    53.85        5.13      41.03    -187.76   -114.41    9.45    100.53
    detect elasticity = 0.05
    Brands with positive ad         -3.40   80.49     65.97       16.75      17.28     -79.38   -56.87    128.65   296.54
    elasticity
    Main results with 80% of the   -45.96   -70.74    62.11       13.33      24.56    -245.62   -128.79   84.21    336.84
    estimated advertising cost


Note: The estimates are obtained using the border strategy and assuming a carryover parameter  = 0.9.
      7.2       Discussion
      We evaluated the economic signicance of the estimated advertising stock elasticities and pro-
      vided estimates of the ROI of TV advertising for CPG brands that choose to advertise. Based
      on the estimated advertising eects reported in Section 6.1, we predict that 11% of all brands in
      our data earn a positive ROI on their total advertising spending during the sample period and
      another 57% of brands include positive ROI values in their condence interval. However, the
      vast majority of brands over-invest in advertising and could increase prots by reducing their
      advertising spending.

      8 Conclusions
      In this paper, we provide a generalizable distribution of television advertising elasticities that

      can serve as a prior distribution for rms and researchers. Providing generalizable estimates of

      TV advertising eects necessitates transparent and replicable estimation methods and an a priori

      relevant population of products. Our analysis is based on a sample of 288 large, national CPG

      brands that are selected using a clear research protocol, and our data sources (Nielsen Ad Intel

      and RMS scanner data) are widely used by marketing managers and academic researchers. To

      ensure robustness of the results, we consider a variety of specication choices and identication

      strategies. We nd that the median of the distribution of estimated long-run advertising elas-

      ticities is (depending on the exact specication and identication strategy) between 0.0089 and

      0.0144, and the corresponding mean is between 0.0102 and 0.0257. We draw two main lessons

      from these results.

          First, the estimated advertising elasticities are small.        Roughly two-thirds of all estimates



                                                           37
are not statistically dierent from zero and roughly seven percent are negative and signicant.
The estimates are also economically small, in the sense that more than 70% of all brands have a
negative ROI of advertising at the margin. The estimates are roughly half the size of the most
comparable prior study, Lodish et al. (1995), which used data from the 1980s. This dierence is
consistent with an overall decline in TV advertising eectiveness over the last three decades.
   Second, our results are robust. The results stabilize once we adjust for confounding due to
market (store) and season specic factors, and we nd there is no systematic dierence between
our baseline specication and border strategy results. While individual estimates move around
to some degree, the overall distribution is stable. Hence, although one can never completely rule
out confounding in observational studies, it appears implausible that there are any remaining
confounds in these data. Finally, our results are robust to considerations of statistical power and
functional form, and do not seem to be driven by measurement error.
   We caution that while we document over-investment in advertising at the margin, conditional
on the observed total spending, this does not imply that all advertising is wasted. For about half
of all brands, the observed advertising spending has a positive return over no ad spending.
   Our results reveal that even using one of the best and most widely used data sources, adver-
tising eects are either hard to measure or the size and direction of the eects is not always as
expected. We hope this work will encourage rms to re-evaluate their advertising strategies and
researchers and rms to invest in data and techniques that can improve the measurement of TV
advertising eectiveness. We also hope that this work provides an unbiased prior that is useful
for decision making.


References
Abraham, M. M. and L. M. Lodish (1990):              Getting the Most Out of Advertising and
  Promotion,    Harvard Business Review.
Assmus, G., J. U. Farley, and D. R. Lehmann (1984):              How Advertising Aects Sales:
  Meta-Analysis of Econometric Results,     Journal of Marketing Research, 21, 6574.
Bagwell, K. (2007):      The Economic Analysis of Advertising, in     Handbook of Industrial Or-
  ganization, ed. by M. Armstrong and R. Porter, Elsevier B.V., vol. 3, chap. 28, 17011844.
Bar, R. N. and A. M. Haviv (2019): Brand Building to Deter Entry and its Impact on Brand
  Value,   manuscript.
Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes (1995): Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium,
  Econometrica, 63, 841890.
Borkovsky, R. N., A. Goldfarb, A. M. Haviv, and S. Moorthy (2017): Measuring and
  Understanding Brand Value in a Dynamic Model of Brand Management,            Marketing Science,
  36, 471499.

                                                38
Brynjolfsson, E., A. Collis, and F. Eggers (2019):          Using massive online choice exper-
  iments to measure changes in well-being,     Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
  116, 72507255.

Clark, C. R., U. Doraszelski, and M. Draganska (2009):             The eect of advertising on
  brand awareness and perceived quality: An empirical investigation using panel data,   Quanti-
  tative Marketing and Economics, 7, 207236.
Clarke, D. G. (1976):      Econometric Measurement of the Duration of Advertising Eect on
  Sales,   Journal of Marketing Research, 13, 345357.
Deng, Y. and C. F. Mela (2018):       TV viewing and advertising targeting,    Journal of Mar-
  keting Research, 55, 99118.
Dorfman, R. and P. O. Steiner (1954): Optimal Advertising and Optimal Quality, Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 44, 826836.
Du, R. Y., M. Joo, and K. C. Wilbur (2018): Advertising and Brand Attitudes: Evidence
  from 575 Brands Over Five Years,    Working Paper.
Dubé, J.-P., G. J. Hitsch, and P. Manchanda (2005): An Empirical Model of Advertising
  Dynamics,     Quantitative Marketing and Economics, 3, 107144.
Ellison, G. and S. F. Ellison        (2011): Strategic Entry Deterrence and the Behavior of
  Pharmaceutical Incumbents Prior to Patent Expiration,      American Economic Journal: Mi-
  croeconomics, 3, 136.
Gelman, A. and J. Hill (2007): Data Analysis Using Regression and Multilevel/Hierarchical
  Models, Cambridge University Press.
Goldfarb, A. and C. Tucker (2011): Online Display Advertising: Targeting and Obrusive-
  ness,    Marketing Science, 30, 389404.
Gordon, B. and W. Hartmann (2013): Advertising Eects in Presidential Elections, Mar-
  keting Science, 32, 1935.
Griliches, Z. and J. A. Hausman (1986):          Errors in variables in panel data,   Journal of
  econometrics, 31, 93118.
Grocery Manufacturers Association and PricewaterhouseCoopers (2006): Insights
  into the Food, Beverage, and Consumer Products Industry: GMA Overview of Industry Eco-
  nomic Impact, Financial Performance, and Trends, .

Henningsen, S., R. Heuke, and M. Clement (2011):            Determinants of Advertising Eec-
  tiveness: The Development of an International Advertising Elasticity Database and a Meta-
  Analysis,    Business Research, 4, 193239.

                                                39
Hitsch, G. J., A. Hortaçsu, and X. Lin (2019): Prices and Promotions in U.S. Retail
  Markets: Evidence from Big Data, manuscript.


Hristakeva, S. and J. H. Mortimer (2020): Impacts of Legacy Discounts in the Market for
  National Television Advertising, Working Paper.


Hu, Y., L. Lodish, and A. Krieger (2007): An Analysis of Real World TV Advertising
  Tests: A 15-Year Update, Journal of Advertising Research, 47, 341353.


Johnson, G., R. Lewis, and E. Nubbemeyer (2016): The Online Display Ad Eectiveness
  Funnel & Carry-Over: A Meta-Study of Ghost Ad Experiments, Working Paper.


Kalyanam, K., J. McAteer, J. Marek, J. Hodges, and L. Lin (2018): Cross Channel
  Eects of Search Engine Advertising on Brick & Mortar Retail Sales: Meta Analysis of Large
  Scale Field Experiments on Google.com,   Quantitative Marketing and Economics, 16, 142.
Lewis, R. and D. Nguyen (2015): Display advertising's competitive spillovers to consumer
  search, Quantitative Marketing and Economics, 13, 93115.


Li, X., W. R. Hartmann, and T. Amano (2019): Identication Using Border Approaches
  and IVs, Available at SSRN 3402187.


Lodish, L. M., M. Abraham, S. Kalmenson, J. Livelsberger, B. Lubetkin,
  B. Richardson, and M. E. Stevens (1995): How T.V. Advertising Works: A Meta-
  Analysis of 389 Real World Split Cable T.V. Advertising Experiments, Journal of Marketing
  Research, 32, 125139.
Moshary, S., B. Shapiro, and J. Song (2020): How and When to Use the Political Cycle
  to Identify Advertising Eects, Marketing Science, forthcoming.


Nevo, A. (2000): Mergers with Dierentiated Products: The Case of the Ready-to-Eat Cereal
  Industry, RAND Journal of Economics, 31, 395421.


Petrin, A. (2002): Quantifying the Benets of New Products: The Case of the Minivan,
  Journal of Political Economy, 110, 705729.
Sahni, N. S. (2016): Advertising Spillovers: Evidence from Online Field Experiments and
  Implications for Returns on Advertising, Journal of Marketing Research, 53, 459478.


Sethuraman, R., G. Tellis, and R. Briesch (2011): How Well Does Advertising Work?
  Generalizations from Meta-Analysis of Brand Advertising Elasticities, Journal of Marketing
  Research, 48, 457471.
Shapiro, B. T. (2018): Positive Spillovers and Free Riding in Advertising of Prescription
  Pharmaceuticals: The Case of Antidepressants, Journal of Political Economy, 126, 381437.



                                             40
Shashoua, M., J. Fox, and S. Hoderlein (2018):         Private Labels, Famous Brands, and Het-
  erogeneous Households: Can High Ad Spending be Justied and are Households' Advertising
  Elasticities Stable Across Products?   manuscript.
Sinkinson, M. and A. Starc (2019):       Ask Your Doctor? Direct-to-Consumer Advertising of
  Pharmaceuticals,   Review of Economic Studies, 86, 836881.
Spenkuch, J. L. and D. Toniatti          (2018): Political advertising and election outcomes,
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Sutton, J. (1991): Sunk Costs and Market Structure, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Thomas, M. (2020):    Spillovers from Mass Advertising: An Identication Strategy,   Marketing
  Science (forthcoming).
Tuchman, A. E.    (2019): Advertising and Demand for Addictive Goods: The Eects of E-
  Cigarette Advertising,   Marketing Science, 38, 9941022.
Wang, Y., M. Lewis, and D. A. Schweidel             (2018): A Border Strategy Analysis of Ad
  Source and Message Tone in Senatorial Campaigns,      Marketing Science, 37, 333355.




                                               41
