                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          IMPROVING MANAGEMENT THROUGH WORKER EVALUATIONS:
                  EVIDENCE FROM AUTO MANUFACTURING

                                           Jing Cai
                                        Shing-Yi Wang

                                      Working Paper 27680
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27680


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2020




We thank Qingqing Chen, Sijia Chen, Ying Chen, Tianqi Gan, Sunny Lee, Yue Li, Sai Luo, Cung
Truong and Stephanie Wu for excellent research assistance; Santosh Anagol, Nick Bloom, David
Lam, Dean Yang, and various seminar participants for helpful comments. We thank the
University of Michigan, the Wharton Dean's Research Fund and the Wharton Katz Fund for
Research on Leadership and Emotional Intelligence for funding. This study was registered in the
American Economic Association Registry for randomized control trials under trial number
AEARCTR-0002286. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jing Cai and Shing-Yi Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Improving Management through Worker Evaluations: Evidence from Auto Manufacturing
Jing Cai and Shing-Yi Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 27680
August 2020
JEL No. D22,O1

                                           ABSTRACT

Using a randomized experiment with an automobile manufacturing firm in China, we measure the
effects of letting workers evaluate their managers on worker and firm outcomes. In the treatment
teams, workers evaluate their supervisors monthly. We find that providing feedback leads to
significant reductions in worker turnover and increases in team-level productivity. In addition,
workers report higher levels of happiness and positive mood. The evidence suggests that these
results are driven by changes in the behavior of managers and an overall better relationship
between managers and workers.


Jing Cai
Department of Agricultural & Resource Economics
University of Maryland
2122 Symons Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
cai516@umd.edu

Shing-Yi Wang
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
was@wharton.upenn.edu




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/2286
1    Introduction

There are large differences in firm productivity between developing and developed countries (Bloom

and Reenen (2007)), and prior research has demonstrated that management practices may be key

to explaining the observed productivity differentials (Bloom et al. (2013)). This may reflect that

different firms approach the fundamental principal-agent problem between managers and firms in

different ways. Theory suggests that financial incentives for managers may be key to solving the

moral hazard problem of firms and managers (e.g. Grossman and Hart (1983), Holmstrom and

Milgrom (1987)). However, randomized controlled studies have shown that interventions that do

not alter the financial incentives of managers, including providing managers with training, feedback,

or consulting, may be effective in improving managerial performance (e.g. Bruhn, Karlan, and

Schoar (2018), Schoar (2013), Kelly et al. (2014), Bloom et al. (2013)).

    Feedback is one potential cost-effective method of addressing these issues. A manufacturing

firm usually has team-level productivity metrics such as whether the team is meeting its production

targets and the quality of its output. However, workers may have information about the quality of

managerial inputs, which is hard for the firm to directly observe. For example, a team may perform

well because the workers happen to be high ability workers, despite having a bad manager. As a

result, workers' feedback on managers can be important in measuring and improving management

performance.

    We investigate the impact of eliciting workers' feedback about their managers on worker, man-

ager and firm outcomes using a field experiment in China. The experiment involved 76 production

teams with 1,250 workers in a large automobile-manufacturing firm. In the randomized experi-

ment, we allow production line workers to evaluate their managers in 50% of the teams. Workers

are asked to rate their managers in five areas, including production organization, fairness, openness

to suggestions, adaptability, and empathy. In treated teams, the worker evaluation component

accounts for 20% of the monthly evaluation score of managers. The evaluations occurred every

month for 8 consecutive months, and results are posted publicly each month along with the team's

standard performance outcomes. In control teams, the company continues to evaluate managers

based on hard performance metrics including meeting production targets.


                                                                                                   2
    Company policies where workers evaluate their managers are common. In a sample of 280

American firms, Antonioni (1996) finds about 25% of American firms in their sample do 360 degree

evaluations.1 There is an existing body of literature in psychology on upward evaluations using

randomized experiments (Atwater et al. (2000), Seifert, Yukl, and McDonald (2003), Heslin and

Latham (2004), Seifert and Yukl (2010)). However, the prior psychology literature does not have

data on hard performance metrics but only survey reports about changes in leadership.

    In our project, we study a comprehensive set of worker and manager outcomes from both ad-

ministrative and survey data. We received a rich set of administrative data from the firm, includ-

ing individual-level performance measures, team-level key performance indicators (KPI) evaluated

monthly by the firm, and worker turnover. We also collected two waves of our own survey data

where we did a baseline survey in the summer of 2016 before the intervention and a follow-up survey

in the summer of 2017 shortly after the end of the intervention. In the survey we collected infor-

mation on demographic characteristics, earnings, work satisfaction, interactions with managers,

happiness, and social networks within the firm.

    While the worker evaluations of managers occurred over 8 months, direct incentives to the

managers were linked to the evaluation scores only for the first 6 months. In treatment teams,

the firm gave the worker evaluations a weight of 20% in the calculation of the managers' monthly

performance score and reduced the weight on hard metrics from 100 to 80%. In the control team,

the firm continued to use their existing scheme based on hard metrics to determine the managers'

monthly score. The performance score is important for managers because it is the key factor

determining their monthly bonuses, annual pay raises, and the likelihood of future promotion.

In the final two months, the worker evaluations continued to happen without entering the final

performance score. This helps us to examine the importance of monetary and career incentives

versus the feedback alone in changing the behavior of managers.2 In this setting, we find evidence

that the financial incentives were not necessary to see persistent changes in outcomes.
   1
     The 360 degree evaluation includes upward evaluations where workers evaluate their managers, horizontal eval-
uations of peers, as well as the more common downward evaluations where managers give feedback on their workers.
   2
     This contributes to a number of existing studies that have examined the impact of the financial incentives to
managers (Coughlan and Schmidt (1985), Jensen and Murphy (1990), Lazear (2018), Murphy (1999), Mehran (1995),
Carpenter and Sanders (2002), Bandiera, Barankay, and Rasul (2007), Bandiera, Barankay, and Rasul (2009)).




                                                                                                                3
   We estimate the impact of the intervention on the probability that workers and managers leave

the firm between the baseline and follow-up surveys. Workers that participated in the manager

evaluation are 6.2 percentage points less likely to quit the job relative to the control group, corre-

sponding to a treatment effect on worker turnover of over 50%. This is important in the broader

context of firms in developing countries where turnover rates are very high and employee retention

is a major challenge to firms (World Bank (2013)). For example, the average employee turnover

rate in China was 20.8% in 2016 with the rate being as high as 40% in some industries (Calle-

garin (2017)). Not surprisingly, research suggests that rapid worker turnover significantly disrupts

productivity (Moon et al. (2019), Moon et al. (2020)).

   We find that there is no significant change in individual productivity. However, team-level KPI

does increase significantly by 2.3%. How can individual productivity not change while total team-

level productivity increases? This is driven by the fact that individual-level productivity does not

change for workers who stay, but treated teams have lower worker turnover than control teams.

High turnover is costly to team-level KPI because new workers normally perform poorly in the

beginning and need substantial training.

   We also explore the impact on workers' and managers' well-being, measured by happiness, work

satisfaction, mood, and health. We find that workers in teams that were given the opportunity to

evaluate their managers report higher levels of happiness, and there is a significant increase in the

measure of positive mood. This is consistent with the idea that the intervention led workers to be

happier and less likely to quit.

   Overall, our results suggest that the intervention led to improved outcomes for workers, man-

agers and the firm with no observable downside. Workers reported higher job satisfaction and quit

less, managers performed better (and increased their earnings), and the team-level performance

metrics that the firm cared most about increased. After seeing the results of our research, the firm

scaled up the feedback system to all of their plants, covering thousands of production teams and

almost 20,000 workers.

   We next test three main mechanisms that could drive the results. First, managers may change

their behavior at work and these changes lead to changes in workers' outcomes. We provide direct



                                                                                                    4
evidence supporting this mechanism: in treatment teams, workers report that the team manager

encourages them more, criticizes them less, and is less likely to lack empathy towards the feelings

of the workers. Moreover, treated managers have more social interactions with workers outside of

work.3

       A second mechanism is the idea that giving workers voice (with no change in managers' behavior)

makes workers happier and reduces turnover. For example, Adhvaryu, Molina, and Nyshadham

(2020) show that giving randomly selected workers the opportunity to participate in a feedback

survey after a disappointing wage hike reduced turnover.4 To test this channel in our context, we

use variation in the salience of the intervention among treated teams.5 We find that only salience

of the treatment for managers has a positive and significant impact on worker outcomes and team

KPI, while workers' awareness of the consequences of the evaluation does not matter, thus ruling

out the voice channel as the primary mechanism.

       Third, the results could be driven by changes in team composition (beyond worker turnover)

in treatment relative to control teams. However, we show that there are no significant differences

in manager turnover, the probability of workers shifting between treatment and control teams, and

in the outcomes of interest for workers who switched teams or left the company. Taken together,

our results suggest that the positive impacts of adding workers' feedback in manager evaluation are

mainly driven by changes in the relationship between managers and workers.

       We then test the persistence of the effect by examining new entrants to the firm who began after

our intervention was terminated. Our results show that even for new hires who entered after the

intervention ended and never participated in the manager evaluations, those in treated teams report

that their managers gave more encouragement and provided more empathy than new entrants to

control teams. This suggests that the changes in managers' interactions with workers persisted

beyond the period in which subordinates evaluated them.
   3
     One possible reason that managers' kindness towards workers leads to better outcomes is driven by gift exchange
between workers and managers (e.g. Akerlof (1982)). For example, Bellemare and Shearer (2009) documents that
giving workers a monetary gift increases productivity significantly. However, we rule out gift exchange in our setting
because individual performance does not change after the intervention.
   4
     The participants are told that the firm will not receive the feedback provided, so they isolate providing an avenue
for worker voice absent any possible changes in firm policy or managers' behavior.
   5
     Salience is measured by their recall of participating in the feedback a few months after it ended.




                                                                                                                      5
      Finally, we discuss some issues with identification and interpretation. The main concern is that

two types of spillovers might bias our estimations. First, if workers in control teams heard about

the opportunity to evaluate managers in treated teams, they might react negatively to not being

given this opportunity, leading to overestimates in the impacts of the intervention. We rule out

this concern by showing that there is little discussion about the intervention across teams, and

more importantly, control workers' outcomes are not significantly affected by the share of their

social networks who are treated. Second, there can be direct productivity spillovers across teams

along the production line. However, we find that having a treated team immediately upstream in

the production line does not have a significant impact on the productivity of downstream control

teams.

      Our work builds on and contributes to several existing literatures. First, this paper sheds

light on the growing literature documenting the importance of improving management practices

(Bebchuk, Cohen, and Hirst (2017), Bloom and Reenen (2007), Bloom et al. (2013), McKenzie and

Woodruff (2016), Adhvaryu, Kala, and Nyshadham (2019)). A number of studies have examined

specific strategies to improve management, such as offering training programs to improve the soft

skills of managers (Schoar (2013), Kelly et al. (2014)), performance monitoring (Frederiksen, Kahn,

and Lange (2019), Gosnell, List, and Metcalfe (2019)), and giving managers more decision rights

(Milgrom (1988), Bartling, Fehr, and Herz (2014)). We add to this literature by showing that

letting workers provide feedback on managers can be a cost-effective way to improve management

practices.

      Second, our results provide one potential solution to the observed high worker turnover rates

in developing countries.6 Managing high turnover is critical because it is costly to hire and train

new workers (Dube, Freeman, and Reich (2010), Blatter et al. (2015), Muehlemann and Pfeifer

(2016)), and rapid turnover can lead to negative impacts on productivity and product reliability

(Moon et al. (2019), Moon et al. (2020)). There is almost no experimental evidence on effective

interventions that firms use to solve the problem. Our contribution to this literature is to provide
  6
    The phenomenon of high worker turnover is not unique in developing countries. For example, in the early 20th
century worker turnover was as high as 117.2% in the U.S. but it reduced to around 47% by the 1970s (Jacoby
(1983)). Owen (1995) attributes the decline to improvements in employment relationships and benefits.




                                                                                                              6
new evidence of an effective method of increasing worker satisfaction and retention.

   Furthermore, our results contribute to the literature on empowering workers and changing

the lines of communication between workers, managers and the firm. In addition to experiments

on upwards evaluations (Atwater et al. (2000), Seifert, Yukl, and McDonald (2003), Heslin and

Latham (2004), Seifert and Yukl (2010)) and voice (Adhvaryu, Molina, and Nyshadham (2020)),

there is non-experimental evidence on other avenues for communication including worker coopera-

tives (Craig and Pencavel (1995)), unions (Cooke (1994), Freeman (1980), Batt, Colvin, and Keefe

(2002)), and counterproductive work behavior (Coviello, Deserranno, and Persico (2020)). Our

findings are in line with the prior research on upward evaluations in finding changes in manage-

ment behavior following the feedback. However, we add to the existing literature in our access to

administrative data from the firm, which allows us to be the first to consider the potential trade-

off between worker satisfaction and performance. We are also the first to examine the potential

mechanisms through which worker feedback about managers matters.

   Lastly, our analysis provides a novel test of the theoretical idea that firms should incentivize

managers based on productivity and not on any intermediate inputs (Holmstrom and Milgrom

(1987)). The intuition of these models is that there is no need to incentivize intermediate inputs

because managers should choose those to optimize productivity and firm profits. However, our

results reject the idea that aligning financial incentives alone is the best policy; instead, profits

can be increased through improved worker happiness and retention if managers are given direct

feedback to be nicer to their workers.

   The paper proceeds as follows. In section 2, we explain the background for the study. In

sections 3 and 4, we present the experimental design and explain a simple framework. In section 5,

we discuss the data collected. In section 6, we report the main impacts of worker evaluation and

results on mechanisms. Section 7 discusses the persistence of the intervention impact and some

robustness checks. Section 8 concludes.




                                                                                                   7
2        Background

We carry out our experiment with an automobile manufacturing firm in China. During our study

period, the automobile industry was growing steadily, with an average sales growth rate of more

than 5% per year and export growth of around 30%. Our project partner is a large company,

mainly producing passenger vehicles, heavy duty vehicles, and new energy cars. Similar to many

other manufacturers in China, the company faces problems of hiring and retaining workers, with

an average annual worker turnover rate of more than 20%.

        We partner with one major plant of the company, which produces passenger cars. The plant has

four factories, including a stamping factory, a welding factory, a coating factory, and a final assembly

factory. The production process is fairly capital intensive, but the mode of production used here

is substantially less capital intensive and more labor intensive than for a similar car produced in

the United States. Production line workers are organized into production teams within each plant.

Every team has a team manager. Team managers are usually promoted from the pool of workers

within the team, where workers need to pass a written exam to be in the eligible pool of workers

for consideration for promotion.

        Workers and managers are paid monthly. The monthly earnings of workers and managers are

composed of two parts: the flat salary and a bonus. The flat salary accounts for around 90%

of workers' monthly earnings and about 80% of team managers' monthly earnings. The monthly

bonus component of their compensation depends on performance metrics at the company level and

also at the team level for managers and at the individual level for workers. Workers receive public

feedback on their individual performance on a daily basis at team meetings. Managers also receive

public feedback on their team-level performance metrics on a monthly basis; the information about

the worker and team performance is posted at the team's bulletin board regularly.7 Workers and

managers also receive semi-annual and annual bonuses and pay raises, both of which depend on

their performance metrics as well as how the firm is doing in aggregate.
    7
    In addition to teams' performances, the monthly ranking of team performance scores and the "star worker" of
the month is usually posted at each factory's announcement board located at the entrance of the factory.




                                                                                                             8
3        Experiment

Our experiment was implemented in three of the four factories at the plant.8 The experimental

factories include 76 production teams and 1251 workers. The main intervention is to randomize the

introduction of workers' monthly evaluation of the performance of their manager at the team level.9

Specifically, in half of our sample teams (the treated teams), workers evaluated their managers

on five components of management (organization, adaptability, fairness, openness to suggestions

and empathy) on a scale from 1 to 5 with 5 being extremely effective and 1 being not effective

at all.10 In treatment teams, the worker evaluation score accounted for 20% of the managers'

monthly performance score while the hard metrics accounted for 80%. Aggregate scores from the

worker evaluations were posted every month on the team's bulletin board along with the other

performance metrics posted every month. The collection of the feedback from workers lasted for 8

months, from September 2016 to April 2017. However, the worker evaluation score did not enter

into managers' total performance score after February 2017; thus for two months prior to the end

of the feedback collection, the feedback continued without factoring directly into the managers'

monthly performance score.

        Managers may care about the worker evaluations for multiple reasons. First, it affects their

earnings directly for 6 months; given that the monthly bonus is approximately 20% of the managers'

total compensation in a month, this means the intervention alters up to 4% of their monthly

salary.11 Moreover, the performance score also influences the managers' annual bonuses and pay

raises. Finally, the performance score is a key factor in determining promotions for production line

managers.

        The procedures of our intervention were as follows. Before beginning the intervention, the plant

manager held a meeting with workers and managers of each treated team. During the meeting, they
    8
     The welding factory did not participate.
    9
     The randomization is stratified by team size and the average team performance score during 2015, the year before
our experiment.
  10
     See Appendix Table A.1 for the wording of the questions.
  11
     The firm does not inform workers or managers about the specific formula determining their bonuses, but they
understand what the components are and can see month-to-month how variation in their own performance and firm
performance map into changes in salaries. In the data between September 2016 and April 2017, there is a positive
correlation of 0.157 between managers' total evaluation scores and the team-level hard metrics.




                                                                                                                   9
first introduced our research assistants, and notified that the research team would visit the factory

every month to collect worker evaluations of team managers. Next, the plant manager distributed

the evaluation questionnaire to team managers and workers and explained each question. Finally,

they informed individuals in treated teams that the evaluation was completely anonymous and that

the factory would take the evaluation into account when calculating the team managers' monthly

performance scores until the Chinese New Year. Specifically, the workers did not write their names

on the evaluation cards, which were passed out and collected at the end of a team meeting by

an individual on our research team. The manager was not present during the collection of the

feedback. The data was then digitized and sent to each plant's human resources team.12 Thus, the

workers could be assured of the anonymity of their responses. The whole process took less than 10

minutes per month per team.

         The firm had never asked workers to provide feedback on their managers prior to our interven-

tion. While the policy was new, our understanding is that it did not feel out of place for several

reasons. First, team-level managers were asked to provide feedback about their own production

line managers on an annual basis, so managers were familiar with the concept of providing upward

evaluations. Second, the firm collects and uses a lot of data at regular intervals, including some at

a daily frequency.

         In control teams, the pre-existing status quo was preserved. Workers did not evaluate their

team managers and team managers' monthly performance scores were solely determined on the

basis of the standard team-level performance metrics.



4         Framework

We provide a basic framework for understanding the incentives of workers, managers and the firm.

We assume that the firm wants to maximize profits and tries to provide incentives for managers to

behave in ways that help maximize firm profits.

         The managers want to maximize their own earnings. The firm attempts to align incentives
    12
         Nobody in the firm saw the paper copies of the individual evaluation forms filled out by workers.




                                                                                                             10
by making the managers' earnings depend in part on the team's performance, k (Q(sm ), E (sm )).13

Managers (denoted by m) make choices about managerial effort, hm and sm , where we assume

managers can spend their limited effort either pushing the workers to meet production targets (h)

or providing soft management skills (s), such as expressing empathy for the life circumstances that

prevent workers from getting to their shift on-time. Q and E are summations of all of the workers

on the team's decisions regarding quitting (qi ) and effort (ei ), respectively.

      Managers' earnings are denoted by ym which can be broken down into a fixed component, ym ,

and a component that varies based on team performance. So the manager's problem is:


                                                    max ym                                       (1)
                                                     sm



subject to


                                                 hm + sm  1                                      (2)


where


                                       ym = ym + k (Q(sm ), E (sm )).                            (3)


      Workers make two decisions: whether to stay at the firm or leave, and how much effort to exert

on the job. A worker i quits if


                                          i
                                      V (yw (ei (sm )), ai
                                                         w (ei , sm )) < v
                                                                           r
                                                                                                 (4)


where v r is the value of their outside option. The worker's utility at the firm depends on earnings,

yw , and other amenities, aw , which we might summarize as non-pecuniary job satisfaction. The

cost of effort is reflected in the idea that job satisfaction is decreasing in effort, a/e < 0. The

worker also makes a choice regarding how much effort, e, to exert on the job:
 13
      This will correspond to the key performance indicators (KPI) in the data.




                                                                                                  11
                                              i
                                      max V (yw (ei (sm )), ai
                                                             w (ei , sm )).                                        (5)
                                        ei


                                                   i , and a bonus that depends on their effort,
Workers' earnings include both a fixed component, yw

b(ei (sm )):


                                              i    i + b(e (s )).
                                             yw = yw      i m                                                      (6)


We have workers' job satisfaction increasing in the managers' choice of s; in other words, a/s > 0.

Note also that increasing effort leads to better performance and a higher bonus for the worker so

b/e > 0. Thus, for workers, there is a trade-off where higher effort decreases their overall

satisfaction at work but increases their earnings.

       Let us consider how worker effort depends on the manager's decision, sm . One possibility is

that effort depends on hm such that e/h > 0 (so e/s < 0). Under this assumption, the more

managers crack the whip on their workers, the more effort is produced, but they risk workers being

unhappy and quitting.14 However, an alternative is a system of gift exchange between managers

and workers such that when managers are kinder to workers, workers exert more effort.15 Under

this system of gift exchange, we would have e/s > 0.

       The propensity of the worker to quit is given by


                                            i
                                   qi = V (yw (ei (sm )), ai
                                                           w (ei , sm )) - v
                                                                             r
                                                                                                                   (7)


where q/a < 0 and q/yw < 0. A worker's quit rate falls with both greater job satisfaction and

higher earnings.

       Team-level performance depends on the levels of performance of the individual workers on the
  14
     This trade-off is similar to Akerlof and Kranton (2005, 2008) where supervisors trade off between loose and strict
supervision where loose supervision engenders workers' identity as part of the team.
  15
     Note this set up deviates from the canonical model of gift exchange with workers where efficiency wages induce
greater effort (Akerlof 1982).




                                                                                                                    12
team as well as the workers' turnover rates in a way defined by the function f ():

                                                      T
                              k (Q(sm ), E (sm )) =         f (qi (sm ), ei (sm ))                        (8)
                                                      i=1


where T refers to the total number of workers on a team. Turnover reduces team-level performance

(k/Q < 0) because team members must help with training new workers, and new workers start

off with very low levels of productivity while being trained.16 Worker effort also affects team

performance, so k/e > 0.

       Under the scenario where managers need to crack the whip to induce effort (i.e. e/h > 0),

managers want workers to be happy because it matters for workers' turnover rates (which affect

team performance). Both k/s > 0 and k/h > 0. There is a trade-off that managers face

between workers' job satisfaction and workers' performance. The manager needs to decide whether

to push the workers hard and get more output, but this may lead to workers being unhappy and

being more likely to quit. Alternatively, under gift exchange (i.e. e/s > 0), managers choose to

be nice to workers both to reduce turnover and to increase workers' performance.17 Regardless of

the relationship between worker effort and s, rational managers should choose s to maximize k .

       There are several ways that the intervention may shift the incentives of managers. One possi-

bility is that the intervention works through placing additional financial incentives on soft skills of

managers through the function j (). We have:


                           ym = ym + (1 - )k (Q(sm ), E (sm )) + j (sm )                                  (9)


where before our intervention  = 0 and afterwards  = 0.2 and j/sm > k/sm . The key

prediction here is that intervention should lead managers to shift their input decisions such that sm

increases. While a simple way to look at this is through the financial incentives given by equation 9,

it is also possible that the intervention works not through ym but through managers getting positive

utility from doing well in the feedback and negative utility from doing poorly in the feedback. This
  16
    See Appendix Table A.1.
  17
    Note the model of gift exchange suggests that managers should simply maximize sm with no trade-off between
the sm and hm . In this case, we would need to replace equation 2 with a positive cost associated with sm .



                                                                                                           13
would produce the same key prediction that the intervention should lead to an increase in s and

decrease in h.

    The model also suggests that any observed increases in k must be driven by declines in turnover,

increases in worker productivity, or both. One key implication of the framework is that if e/h > 0

and managers were optimally choosing managerial inputs prior to the intervention, we should not

observe an increase in k after the intervention. As managers shift towards increasing s, workers'

job satisfaction will increase and turnover will fall, but this should come at a cost to k . Under gift

exchange (e/s > 0), the intervention can lead to an increase in k driven by increases in e. Thus,

if we see an increase in k combined with an increase in worker productivity (reflecting an increase

in e), this would provide support for the idea of a gift exchange between workers and managers

where kindness by managers induces more worker effort.

    If we see increases in managers' soft skills (s), worker job satisfaction (a), and team performance

(k ) combined with declines in turnover (Q), this suggests that we can see improvements in all

outcomes at no cost and the original strategy of the firm to focus incentives on hard performance

metrics may not be optimal.



5     Data

Our analysis combines data from two main sources: administrative data from the firm spanning

the months May 2016 to July 2017, and survey data that we collected at baseline from June to

August 2016 and for the follow-up in July and August 2017.


5.1    Administrative Data

There are two main performance data sets that we receive from the firm. First, we have monthly

data on performance measures of individual production line workers. This data set provides metrics

for performance at the monthly level, broken down into various components, including production,

safety, quality, attitude, attendance and routine.18 Each worker starts with a total performance
  18
     Note that these aggregations can be measured differently across teams and factories. Routine is a direct trans-
lation of this category, but it is a residual that encompasses anything that does not fall into the other categories.



                                                                                                                  14
score of 100 and points are added or subtracted by the manager if they do well or poorly that

month in each of the 6 components. Thus, the values associated with each component are positive

or negative depending on the worker's performance in that component. This data is collected

daily where feedback is also given to the worker daily by the manager. The data that we receive

is aggregated to the monthly level by the firm (and this monthly aggregate is what is used in

determining the workers' monthly bonus).

      The second administrative data set that we use is monthly data on team-level key performance

indicators (KPI) which range from 0 to 100. Team-level KPI is also how managers' performances

are assessed, and are directly linked to their bonuses. Total KPI is broken down into five main

categories: production, management, equipment, quality, and safety. The production category

is about meeting production targets (i.e. the completion rate) but also includes the accuracy and

efficiency of information delivery, the management of inventory and the frequency of line stoppages.

The management category includes easy-to-observe aspects such as whether the manager fills out

the worker attendance records correctly and submits them on time, and whether the workers get

the required hours of training. Safety takes into account the number of accidents and violations of

safety regulations. Quality reflects the number of products that do not pass the quality test and

the number of problems found in audits.

      These categories are combined (with weights that vary across factories and across teams) into

a total team-level performance score.19 Appendix Table A.5 shows the average weights placed

on these categories across teams, broken down by treatment and control teams. There are no

significant differences in these weights between treatment and control teams. The most weight on

average is placed on production, followed by quality, management, safety and equipment. We do

not have data on profits (which are at the firm level) but it is reasonable to assume that the weights

are based on how the firm thinks these metrics map into profits for each team.

      Table 1 presents the summary statistics for the treatment group in column 1 and the control

group in column 2. The statistics show the average of all pre-intervention months of data (May,

June, July and August of 2016).20 Column 3 shows the total number of observations and the last
 19
      For example, the equipment category does not exist at all in one of the factories in our analysis.
 20
      For cases where the data are not present for all four months, we take the average over the existing months of


                                                                                                                15
column shows the p-value on the treatment dummy in a regression testing the statistical difference

between the two groups. Panel A shows the statistics for the individual performance measures and

Panel B the team-level KPI and its components. Across the 13 different measures of performance

at the individual and the team level, only one is statistically different between the treatment and

control groups; worker-level performance in terms of quality is significantly better in the treatment

group than in the control group.21


5.2    Survey Data

We collected baseline data prior to the intervention (from June to August 2016) in addition to a

round of follow-up data one year after the baseline data collection (in July and August 2017). Both

workers and managers were surveyed. While the administrative data are sufficient to examine the

impact of the intervention on individual and team-level performance metrics collected by the firm,

our survey data are important for providing insight into the mechanisms of the changes.

    Table 2 shows summary statistics for variables collected in the survey data prior to the inter-

vention. The first set of variables show some demographic characteristics of the workers in our

sample. The workers' average age is early 30's. The vast majority of these production line workers

are male (approximately 90%). About half of the workers have a high school degree or more. The

average tenure within the firm is over 4 years. About two-thirds of the workers are married.

    We ask several questions about individual well-being. First, we ask a general well-being question

that asks them to rate their life imagining a ladder with steps number 0 to 10. The workers rate

their lives around 7 on this scale. This is the only summary statistic along which the treatment

group and the control group are statistically different. The difference is 0.3 on a 10 point scale (or

15% of a standard deviation). We also ask them to self-report their general health on a five-point

scale. The table presents an indicator for whether they answer with the top two values. Over 60%

of workers report being in good or very good health.
data. For example, for a worker who entered the firm in June, we will not have data for May 2016 and calculate that
worker's pre-intervention performance measures using the 3 months after the worker began.
  21
     There are some large outliers in the individual performance data. Winsorization of the top and bottom 1% does
not affect the comparison of means (Appendix Table A.4) or the subsequent results using individual performance
(Appendix Table A.9).




                                                                                                                16
         While the life rating and the health question capture a longer-run sense of well-being, we also

ask questions about their mood in the past 30 days. This is a widely-used set of questions called the

Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS) developed by Watson, Clark and Tellegen (1988).

This entails asking 20 questions, detailed in Appendix Table A.2. We follow the standard formula

for converting these 20 questions into a summary measure of positive mood and negative mood.

         We also ask a standard set of questions on work satisfaction. These questions are asked on a

five-point scale where some questions are positive and some are negative.22 In particular, there are

four questions that refer specifically to their manager, including whether their manager encourages

them, is unfair to them, criticizes them, or lacks empathy. Other questions on work satisfaction go

beyond their relationship with their manager; for example, one question asks about opportunities for

promotion that reflects firm-level policies and opportunities. Some questions, such as the workload,

could reflect behavior by their direct manager or other higher-level managers. Table 2 shows the

averages for the work satisfaction index while Appendix Table A.6 shows the summary statistics

for each component of the index.

         The average monthly earnings is around 3700 RMB or a little over USD$500. This survey

question asks about earnings in the past two months. The average monthly bonus in the baseline

survey is under USD$200.23 Finally, we ask a question in the survey about the number of times that

workers socialized with their managers outside of work in the past month. The average number of

times is 0.56 in the treatment group and 0.60 in the control group, and these are statistically not

different.



6         Main Results

6.1        Estimation Strategy

Our empirical strategy exploits the randomized experiment to compare outcomes in the treatment

group with the control group. For outcomes at the individual level, we estimate for individual i in
    22
    See Appendix Table A.3 for the wording of the work satisfaction questions.
    23
    Given the timing of the survey, this is actually higher than most months because the semi-annual bonus was
disbursed in the months referenced by the survey.




                                                                                                           17
team t the following equation:


                                         yit = T reatedt + Xit  +          it                                         (10)


where the key regressor of interest is T reatedt which is an indicator for whether workers in team

t were given the opportunity to evaluate their managers. We also include a vector of control

variables, Xit . This includes the randomization strata in all regressions. All regressions also

include an indicator variable for a second randomized experiment that we conducted at the same

time but is not the focus of this paper.24 In cases where we have lagged values of the dependent

variable, we include it as a control in order to improve the precision of the estimates.25 Finally,

when the dependent variable is from the survey rather than from administrative data, we also

include enumerator fixed effects. The standard errors are clustered at the team level.

       For the administrative data from the firm, we can estimate equation (10) by pooling the months

prior to the reform and the months after the reform. In addition, we can also exploit the full panel

of monthly data for the team-level KPI and individual performance and estimate the following

equation with all the leads and lags around the start of the intervention where t denotes team and

j denotes the month:

                           10
                  yit =         (j M onthj × T reatedt + j M onthj ) + t + Xit  +                it .                 (11)
                          j =-4


The variables M onthj are indicators for the month relative to j = 0 when the intervention begins.

We omit the month prior to the start of the intervention (j = -1). We include team fixed effects, t .

With the four months prior to the intervention, we can examine whether there were any differences

in the trends between the treatment and control groups prior to the intervention. With the 10

months after the intervention, we can examine how long it takes for changes to appear and whether

they persist. First, we can see whether the effects persist after workers stop providing monthly
  24
     In a parallel experiment, we gave randomly selected workers the right to vote on their compensation policy. Our
results are not sensitive to the inclusion of the indicator variable for this randomization.
  25
     Thus, our estimation strategy is similar to a differences-in-differences strategy but does not restrict the coefficient
on the lagged dependent variable to be one.




                                                                                                                         18
feedback on their managers' performance; the feedback ends 8 months after the intervention began

(j = 7) and we have administrative data for three additional months after the end of the collection

of the feedback. Second, we can use the dynamic data to examine whether the effects are primarily

driven by the financial incentives linked to the feedback. The financial incentives end 6 months

after the intervention began (j = 5) so in periods 6 and 7, the financial incentives linked to the

feedback are removed while the feedback continues.


6.2    Results on Individual Performance and Team-Level KPI

We begin with regression estimates based on equation 10. We first examine the impact of the

intervention on the probability that workers and managers leave the firm between the baseline and

follow-up surveys. As shown in Table 3, in treated teams relative to control teams, we see a fall

in worker turnover of 6.2 percentage points, and this is significant at the 1% level. We see a 3.6

percentage points decrease in the turnover of managers but this is not significant at the standard

levels. The magnitudes of the estimates are very large relative to the mean turnover in the sample

of 10.7 percentage points for workers and 1.37 percentage points for managers.26

    In Table 4, we look at the impact of evaluating managers on individual performance metrics.

The dependent variable is the average across all months after the start of the intervention, and

the lagged dependent variable is the average across all months prior to the intervention. For the

sample of workers who were at the firm in both the baseline and the follow-up period, we see no

significant changes in total productivity or in any of the components of individual productivity.

Next, in Table 5, we examine the impact of evaluating managers on team-level KPI. There is a

significant increase in total KPI of 2.2 (where the average KPI in the control teams in 97). We also

see significant increases in two subcategories of team-level KPI: production and management.

    How can we reconcile the results where individual productivity doesn't change but total team-

level productivity increases? This is driven by the fact that individual-level productivity doesn't

change for workers who stay, but treated teams have lower rates of turnover than control teams.
   26
      Note that a turnover rate of 10.7 percentage points means that 10.7% of workers surveyed in the baseline were
reported by the firm as having left the firm by the time we conducted the follow-up survey. This is an under-estimate
of total turnover at the firm given this number doesn't include the many workers who began after our baseline survey
and left before our follow-up survey. The firm reports that their annual turnover rate during this period was 20%.


                                                                                                                  19
High turnover is costly to team-level KPI because the newest workers perform poorly in the begin-

ning and need substantial training. This is shown in Appendix Figure A.1 where we see relatively

low average scores for individual production performance in the first and second quarter after start-

ing at the firm, after which performance improves (and remains relatively flat). Furthermore, the

separation rates for new workers is high as many learn that they cannot or do not want to do this

kind of work.

   We now turn to the estimation of dynamic effects - estimates of the leads and lags around the

intervention specified in equation (11). We only have monthly panel data for individual perfor-

mance and team-level KPI. The regression estimates for worker performance and KPI are shown in

Appendix Tables A.7 and A.8, respectively. Given that the basic regression estimates for the perfor-

mance measures and many of the KPI components are not significant in the regressions comparing

post-intervention outcomes, it is not surprising that most of the estimates of the leads and lags are

not significant at the standard levels. In Figure 1, we focus on the coefficients of the leads and lags

for the two KPI components that were significant (in Table 5): production and management.

   In looking at the coefficients on the leads in the interaction, there are no significant differences

in the trends in these measures of KPI across treatment and control teams leading up to the ran-

domized experiment. This provides reassurance that pre-existing differences in the trends between

these groups are not driving the results. Next we turn to post-intervention periods. We see that

the significance in the impact on production KPI shifts around 4 months after the intervention

(j = 3). The magnitude of the coefficients for management KPI (which measures whether the

managers fulfill observable aspects of their jobs such as providing the required amount of train-

ing and submitting forms promptly and completely) shifts up immediately after the intervention

begins. However, the individual estimates are not significant at the standard levels, though the

pooled post-intervention effect is (Table 5). This suggests that the managers begin to change their

behavior almost immediately, but that the impact on team-level production may take over a quarter

to fully take effect. This is consistent with the idea that effects on team-level production are driven

by team turnover, which takes more time to adjust.

   The financial incentives for managers to care about worker feedback end after six months (j = 5).



                                                                                                    20
Furthermore, the provision of monthly feedback from workers ends after eight months (j = 7).

However, we see the shift in the magnitude of the effects for production and management KPI

persist both after the end of the financial incentives and after the end of the formal system of

worker feedback. The estimates for production KPI remain significant at the 10% level after the

end of the incentives linked to feedback for every period except one (j = 9) which is only significant

at the 12.5% level. First, this suggests that the financial incentives were not the primary motivation

for any changes in by managers and the financial incentives were not necessary for the changes to

persist over time. Second, this suggests that the changes brought about by the intervention persisted

even beyond the end of the formal feedback system from workers.


6.3      Results on Earnings and Other Measures of Well-Being

In Table 6, we look at the impact of evaluating managers on workers' and managers' monthly

earnings. The intervention does not correspond to significant changes in workers' monthly earnings

of bonus. This is not surprising given that there is no impact of the intervention on worker-level

productivity, which determines their bonus. For managers, we see a 22.8% increase in their monthly

bonus and this estimate is significant at the 5% level. Given that we see team-level KPI increasing

in treated teams, and managers' bonus depends heavily on KPI, the impact on earnings is consistent

with the other estimates. The bonus is approximately 20% of their total monthly earnings, so a

22.8% increase in bonus maps approximately into the 4% increase in total monthly earnings that

we see in column 3, though this estimate is not significant at the standard levels.

      The next set of results examines the impact of evaluating managers on workers' and managers'

well-being. The results are presented in Table 7 in Panel A for workers and in Panel B for managers.

We see no significant changes in any of the measures of well-being for managers. However, we see

that workers in teams that were given the opportunity to evaluate their managers report higher

levels of general happiness of the life rating scale.27 This increases by 0.3 on a scale that goes

from 0 to 10, and this increase is significant at the 1% level. We also see a significant increase

in the measure of a person's positive mood. We do not see significant changes in workers' work
 27
      Note these results are for the sample of workers present at the firm in both the baseline and follow-up.




                                                                                                                 21
satisfaction index, negative mood or a person's self-reported health status.

    Overall, the main results indicate that allowing workers to provide evaluations of their managers

led to a fall in worker turnover rates and a corresponding increase in team-level KPI. This is good

both for treated managers, who are earning more due to the higher levels of KPI, and the firm, which

cares about KPI. While worker productivity and earnings do not improve, there is evidence that the

intervention is positive as they report higher levels of happiness and positive mood. Furthermore,

the higher levels of retention among treated workers are also suggestive of them being happier in

the job.



7     Mechanisms and Persistence

7.1   Overview of Mechanisms

We consider three main mechanisms that may drive the results. First, managers may change their

behavior at work and these changes may lead to changes in workers' outcomes. There are different

reasons that the intervention can lead managers to change their behavior. They may be responding

to the information and feedback that they receive from workers on how to be better managers.

Alternatively, managers may change their behavior to simply be nicer to their workers in order to

get better evaluations from their workers, but this isn't the result of direct information from the

workers. We can test whether there is evidence of observable changes in the managers' behavior.

    A second mechanism is that giving workers voices, even without any real changes in what

managers do, makes workers happier with the firm and reduces turnover. This is consistent with

the work of Adhvaryu, Molina and Nyshadham (2020) on worker voice. To provide some suggestive

evidence for this idea, we can use variation in treated teams in whether the intervention was still

salient for managers or the workers in the follow-up survey, three months after the intervention

had ended. We can look within treated teams at whether managers' or workers' awareness of the

policy is important for changing the key outcomes of interest. If the main mechanism is about

giving workers voice with no changes in managers' behavior, workers' awareness of the intervention

should matter for changes in KPI, satisfaction, and mood, while managers' awareness may not be



                                                                                                  22
necessary.

       A final mechanism is that the results are driven primarily by changes in team composition.

There are several ways that the teams may be changing differently in treatment and control teams.

First, managers may be changing. For example, managers in higher KPI teams may be more likely

to be promoted and new managers are closer to and more responsive to workers. Second, workers

can shift across teams. The results can be driven by decisions to shift bad or unhappy existing

workers from treatment teams to control teams. The higher rates of turnover in control teams may

be staffed from other teams, but other managers only give up their worst workers. Finally, the

results may be driven by the characteristics of the workers who leave. For example, it may be the

case that the best performing and happiest workers are most likely to leave so the estimated effects

on worker satisfaction are driven by the different rates of turnover. However, for all of the team

composition mechanisms, there would still need to be an explanation for why there were different

rates of changes in team composition in treatment versus control teams to begin with. We can look

directly at whether there are differences in manager changes and worker shifts between treatment

and control teams. We can also examine the characteristics of firm stayers and leavers as well as

team stayers and shifters.


7.2      Results on Managers' Behavior

We first break down the work satisfaction index (shown in column 2 of Table 7) to all the individual

questions. The results are shown in Table 8 where each row is a separate regression where the

variable indicated in the first column is the dependent variable in the regression.28 There are

four questions that directly reference the team manager: encourages, unfairness, criticizes and

no empathy. Three of the four components of work satisfaction that directly relate to the team

manager change significantly in the treatment teams relative to the control teams. In treatment

teams, workers report that the team manager encourages them more, criticizes them less and is less

likely to lack empathy towards the feelings of the workers. The only component that references the

manager specifically but does not change significantly is whether the manager is unfair towards the
  28
   The wording of the question that corresponds to each dependent variable can be found in Appendix Table A.3.
The corresponding summary statistics broken down by treatment and control are presented in Appendix Table A.6.


                                                                                                           23
worker.

       Most of the other questions about work satisfaction, such as their opportunities for promotion

or their satisfaction with employer-provided benefits, do not change significantly as a result of the

intervention. The changes are generally concentrated in the way that their manager treats them.

The one exception is that there is a significant decrease in workers in treatment teams reporting

that the incompetence of their teammates makes them have to work harder.29 This change is

consistent with the fact that there is lower turnover in treatment teams and fewer inexperienced

new workers entering the team.

       In Table 9, we examine questions that we asked workers about quantifiable interactions with

their managers. First, we asked about the total number of times that they socialized with their

managers outside of work.30 The average in the data is socializing outside of work 5.3 times. This

doesn't change significantly with the intervention. Another question that we ask in the follow-up

survey is whether a worker's manager responds to the worker's WeChat posts, where WeChat is a

popular form of social media in China.31 The dependent variable is an indicator that equals one if

the worker reports that their manager responds sometimes or often.32 On average, 63% of workers

report that their manager responds sometimes or often. Workers who have the opportunity to

evaluate their managers report a 7% higher response rate on WeChat. This estimate is significant

at the 10% level. Along with the components of work satisfaction, this suggests that managers

respond to worker evaluations by being nicer and more responsive to workers.

       While the evidence indicates that managers are nicer to workers after the intervention, the

lack of increase in the effort of workers who stay (as measured by worker performance in Table

4) provides suggestive evidence against the idea of gift exchange between workers and managers

driving the results. Rather, the results suggest that managers trade off exerting effort in cracking

the whip (and make production targets) and being nice which increases worker job satisfaction and
  29
      Note that this is one of two work satisfaction variables along which the treatment and control groups are statisti-
cally different at baseline at the 10% level or higher (Appendix Table A.6). However, the magnitude of the difference
is fairly small (0.14 on a five point scale).
   30
      This is asked since September of the previous year (after the start of the intervention) in the follow-up so the
time frame is approximately almost one year. Note that the lagged dependent variable, which is the same question
in the baseline survey, is asked about the past month.
   31
      The options are often, sometimes, rarely or not relevant (because they do not post on WeChat).
   32
      Most of the WeChat posts are not work related.


                                                                                                                      24
reduces turnover.


7.3      Results on Worker Voice

We now consider whether there is evidence to support the idea that the results are driven by giving

workers voices, absent any changes by managers or higher management. To test this idea, we use

variations in the salience of the intervention months after it has ended.33 In particular, we make

use of questions in the follow-up survey asking in the Summer of 2017 whether workers provided

feedback on their managers' management skills since the Fall of 2016. Conditional on answering

yes to that question, the workers are then asked whether the feedback that they provided affected

in any way the earnings of their manager. We ask similar questions of managers: whether their

workers provided feedback on their management skills, and conditional on answering yes to that

question, they were then asked whether their workers' feedback affected their earnings.

       To check that these responses make sense, we first examine the impact of the treatment on these

responses in Table 10. Workers in the treatment teams are 56% more likely to report participating

in giving feedback about their managers, and this estimate is significant at the 1% level (column

1). Similarly, managers in the treatment teams are 66% more likely to report that they received

feedback in the past year from the workers in their team (column 4) and this is also significant at

the 1% level.

       In columns 2 and 5, the outcome variable is based on the question of whether the feedback

affected the earnings of the managers where we fill this variable in as zero if they answered that

they didn't give (for workers) or receive (for managers) worker feedback in the prior question.

In columns 3 and 6, it's the same outcomes but we do not fill in based on the prior question;

if they answer that they didn't participate, the question is missing. For workers, being in the

treatment group significantly increases the probability that they reported being aware that the

evaluations affect managers' earnings. However, the magnitudes here are much smaller than for

those participating in the program. The estimates are not significant for managers, suggesting that

it was not very salient to the managers that the formula determining their monthly bonus placed
  33
   The feedback occurred from September 2016 to April 2017 and they were surveyed for the follow-up in July and
August 2017.


                                                                                                            25
weight on this feedback. This provides additional evidence to suggest that the financial incentives

were not a major driver of the results, an interpretation consistent with the prior results of Figure

1 where the shift in production and management KPI in treatment teams persisted after the end

of the financial incentives.

   Turning to our test of the voice mechanism, we can now examine whether workers' awareness

and/or managers' awareness explain the impacts of the treatment. In a sample limited to treatment

teams, we estimate the impacts of whether the worker and whether the manager reported partici-

pating in the worker evaluation in the follow-up survey on the outcomes for which we saw significant

impacts of the treatment. The results are presented in Table 11. The salience of the feedback for

the manager has a positive and significant impact on total KPI. More specifically, in teams for

which the manager finds the treatment salient, the team-level total KPI is 5 points higher than in

teams where the treatment wasn't salient for the manager. The estimates of manager awareness

on production KPI and management KPI are positive but not significant at the standard levels.

The managers' awareness does have positive and significant effects on workers' life satisfaction and

positive mood in columns 4 and 5, respectively. Controlling for managers' awareness though, work-

ers' own awareness of the treatment is not significantly related to any of the outcomes. Overall,

the results provide suggestive evidence that the main mechanism is not through worker voice and

empowerment absent changes in the managers' behavior. What really matters is the managers'

awareness of the feedback, and the way that they change their management behavior as a result.


7.4   Results on Team Composition

We consider whether the main effects of the treatment are explained by differential changes in

the composition of the teams. We consider the following changes in team composition: manager

turnover, workers shifting across teams, and the types of workers separating from the firm.

   In column 1 of Table 12, the dependent variable is whether the manager for the team changed

between the follow-up and baseline surveys. There are no significant differences in manager turnover

between the treatment and control teams. The next two variables in Table 12 are different measures

of whether workers have switched to a different team within the plant. In column 2, the measure is



                                                                                                  26
at the worker level. In column 3, the dependent variable is the team-level total number of workers

who have switched teams between the baseline and follow-up surveys. In both measures, we see that

there are no significant differences in the probability of workers moving across teams for treatment

teams as compared to control teams.

   Table 13 shows the average characteristics of workers who are likely to switch teams. Not

surprisingly, workers who were performing poorly are likely to be shifted to different teams. In

particular, we see that workers who have switched have significantly lower individual scores on

production and quality. Given that we do not see individual productivity measures changing

significantly for treatment and control teams (in Table 4), it's clear that they are not moving more

low performing workers to control teams. Furthermore, there are no significant differences in terms

of the KPI of the teams that they were in at baseline or their well-being measures. This provides

additional evidence that the results on mood and life satisfaction cannot be explained by the firm

moving unhappy workers from treatment teams to control teams.

   We now consider whether the characteristics of the types of people who leave versus stay might

explain the results. Given that firm separations are higher in the control teams, one possible

explanation for the results on the well-being measures is that workers with higher measures of

well-being are more likely to leave. In Table 14, we look at baseline averages for individuals who

stay at the firm as compared to individuals who leave the firm by the follow-up survey. Workers

who leave the firm have significantly lower scores on attitude (a category that the firm evaluates

them on) and were working in teams with higher average levels of KPI. They also have slightly

lower individual total performance scores, though this difference is only statically significant at the

11% level. They are not statistically different along the metrics of well-being. This suggests that

changes in the characteristics of stayers and leavers are not driving the results where workers in

treatment teams are having higher levels of life satisfaction and positive mood.

   A final composition-related mechanism that we consider is that teams are unable to hire to

replace team members who leave the firm (either because the firm will not allow new hires or because

it is difficult to find a qualified worker to take the job). Then, if the intervention leads to lower

turnover in the treatment teams, they are able to have higher levels of team-level productivity and



                                                                                                    27
better mood simply because the teams are better staffed and workers do not need to permanently

share the burden of departing team members. This is unlikely given that we have already seen that

there are no reported differences in workers feeling their workload is too much in Table 8. Column

4 of Table 12 also confirms that this mechanism is not relevant as we see no significant differences

in team size between treatment and control teams at the time of follow-up.

   We argue that the team-level productivity results are driven by changes in team composition,

in particular by the lower turnover rates in the treatment teams as compared to the control teams.

However, no other changes in the composition of teams, including changes in managers or shifting

workers across teams, explains the results. Furthermore, the characteristics of the people who

change teams or leave the firm do not explain the main results.


7.5   Persistence and New Workers

The primary mechanism for the results appears to be changes in the way that managers interact

with their workers. We have already seen evidence that the results are persistent for several months

after they stop providing feedback in treatment teams in Figure 1. This is consistent with informal

conversations with workers we had two years after the follow-up survey was conducted, where

many workers stated that the intervention permanently changed their working relationship with

their managers. Even after they stopped formally providing feedback to their managers, they said

that their managers continued to listen to them more. We can also examine the outcomes of new

entrants (who began after the intervention ended in April 2017) to test for whether there is evidence

that the improvements in the relationship between managers and workers persisted. There were 69

new entrants defined in this way.

   The results are presented in Table 15 where we focus on individual-level variables that were

significantly affected by the intervention: two measures of well-being (life satisfaction and positive

mood) and four components of job satisfaction (the incompetence of others, managers' encourage-

ment, managers' criticisms, and managers' empathy). The results indicate that the new entrants

to the treatment teams, who never participated in the feedback, report that their managers give

more encouragement and provide more empathy than new entrants to control teams. These two



                                                                                                   28
estimates are significant at the 5% and the 10% levels, respectively. We also observe higher levels

of life satisfaction and positive mood among the new entrants to treatment teams, though these are

only statistically different from zero at the 13% and 12% levels, respectively. Overall, these results

not only suggest additional support for the mechanism that managers changed their interactions

with workers, but also suggest that these changes persisted beyond the period in which they were

receiving feedback from their subordinates.34



8     Robustness Checks

We consider whether the results are robust to survey attrition and spillovers from the treatment

teams to the control teams.


8.1    Survey Attrition

Workers attrite from our analysis when they leave the firm, and we conclude that these firm sep-

arations are different in treatment and control teams and explain the results. Here, we consider

the idea that there is attrition from the survey (among workers who still work at the firm).35 This

could potentially explain the results based on survey responses, including job and life satisfaction

and mood, but this issue cannot explain the results based on administrative data from the firm, in-

cluding team-level productivity and individual-level performance. Survey attrition in the follow-up

survey (not including firm separations) is extremely low at 1.65% of the sample. More importantly,

there are no differences in survey attrition between the treatment and control teams.36
  34
     An alternative possible explanation is that new entrants are not randomly assigned to teams but that new
applicants who were happier were assigned to teams that had lower turnover rates (i.e. treatment teams). In
Appendix Table A.10, we examine characteristics that are fixed since the time of hire or very likely not to have
changed (i.e. married) since being hired within the past couple of months. The observable characteristics of new
entrants were not significantly different for treatment and control teams.
  35
     This could occur if the workers were absent from work when we were interviewing the team.
  36
     The coefficient in a regression including 1272 observations on treatment where the dependent variable is survey
attrition is 0.010 with a standard error of 0.009.




                                                                                                                 29
8.2   Spillovers

We will consider two potential ways that spillovers could affect the results. One primary concern

regarding spillovers is that individuals in the control group found out about the intervention in

the treatment teams and reacted negatively to not being given the opportunity to evaluate their

managers. Thus, the results could be driven by workers in the control group leaving the firm

or reporting lower satisfaction and worse relationships with their managers because they were

upset about being excluded from the evaluations. This concern could lead to overestimates in the

impact of the intervention and a misattribution of the mechanism. We do two things to consider

this concern. First, we asked questions about whether individuals discussed the intervention with

others in the follow-up survey. Second, we collected information about social networks in the

baseline survey and use that information to estimate spillover effects by looking at whether the

treated share of individuals in one's social network matters for the results.

   A second concern is that there are direct productivity spillovers across teams along a production

line. This type of spillover could lead to underestimates of the productivity effects of the intervention

if the control teams are positively affected. To examine this concern, we estimate the impact of

having a treated team immediately upstream in the production line.

   Appendix Table A.11 shows the summary statistics for the questions in the follow-up survey

related to discussing and hearing about the intervention. The three questions on discussing the

intervention are asked conditional on answering yes to the question about participating in the

feedback (referred to in column 1 of Table 10). We asked whether they discussed the intervention

with their managers, with their colleagues (on the same team) and with employees on other teams.

Overall, most workers didn't report talking about the feedback system to anyone. As shown in Panel

A, among those who reported participating in giving feedback on their managers, 13.57% reported

discussing the feedback in any way with their managers, and less than one-quarter discussed it with

workers on their team. And only 3.2% of workers reported discussing the feedback with workers on

other teams. Panel B shows the responses to the same questions for managers. The vast majority

of managers didn't talk about the feedback program with their workers (82%), managers on other

teams (73%) and their higher-level supervisors (75%). Conditional on answering no to participating


                                                                                                      30
in the feedback intervention, workers were asked whether they had heard of workers on other teams

being able to do this. Only 11% of workers who didn't participate in the feedback themselves said

that they had heard of other teams doing this. This partially mitigates concern that there was a

lot of discussion across teams about the intervention.

    To further test the importance of spillovers in the control teams, we also make use of social

network information that we collected in the baseline survey. We ask all survey respondents to

identify any relatives who are currently working at the firm, friends on other teams, people who

referred them to the firm and people whom they referred to the firm.37 In Table 16, we include

a variable for the number of people in their social network outside of their own team that were

treated plus its interaction with the treatment status of the individual.38 Thus, the key coefficient

of interest is the one on N etwork T reated which provides information on whether the outcomes of

individuals in control teams are affected by having more people in their social network exposed to

the treatment. For all of the outcome variables, we see no significant effects of having more treated

social connections on the outcomes for control group individuals. This provides additional evidence

that the main results are not being driven by negative spillover in the control group.

    Finally, we consider the possibility that there are productivity spillovers across teams along

the production line. To some extent, manufacturing teams are organized to minimize production

spillovers, but we consider the possibility that higher productivity from the team directly upstream

affect a team's own KPI outcomes. To do this, we include a variable on whether the team upstream

in the production line within a plant is treated in the regressions of team-level KPI. It is also common

for multiple teams to feed into the production process for a team; in this case, the variable is equal

to zero if less than half of the adjacent upstream teams were treated and equal to one if more than

half of the adjacent upstream teams were treated.

    The results are presented in Table 17. Whether the upstream teams are treated or not has

no significant effects on total KPI, production KPI or management KPI. The results indicate that
  37
     In the survey, we allow respondents to list up to 6 family members, 8 friends on other teams, 5 people they
referred, and 2 people who referred them. These maximums are hit in less than half of one percent of cases. The
mean number of family or friends on other teams is 1.41. They have referred on average 0.13 people to other teams
and received on average 0.13 referrals from people on other teams.
  38
     An alternative measure is the share of their social network treated rather than the total level. The results, shown
in Appendix Table A.12, are not substantively different.



                                                                                                                     31
there are no production spillovers resulting from the intervention across teams. Overall, there is

no evidence to suggest that spillovers bias the results either through negative effects on the control

group or through positive spillover effects across the production line.



9    Conclusion

The results of our paper show that letting workers participate in evaluating their managers reduces

worker turnover by over 50%. Although the intervention does not affect individual productivity,

team-level productivity does increase significantly. This is driven by the fact that treated teams

have less worker turnover than control teams, and high turnover reduces team productivity because

new workers normally perform poorly in the beginning and need substantial training. Furthermore,

we find that workers in teams that were given the opportunity to evaluate their managers report

higher levels of happiness, and there is a significant increase in the measure of positive mood. This

is consistent with the idea that the intervention led workers to be happier and less likely to quit.

    Examining factors driving the observed results, we find direct evidence for one mechanism:

changes in managers' behavior and their relationship with workers. Specifically, treated workers

report that their team managers encouraged them more, criticized them less, and provided more

empathy for the feelings of the workers. Moreover, treated managers had more social interac-

tions with workers outside of work. We also rule out two other potential mechanisms, including

empowering workers by giving them voices and changes of team composition.

    An important question for future research is: why didn't managers engage in a more empathetic

and encouraging relationship with their workers prior to the intervention? Given that the less

critical behavior reduced worker turnover, increased team-level KPI and increased the managers'

monthly earnings, rational economic models suggest that they should have already been choosing

their managerial inputs to reduce turnover and maximize team performance. One possibility is

that managers may have underestimated the value of retention. Related to the idea that managers

are making mistakes, it is possible that behavioral biases may explain the results. For example, the

manager may know that improving their relationships with workers will lead to better outcomes,

but is present-biased where there may be costs to productivity today in order to increase future

                                                                                                   32
retention and productivity.

   An alternative possibility is that managers may estimate correctly the value of retention but

are not able to gather the information needed to know how to increase retention. Indeed, it is quite

possible that if managers try to directly solicit feedback from their workers about their managerial

skills, workers would not feel comfortable being honest. Thus, it may be the case that outside

intervention (either by a third party or other parties in the firm that are not the manager) is

necessary for workers to feel confident that their individual responses are anonymous. These are

thought-provoking questions that we leave for future research.

   Importantly, our results pass the market test. After seeing our findings, our partner company,

the large automobile-manufacturing firm in China, decided to change company policy to incorporate

worker feedback in all their plants, covering thousands of production teams and almost 20,000

production-line workers. Our results thus suggest that letting workers participate in their managers'

evaluation is an effective and inexpensive way of improving management practices, increasing worker

satisfaction, and reducing turnover.




                                                                                                  33
References

Adhvaryu, Achyuta, Namrata Kala, and Anant Nyshadham. 2019. "Management and Shocks to

  Worker Productivity." NBER Working Paper No. 25865 .

Adhvaryu, Achyuta, Teresa Molina, and Anant Nyshadham. 2020. "Expectations, Wage Hikes, and

  Worker Voice." Working Paper .

Akerlof, George A. 1982. "Labor contracts as partial gift exchange." The quarterly journal of

  economics 97 (4):543­569.

Antonioni, David. 1996. "Designing an effective 360-degree appraisal feedback process." Organiza-

  tional Dynamics 25 (2):24­38.

Atwater, E. Leanne, David A. Waldman, David Atwater, and Priscilla Cartier. 2000. "An Upward

  Feedback Field Experiment: Supervisors' Cynicism, Reactions, and Commitment to Subordi-

  nates." Personnel Psychology 53 (2):275­297.

Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay, and Imran Rasul. 2007. "Incentives for Managers and Inequality

  Among Workers: Evidence from a Firm-level Experiment." The Quarterly Journal of Economics

  122 (2):729­773.

------. 2009. "Social Connections and Incentives in the Workplace: Evidence from Personnel

  Data." Econometrica 77 (4):1047­1094.

Bartling, Barting, Ernst Fehr, and Holger Herz. 2014. "The Intrinsic Value of Decision Rights."

  Econometrica 82 (6):2005­2039.

Batt, Rosemary, Alexander J.S. Colvin, and Jeffrey Keefe. 2002. "Employee Voice, Human Resource

  Practices, and Quit Rates: Evidence from the Telecommunications Industry." Industrial and

  Labor Relations Review 34 (1):573­594.

Bebchuk, Lucian A., Alma Cohen, and Scott Hirst. 2017. "The Agency Problems of Institutional

  Investors." Journal of Economic Perspectives 31 (3):89­112.


                                                                                              34
Bellemare, Charles and Bruce Shearer. 2009. "Gift giving and worker productivity: Evidence from

  a firm-level experiment." Games and Economic Behavior 67 (1):233­244.

Blatter, Marc, Samuel Muehlemann, Samuel Schenker, and Stefan C. Wolter. 2015. "Hiring Costs

  for Skilled Workers and the Supply of Firm-Provided Trainings." Oxford Economic Papers

  68 (1):238­257.

Bloom, Nicholas, Benn Eifert, Aprajit Mahajan, David McKenzie, and John Roberts. 2013. "Does

  Management Matter? Evidence from India." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (1):1­51.

Bloom, Nicholas and John Van Reenen. 2007. "Measuring and Explaining Management Practices

  Across Firms and Countries." Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (4):1351­1408.

Bruhn, Miriam, Dean Karlan, and Antoinette Schoar. 2018. "The impact of consulting services on

  small and medium enterprises: Evidence from a randomized trial in Mexico." Journal of Political

  Economy 126 (2):635­687.

Callegarin, Myriam. 2017.       "High Employee Turnover in China is not a Matter of

  Money."     URL https://www.newpointdeview.com/pro-en/intercultural-compentence/

  high-employee-turnover-in-china-not-matter-of-money/.

Carpenter, Mason A. and WM. Gerard Sanders. 2002. "Top Management Team Compensation:

  the Missing Link Between CEO Pay and Firm Performance?" Strategic Management Journal

  23 (4):367­375.

Cooke, Williams. 1994. "Employee Participation Programs, Group-Based Incentives, and Com-

  pany Performance: A Union-Nonunion Comparison." Industrial and Labor Relations Review

  47 (4):594­609.

Coughlan, Anne T. and Ronald M. Schmidt. 1985.          "Executive Compensation, Management

  Turnover, and Firm Performance: An Empirical Investigation." Journal of Accounting and

  Economics 7 (1-3):43­66.




                                                                                              35
Coviello, Decio, Erika Deserranno, and Nicola Persico. 2020. "Minimum Wage and Individual

  Worker Productivity: Evidence from a Large US Retailer." Working paper .

Craig, Ben and John Pencavel. 1995. "Participation and Productivity: A Comparison of Worker

  Cooperatives and Conventional Firms in the Plywood Industry." Brookings Papers: Microeco-

  nomics :121­174.

Dube, Arindrajit, Eric Freeman, and Michael Reich. 2010. "Employee Replacement Costs." Work-

  ing Paper .

Frederiksen, Anders, Lisa B. Kahn, and Fabian Lange. 2019. "Supervisors and Performance Man-

  agement System." NBER Working Paper No. 23351 .

Freeman, B. Richard. 1980. "Unionism and the Dispersion of Wages." Industrial and Labor Rela-

  tions Review 34 (1):3­23.

Gosnell, Greer K., John A. List, and Robert D. Metcalfe. 2019. "The Impact of Management Prac-

  tices on Employee Productivity: A Field Experiment with Airline Captains." NBER Working

  Paper No. 25620 .

Grossman, Sanford J. and Oliver D. Hart. 1983. "Implicit Contracts Under Asymmetric Informa-

  tion." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 98:123­156.

Heslin, A. Peter and Gary P. Latham. 2004. "The Effect of Upward Feedback on Mangerial Be-

  havior." Applied Psychology: an International Review 53 (1):23­37.

Holmstrom, Bengt and Paul Milgrom. 1987. "Aggregation and Linearity in the Provision of In-

  tertemporal Incentives." Econometrica 55 (2):303­328.

Jacoby, Stanford M. 1983. "Industrial Labor Mobility in Historical Perspective." Industrial Rela-

  tions 22 (2):261­282.

Jensen, Michael and Kevin Murphy. 1990. "Performance Pay and Top-Management Incentives."

  Journal of Political Economy 98 (2):225­264.


                                                                                              36
Kelly, Erin L., Phyllis Moen, J. Michael Oakes, Wen Fan, Cassandra Okechukwu, Kelly D. Davis,

  Leslie B. Hammer, Ellen Ernst Kossek, Rosalind Berkowitz King, Ginger C. Hanson, Frank

  Mierzwa, and Lynne M. Casper. 2014. "Changing Work and Work-Family Conflict: Evidence

  from the Work, Family, and Health Network." American Sociological Review 79 (3):1­32.

Lazear, Edward P. 2018. "Compensation and Incentives in the Workplace." Journal of Economic

  Perspectives 32 (3):195­214.

McKenzie, David and Christopher Woodruff. 2016. "Business Practices in Small Firms in Devel-

  oping Countries." Management Science 63 (9):2773­3145.

Mehran, Hamid. 1995. "Executive Compensation Structure, Ownership, and Firm Performance."

  Journal of Financial Economics 38 (2):163­184.

Milgrom, Paul R. 1988. "Employment Contracts, Influence Activities, and Efficient Organization

  Design." Journal of Political Economy 96 (1):42­60.

Moon, Ken, Patrick Bergemann, Daniel Brown, Andrew Chen, James Chu, Ellen A. Eisen, Gre-

  gory M. Fischer, Prashant Loyalka, Sungmin Rho, and Joshua Cohen. 2019. "Manufacturing

  Productivity with Worker Turnover." Working paper .

Moon, Ken, Prashant Loyalka, Patrick Bergemann, and Joshua Cohen. 2020. "The Hidden Cost of

  Worker Turnover: Attributing Product Reliability to the Turnover of Factory Workers." Working

  paper .

Muehlemann, Samuel and Harald Pfeifer. 2016. "The Structure of Hiring Costs in Germany:

  Evidence from Firm-Level Data." Industrial Relations 55 (2):193­218.

Murphy, Kevin J. 1999. "Executive Compensation." In Orley Ashenfelter and David Card (eds),

  Handbook of Labor Economics 3b (38):2485­2563.

Owen, Laura. 1995. "Worker Turnover in the 1920s: The Role of Changing Employment Policies."

  Industrial and Corporate Changes 4 (3):499­530.



                                                                                            37
Schoar, Antoinette. 2013. "The Importance of Being Nice: Supervisory Skill Training in the Cam-

  bodian Garment Industry." Working paper .

Seifert, Charles and Gary Yukl. 2010. "Effects of Repeated Multi-source Feedback on the Influ-

  ence Behavior and Effectiveness of Managers: A Field Experiment." The Leadership Quarterly

  21 (5):856­866.

Seifert, Charles, Gary Yukl, and Robert A. McDonald. 2003. "Effects of Multisource Feedback and

  Feedback Facilitator on the Influence Behavior of Mangers Toward Subordinates." Journal of

  Applied Psychology 88 (3):561­569.

World Bank. 2013. "World development report 2013: Jobs."




                                                                                            38
                 Figure 1: Coefficients on Treatment × Month around Intervention
                                              (a) Production KPI




                                             (b) Management KPI




Note: The dependent variable is Production KPI in Panel A and Management KPI in Panel B. The dots indicate
 the coefficients on the interactions between treatment and month around intervention. The regressions include
indicators for month around intervention, randomization strata, KPI form version and team. The bars show the
   90% confidence intervals around the estimates. The periods shown in red with the short dashed line as the
 confidence intervals (6 and 7) indicate that the feedback is being provided but the incentives have ended. The
 periods 8 through 10 shown in green with the alternating long dashes and dots line as the confidence intervals
                                   indicate periods where the feedback has ended.                               39
           Table 1: Pre-Intervention Summary Statistics for the Administrative Data

                                    Treatment Control  N   p-value
                        Panel A: Worker Performance Measures
                        Total         99.55    99.08  1094  .6520
                                     (4.697)  (17.64)
                        Production    .4453    .1327  1075  .2006
                                     (3.500)  (1.822)
                        Safety        -.071    -.098  1069  .7248
                                     (.4473)  (.4161)
                        Quality       .2017    -.031  1069  .0806
                                     (.9646)  (.6412)
                        Attitude      .0688    .0702  1069  .9788
                                     (.6315)  (.6324)
                        Routine       -.376    .0164  1070  .1106
                                     (1.422)  (1.134)
                        Attendance    .0764    .7278  1075  .4446
                                     (1.948)  (17.37)
                        Panel B: Team-Level KPI
                        Total         98.11    97.15   76   .5556
                                     (6.930)  (7.147)
                        Production    32.98    33.83   74   .7544
                                     (11.09)  (12.00)
                        Management    20.40    20.12   76   .8115
                                     (5.386)  (4.600)
                        Equipment     10.22    10.05   30   .9145
                                     (4.721)  (3.428)
                        Quality       26.87    29.07   70   .5670
                                     (15.96)  (15.97)
                        Safety        19.96    16.21   76   .1720
                                     (13.25)  (10.07)
The mean of each variable is shown for the average of all pre-invention months with standard deviations below
in parentheses. The p-value is taken from a regression testing the statistical difference between the two groups.




                                                                                                                    40
                Table 2: Pre-Intervention Summary Statistics for the Survey Data

                                                  Treatment       Control       N       p-value
                  Age                                32.80         33.73       1251      .4982
                                                   (9.359)        (9.591)
                  Male                               .9226         .8800       1250      .2211
                                                   (.2672)        (.3251)
                  High School or More                .4703         .4525       1251      .5975
                                                   (.4995)        (.4981)
                  Tenure at Firm                     4.490         4.947       1251      .4985
                                                   (4.967)        (5.091)
                  Married                            .6474         .6671       1247      .6746
                                                   (.4781)        (.4715)
                  Life Rating                       7.092          6.795       1248      .0361
                                                   (1.892)        (1.974)
                  Good Health                        .6546         .6345       1251      .6402
                                                   (.4758)        (.4819)
                  Positive Mood                      29.27         28.60       1247      .2414
                                                   (6.614)        (7.183)
                  Negative Mood                      17.96         17.38       1246      .1443
                                                   (6.372)        (5.905)
                  Work Satisfaction                  35.65         35.81       1250      .8489
                                                   (8.870)        (9.453)
                  Monthly Earnings                  3690.6        3652.1       1235      .7030
                                                   (802.9)        (769.1)
                  Monthly Bonus                     1357.0        1315.2       1228      .5930
                                                   (594.2)        (562.1)
                  Socialize with Manager             .5570         .5981       1247      .7580
                                                   (1.325)        (1.341)
The mean of each variable is shown for the average of all pre-invention months with standard deviations below
in parentheses. The p-value is taken from a regression testing the statistical difference between the two groups.




                     Table 3: Impact of Evaluating Managers on Leaving Firm

                                                         Workers        Managers
                                                            (1)            (2)
                                Treated                 -0.0622          -0.0361
                                                         (0.0178)       (0.0272)
                                Obs                        1424             73
                                Mean of Dep Var            0.107         0.0137
Notes: Regressions include controls for randomization strata and second treatment. Standard errors clustered
at the team level are shown in parentheses. ***, **, * denotes significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels respectively.




                                                                                                                       41
              Table 4: Impact of Evaluating Managers on Individual Performance

                  Total      Production      Safety     Quality     Attitude     Routine      Attendance
                    (1)          (2)            (3)        (4)          (5)         (6)           (7)
Treated           0.142        0.0184         -0.347     0.0596       -0.144      -0.0888       0.0358
                 (0.375)      (0.0608)       (0.320)    (0.0447)     (0.189)     (0.0609)      (0.0695)
Lag DepVar       1.090        0.725            0.671    0.596       0.438        0.804         1.181
                 (0.143)      (0.0311)       (0.405)    (0.0754)    (0.0724)     (0.0697)       (0.109)
Obs                963          949             946        944         945          945           946
Notes: Regressions include controls for randomization strata and second treatment. Standard errors clustered
at the team level. ***, **, * denotes significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels respectively.




                      Table 5: Impact of Evaluating Managers on Team KPI

                      Total      Production      Management        Equipment      Quality      Safety
                       (1)           (2)             (3)               (4)           (5)         (6)
    Treated          2.264        3.714            1.899             0.566          0.419      0.541
                     (1.075)       (1.289)         (0.808)          (0.603)        (1.070)    (1.184)
    Lag DepVar      0.471         0.929           0.476             0.876         0.951       0.827
                    (0.0898)       (0.102)        (0.0783)          (0.106)       (0.0320)    (0.133)
    Obs                 70           68               70               26             58         70
Notes: Regressions include controls for randomization strata and second treatment. Standard errors clustered
at the team level. ***, **, * denotes significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels respectively.




                             Table 6: Impact of Treatment on Earnings

                                             Workers                 Managers
                                      Earnings      Bonus      Earnings       Bonus
                                         (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)
                     Treated          -0.00264      -0.153      0.0388       0.228
                                      (0.0166)     (0.125)     (0.0288)      (0.106)
                     Lag DepVar       0.762        0.664       0.741         0.590
                                      (0.0436)     (0.190)      (0.112)      (0.177)
                     Obs                1114         1020          70           70
Notes: The dependent variables, total monthly earnings and monthly bonus, are transformed using the inverse
hyperbolic sine (IHS) function. Regressions include controls for randomization strata, enumerators, survey
month and second treatment. Standard errors clustered at the team level are shown in parentheses. ***, **, *
denotes significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels respectively.




                                                                                                               42
                      Table 7: Impact of Evaluating Managers on Well-Being

                             Life     Work                   Positive     Negative      Health
                           Rating Satisfaction                Mood         Mood         Rating
                             (1)       (2)                     (3)          (4)          (5)
              Panel A: All Workers Sample
              Treated     0.324       0.665                   0.633        -0.0145      0.0402
                           (0.116)   (0.635)                  (0.378)      (0.319)     (0.0295)
              Lag DepVar 0.292      0.451                    0.418        0.384        0.413
                          (0.0348)  (0.0246)                 (0.0305)     (0.0250)     (0.0317)
              Obs           1126      1128                     1125         1124         1129
              Panel B: Managers Sample
              Treated       0.454     3.848                    2.002        0.777        0.135
                           (0.442)   (2.318)                  (1.788)      (1.522)     (0.0935)
              Lag DepVar 0.601       0.401                   0.578         0.369       0.716
                           (0.146)   (0.171)                 (0.0873)      (0.152)      (0.101)
              Obs             62        63                       62           62           63
Notes: Regressions include controls for randomization strata, enumerators and second treatment. Standard
errors clustered at the team level are shown in parentheses. ***, **, * denotes significance at the 1, 5 and 10%
levels respectively.




      Table 8: Impact of Evaluating Managers on the Components of Work Satisfaction

                                             Treated                    Lag Dep Var
                                     Coefficent     Std Error     Coefficient     Std Error      N
         Promotion                      0.044        (0.062)       0.257***        (0.062)      1129
         Other Incompetence            -0.152*       (0.078)       0.201***        (0.078)      1129
         Job Meaningless                -0.081       (0.051)       0.255***        (0.051)      1129
         Encourages                    0.128**       (0.049)       0.249***        (0.049)      1129
         Politics                        0.010       (0.081)       0.264***        (0.081)      1129
         Workload                        0.062       (0.082)       0.222***        (0.082)      1129
         Unfairness                     -0.051       (0.072)       0.169***        (0.072)      1056
         Raises                          0.020       (0.077)       0.317***        (0.077)      1129
         Switch Team                    -0.005       (0.065)       0.187***        (0.065)      1128
         Criticizes                   -0.162**       (0.064)       0.194***        (0.064)      1129
         Bad Rules                      -0.113       (0.071)       0.239***        (0.071)      1129
         No Empathy                   -0.164**       (0.066)       0.223***        (0.066)      1056
         Effort Rewarded                -0.020       (0.079)         0.280         (0.079)      1129
Notes: Regressions include controls for randomization strata, enumerators and second treatment. Standard
errors clustered at the team level are shown in parentheses. ***, **, * denotes significance at the 1, 5 and 10%
levels respectively.




                                                                                                                   43
             Table 9: Impact of Evaluating Managers on Socializing with Managers

                                                       Socialize     WeChat
                                                       Manager       Manager
                                                          (1)           (2)
                                Treated                  0.518       0.0713
                                                        (0.903)      (0.0390)
                                Lag DepVar             4.340
                                                        (1.448)
                                Obs                      1125           922
                                Mean of Dep Var          5.277         0.632
Notes: Regressions include controls for randomization strata, enumerators and second treatment. Standard
errors clustered at the team level are shown in parentheses. ***, **, * denotes significance at the 1, 5 and 10%
levels respectively.



                      Table 10: Impact of Treatment on Awareness of Scoring

                         Workers' Awareness                              Managers' Awareness
               Scored       Affected         Affected           Scored        Affected        Affected
              Manager      Wage (Fill)      Wage (Unfill)      Manager       Wage (Fill)     Wage (Unfill)
                 (1)           (2)              (3)               (4)            (5)             (6)
 Treated      0.564         0.301             0.129            0.664           0.194           0.0966
              (0.0349)      (0.0417)         (0.0621)          (0.117)        (0.139)          (0.387)
 Obs            1031           820              378               63             62              39
Notes: Regressions include controls for randomization strata, enumerators and second treatment. Standard
errors clustered at the team level are shown in parentheses. ***, **, * denotes significance at the 1, 5 and 10%
levels respectively.



               Table 11: Impact of Awareness of Policy (Manager Versus Worker)

                                           Total      Product      Manage         Life      Positive
                                            KPI         KPI          KPI         Satis.       Mood
                                             (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)
         Manager Aware Scoring            5.088         1.546       1.782      0.583         1.760
                                          (1.434)      (1.785)     (1.330)      (0.207)      (0.965)
         Worker Aware Scoring              0.379       0.0571       0.893        0.252       0.0226
                                          (0.725)      (0.672)     (0.705)      (0.190)      (0.676)
         Lag DepVar                       0.526       0.866        1.110       0.275        0.426
                                          (0.127)     (0.0830)     (0.216)     (0.0477)     (0.0495)
         Obs                                605          605         605          562          561
Notes: The sample is limited to the treatment teams. Regressions include controls for enumerators and second
treatment. Standard errors clustered at the team level are shown in parentheses. ***, **, * denotes significance
at the 1, 5 and 10% levels respectively.



                                                                                                                   44
                Table 12: Impact of Evaluating Managers on Team Composition

                                      Manager       Worker       Total Worker         Team
                                      Changes       Changes        Changes             Size
                                         (1)           (2)            (3)              (4)
                  Treated              -0.0303       0.0140         0.0791           -0.0918
                                      (0.0814)      (0.0444)        (0.499)          (0.755)
                  Lag Dep Var                                                       0.830
                                                                                    (0.0719)
                  Obs                      66         1060             71               71
                  Mean Dep Var           0.152        0.167           2.493           18.45
Notes: The dependent variable in column 1 is whether the manager of the team changed between the two
survey rounds. In column 2, it is whether the worker changed teams. In column 3, it is the total number of
workers who shifted teams at the team-level. In column 4, it is total team size at follow-up. Regressions include
controls for randomization strata, and second treatment. Standard errors clustered at the team level are shown
in parentheses. ***, **, * denotes significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels respectively.




             Table 13: Baseline Summary Statistics by Team Composition Changes

                              Team Stayers        Team Changers         p-value    Stayers     Changers
                                 Mean                 Mean                Diff      Obs          Obs
      Total KPI                  98.038               97.901             0.889       904         270
      Production KPI             33.971               34.822             0.610       884         256
      Management KPI             20.591               21.056             0.430       904         270
      Equipment KPI               8.920               10.679             0.285       256         116
      Quality KPI                27.174               27.821             0.775       877         248
      Safety KPI                 19.848               15.956             0.002       904         270
      Total PFM                  99.163               99.514             0.599       820         256
      Production PFM              0.382                0.011             0.020       808         254
      Safety PFM                 -0.079               -0.105             0.743       802         254
      Quality PFM                 0.124               -0.041             0.034       802         254
      Attitude PFM                0.074                0.025             0.166       802         254
      Routine PFM                -0.199               -0.235             0.801       802         254
      Attendance PFM              0.538               -0.095             0.264       807         255
      Firm Tenure                 4.388                4.589             0.719       909         270
      Life Rating                 6.910                6.900             0.947       907         270
      Job Satisfaction           35.903               35.000             0.302       908         270
      Positive Mood              28.881               28.597             0.617       908         268
      Negative Mood              17.653               17.899             0.590       907         268
Notes: Column 1 shows the mean value at baseline for workers who are in the same team at follow-up. Column
2 shows the mean value at baseline for workers who have changed teams between the baseline and follow-up.
Column 3 shows the p-value from a regression testing the statistical difference between the two groups.




                                                                                                                    45
               Table 14: Baseline Summary Statistics of Firm Stayers and Leavers

                                         Stayers     Leavers     p-value     Stayers     Leavers
                                          Mean        Mean         Diff       Obs         Obs
                Total KPI                97.986      99.486       0.028       1246         152
                Production KPI           34.178      34.798       0.505       1211         151
                Management KPI           20.666      20.807       0.720       1246         152
                Equipment KPI             9.554        9.381      0.617        400          42
                Quality KPI              27.308      28.563       0.409       1191         148
                Safety KPI               18.864      17.791       0.313       1246         152
                Total PFM                99.321      97.785       0.100       1094         142
                Production PFM            0.289        0.336      0.894       1075         140
                Safety PFM               -0.085       -0.097      0.817       1069         137
                Quality PFM               0.085        0.002      0.128       1069         137
                Attitude PFM              0.070       -0.139      0.025       1069         137
                Routine PFM              -0.180       -0.189      0.947       1070         137
                Attendance PFM            0.402        0.623      0.806       1075         140
                Firm Tenure               4.725        1.789      0.000       1251         152
                Life Rating               6.940        6.796      0.368       1248         152
                Job Satisfaction         35.737      36.224       0.591       1250         152
                Positive Mood            28.929      29.704       0.148       1247         152
                Negative Mood            17.670      17.724       0.924       1246         152
Notes: Column 1 shows the mean value at baseline for workers who are still at the firm in the follow-up survey.
Column 2 shows the mean value at baseline for workers who have left the firm by the follow-up survey. Column
3 shows the p-value from a regression testing the statistical difference between the two groups.




                Table 15: Impact of Past Intervention on New Entrants' Outcomes

                         Life      Positive       Others        Manager        Manager       Manager
                        Satis.      Mood        Incompet.      Encourage       Criticize     Empathy
                         (1)         (2)            (3)           (4)             (5)           (6)
          Treated       2.388       4.622          0.143        1.368           -0.291        2.629
                       (1.516)     (2.861)        (0.602)       (0.521)        (0.683)        (1.364)
          Obs             66          66             66            66             66             66
Notes: Regressions include controls for randomization strata, and second treatment. Standard errors clustered
at the team level are shown in parentheses. ***, **, * denotes significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels respectively.




                                                                                                                       46
                         Table 16: Heterogeneity by Treatment of Networks

                                             Total      Product      Manage          Life     Positive
                                             KPI           KPI          KPI         Satis.      Mood
                                              (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)
       Network Treated                       0.152       -0.0571      -0.0172      0.0770       0.280
                                            (0.145)      (0.128)     (0.0808)     (0.0632)     (0.268)
       Treated X Network Treated             0.257      0.743          0.0981      0.0794       0.154
                                            (0.180)      (0.238)      (0.120)      (0.101)     (0.370)
       Treated                               1.199      3.221          0.714       0.289        0.579
                                            (0.789)      (1.016)      (0.539)      (0.128)     (0.428)
       Lag DepVar                          0.420        0.755        0.509        0.294       0.414
                                           (0.0710)     (0.0699)     (0.0583)     (0.0351)    (0.0305)
       Obs                                   1123         1098          1123        1126        1125
Notes: Regressions include controls for randomization strata, enumerators and second treatment. Standard
errors clustered at the team level are shown in parentheses. ***, **, * denotes significance at the 1, 5 and 10%
levels respectively.




                  Table 17: Impact of the Treatment Status of Upstream Teams

                                                    Total      Product      Manage
                                                    KPI          KPI          KPI
                                                     (1)          (2)          (3)
                         Upstream Treated           2.235       2.120         1.575
                                                   (2.336)     (2.174)       (1.320)
                         Lag Dep Var              0.466        0.930        0.613
                                                  (0.0935)     (0.117)      (0.0796)
                         Obs                         70           68           70
Notes: Regressions include controls for randomization strata as well as the primary and secondary treatments.
Standard errors clustered at the team level are shown in parentheses. ***, **, * denotes significance at the 1,
5 and 10% levels respectively.




                              Table A.1: Manager Evaluation Questions

       1   Organizing production
       2   Exhibiting good judgement in emergencies and conflicts between workers
       3   Treating all team members fairly, without showing favoritism
       4   Listening to opinions and feedback from team members
       5   Demonstrating understanding/compassion for workers in their work and lives
Notes: The question was "How effective was your team manager in the last month in the following dimensions?"
The responses were a five point scale with 1 being not effective at all and 5 being extremely effective.




                                                                                                                   47
                      Figure A.1: Individual Productivity by Worker Tenure




Note: The figure shows the average production productivity score of individuals by the quarter of tenure within
the firm.



                                      Table A.2: Mood Questions

                                        Positive          Negative
                                        Interested        Distressed
                                        Excited           Upset
                                        Strong            Guilty
                                        Enthusiastic      Scared
                                        Proud             Hostile
                                        Alert             Irritable
                                        Inspired          Ashamed
                                        Determined        Nervous
                                        Attentive         Jittery
                                        Active            Afraid
Notes: The PANAS mood questions are phrased in the following way. I would like to ask questions about
your feelings and thoughts during last month. In each case, you will be asked to indicate how often you felt
or thought a certain way in the last 30 days. Although some of the questions are similar, there are differences
between them and you should treat each one as a separate question. The best approach is to answer each
question fairly quickly. That is, do not try to count up the number of times you felt in a particular way, but
rather indicate the option that seems like a reasonable estimate. For each question choose from the following:
very slightly or not at all, a little, moderately, quite a bit, extremely.



                                                                                                                  48
Table A.3: Work Satisfaction Questions (5 Point Scale - Totally Disagree to Totally Agree)

 1    There is really too little chance for promotion on my job.
 2    The goals of this organization are not clear to me.
 3    I am not satisfied with the benefits I receive.
 4    I find I have to work harder at my job because of the incompetence of my teammates.
 5    I sometimes feel my job is meaningless.
 6    My manager often encourages me.
 7    There is too much bickering and fighting at work.
 8    I have too much to do at work.
 9    My manager is unfair to me.
 10   Raises are too few and far between.
 11   I wish I could switch teams because I don't get along with my coworkers.
 12   I'm often criticized by my manager.
 13   Many of our rules and procedures make doing a good job difficult.
 14   My manager shows too little interest in the feelings of subordinates.
 15   I don't feel my efforts are rewarded the way they should be.




  Table A.4: Winsorized Pre-Intervention Summary Statistics for the Administrative Data

                                        Treatment     Control      N      p-value
                        Total             99.65        99.85      1094     .6565
                                         (3.452)      (2.372)
                        Production        .3037        .0902      1075     .1577
                                         (1.673)      (.8569)
                        Safety            -.068        -.087      1069     .7744
                                         (.3364)      (.3340)
                        Quality           .1750        -.012      1069     .0908
                                         (.7851)      (.4880)
                        Attitude          .0673        .0735      1069     .8816
                                         (.4540)      (.4878)
                        Routine           -.401        -.045      1070     .1297
                                         (1.365)      (.4380)
                        Attendance        .0243        -.010      1075     .7243
                                         (.9938)      (.9618)
The data are winsorized at the top and bottom 1%. The mean of each variable is shown for the average of all
pre-invention months with standard deviations below in parentheses. The p-value is taken from a regression
testing the statistical difference between the two groups.




                                                                                                              49
                          Table A.5: Summary Statistics for KPI Weights

                                            Treatment       Control     N      p-value
                          Production            35           34.70      69      .9265
                                             (14.24)        (11.86)
                          Management          20.85          21.14      71      .8159
                                             (4.615)        (5.568)
                          Equipment           10.66          11.11      25      .7324
                                             (2.581)        (3.333)
                          Quality             29.03          25.14      65      .3110
                                             (15.56)        (15.04)
                          Safety              14.85          17.85      71      .3498
                                             (10.60)        (15.59)
The mean of each variable is shown is the average across all treatment or control teams with standard deviations
below in parentheses. The p-value is taken from a regression testing the statistical difference between the two
groups.




            Table A.6: Baseline Summary Statistics for Work Satisfaction Questions

                                               Treatment       Control       p-value     Obs.
                    Promotion                    0.441          0.355         0.010      1350
                    Other Incompetence           2.374          2.518         0.057      1350
                    Job Meaningless              2.221          2.199         0.758      1350
                    Encourages                   0.373          0.338         0.274      1350
                    Politics                     2.557          2.512         0.556      1349
                    Workload                     0.199          0.216         0.576      1350
                    Unfairness                   0.109          0.115         0.732      1348
                    Raises                       2.979          2.926         0.547      1350
                    Switch Team                  1.848          1.870         0.756      1350
                    Criticizes                   0.062          0.065         0.869      1350
                    Bad Rules                    2.174          2.207         0.626      1350
                    No Empathy                   0.125          0.120         0.786      1348
                    Effort Rewarded              2.392          2.443         0.581      1350
Notes: Column 1 shows the mean value at baseline for treatment group workers. Column 2 shows the mean
value at baseline for control group workers. Column 3 shows the p-value from a regression testing the statistical
difference between the two groups.




                                                                                                                    50
Table A.7: Leads and Lags Estimates of Impact of Evaluating Managers on Individual Performance


                                  Total      Production        Safety      Quality      Attitude      Routine      Attendance
                                    (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)            (7)
 4 months pre X Treat              0.106       -0.0695        -0.298        0.0450      -0.282        -0.0701        -0.333
                                 (0.351)       (0.115)        (0.177)      (0.116)       (0.139)      (0.106)        (0.179)
 3 months pre X Treat              0.418       -0.0359         -0.256       0.162         -0.224       -0.127         -0.139
                                 (0.290)       (0.113)        (0.183)      (0.101)       (0.151)      (0.099)        (0.170)
 2 months pre X Treat              0.131       -0.0711         -0.115     0.00996        -0.240       -0.0715        -0.301
                                 (0.308)       (0.154)        (0.139)      (0.054)       (0.141)      (0.095)        (0.176)
 0 months post X Treat             0.288       -0.286          -0.186       0.0454        -0.184      -0.162          -0.221
                                 (0.321)       (0.151)        (0.143)      (0.070)       (0.162)      (0.086)        (0.166)
 1 months post X Treat             0.676       -0.0703         -0.169      -0.0484      -0.0639        -0.145        -0.549
                                 (0.448)       (0.108)        (0.160)      (0.120)       (0.157)      (0.090)        (0.290)
 2 months post X Treat             0.247       -0.0647         -0.195      -0.0856      -0.0549        -0.139       -0.785
                                 (0.422)       (0.216)        (0.141)      (0.114)       (0.133)      (0.094)        (0.367)
 3 months post X Treat             0.204       -0.253          -0.227        0.118        -0.199       -0.142       -0.423
                                 (0.298)       (0.145)        (0.159)      (0.096)       (0.132)      (0.095)        (0.211)
 4 months post X Treat             0.411         0.118         -0.254      -0.0675        -0.315       -0.126        -0.578
                                 (0.482)       (0.203)        (0.178)      (0.105)       (0.221)      (0.106)        (0.300)
 5 months post X Treat             1.001        -0.755         -0.544       0.0269        -0.126      -0.146         -0.447
                                 (0.679)       (0.526)        (0.460)      (0.132)       (0.134)      (0.084)        (0.248)
 6 months post X Treat            -0.106        -0.183         -0.127       0.0775       -0.297       -0.0254          0.743
                                 (0.620)       (0.120)        (0.201)      (0.106)       (0.158)      (0.122)        (0.557)
 7 months post X Treat            -0.462       -0.207          -0.127      -0.0122        -0.127       -0.106         -0.109
                                 (0.500)       (0.117)        (0.170)      (0.068)       (0.151)      (0.104)        (0.397)
 8 months post X Treat             0.477       -0.0918         -0.254      -0.0416        -0.184      -0.0539         -0.196
                                 (0.780)       (0.140)        (0.186)      (0.104)       (0.142)      (0.093)        (0.440)
 9 months post X Treat             0.236       -0.0810         -0.171        0.129        -0.174       -0.138         -0.188
                                 (0.471)       (0.169)        (0.140)      (0.113)       (0.133)      (0.098)        (0.313)
 10 months post X Treat            0.154        -0.198        -0.300      -0.00503        -0.223        0.176         -0.220
                                 (0.486)       (0.243)        (0.158)      (0.094)       (0.184)      (0.201)        (0.189)
 Obs                              14974         14392          14328        14304         14291        14266          14369
  Notes: Regressions include controls for month around intervention, randomization strata, and team fixed effects.
  Standard errors clustered at the team level. ***, **, * denotes significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels respectively.




                                                                                                                          51
Table A.8: Leads and Lags Estimates of Impact of Evaluating Managers on Team-Level KPI

                                    Total     Product      Manage      Equipment        Quality     Safety
                                      (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)             (5)         (6)
   4 months pre X Treat              0.344     0.395         0.323       1.329           -0.141      -2.232
                                   (1.785)    (1.399)      (1.003)      (1.030)         (1.332)     (3.068)
   3 months pre X Treat              1.297     0.595         0.213       0.271            0.179      -0.138
                                   (1.519)    (1.161)      (0.801)      (1.016)         (0.947)     (2.781)
   2 months pre X Treat              0.580    -0.0702       -0.477       0.970            1.144       0.318
                                   (1.342)    (0.819)      (0.370)      (0.984)         (0.772)     (0.864)
   0 months post X Treat             0.532     2.007        1.287       2.283             0.602      -1.940
                                   (2.010)    (1.374)      (1.225)      (0.935)         (1.560)     (1.622)
   1 months post X Treat             0.743     1.050        1.454        1.797            1.110      -1.890
                                   (1.882)    (1.340)      (1.205)      (1.006)         (1.427)     (1.537)
   2 months post X Treat           0.0744      1.347        1.259       2.134             0.308      -1.095
                                   (2.140)    (1.372)      (1.181)      (1.002)         (2.288)     (1.628)
   3 months post X Treat             2.081     2.822        1.033       2.160             0.493      -0.686
                                   (2.918)    (1.542)      (1.315)      (0.848)         (2.544)     (1.762)
   4 months post X Treat            -0.574    3.260         1.351        1.923            0.967      -0.390
                                   (6.115)    (1.471)      (1.674)      (1.038)         (3.456)     (2.611)
   5 months post X Treat             2.322    3.635         1.218       2.624            -0.484       0.352
                                   (2.767)    (1.544)      (1.393)      (1.064)         (1.998)     (2.937)
   6 months post X Treat             1.271    3.798         0.904        1.983           -0.843       1.021
                                   (2.512)    (1.532)      (1.424)      (1.071)         (1.770)     (2.590)
   7 months post X Treat             3.457    3.869         1.220        1.640            1.159       0.546
                                   (2.836)    (1.618)      (1.340)      (0.953)         (2.127)     (2.774)
   8 months post X Treat             1.546    3.260         1.320        1.473           -0.495       0.512
                                   (2.225)    (1.553)      (1.351)      (0.989)         (1.753)     (2.766)
   9 months post X Treat             1.419     2.651         1.612       2.059           -0.582       1.436
                                   (2.262)    (1.708)      (1.330)      (1.049)         (1.672)     (2.600)
   10 months post X Treat            2.987     3.864        1.716        1.823           -1.262       0.900
                                   (3.298)    (2.004)      (1.514)      (1.038)         (1.950)     (2.709)
   Obs                                923       905           922         351              684         923
Notes: Regressions include controls for month around intervention, randomization strata, KPI form version
and team fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the team level. ***, **, * denotes significance at the 1, 5
and 10% levels respectively.




                                                                                                                   52
             Table A.9: Impact of Evaluating Managers on Individual Performance

                   Total      Production        Safety     Quality      Attitude     Routine      Attendance
                     (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)
Treated            -0.135       0.0630         -0.0207      0.0601      -0.00310      -0.114       0.00652
                  (0.206)      (0.0709)       (0.0407)     (0.0433)     (0.0275)     (0.0578)      (0.0593)
Lag DepVar       0.562         0.386           0.191       0.517        0.321        0.767         0.314
                 (0.0467)      (0.0406)       (0.0794)     (0.0595)     (0.0524)     (0.0720)      (0.0243)
Obs                 963          949             946         944           945          945           946
Notes: The data are winsorized at the top and bottom 1%. Regressions include controls for randomization
strata and second treatment. Standard errors clustered at the team level. ***, **, * denotes significance at the
1, 5 and 10% levels respectively.




  Table A.10: Summary Statistics for Characteristics of New Entrants at the Time of Hire

                                        Treatment       Control     p-value    Treatment        Control
                                          Mean           Mean         Diff        Obs.           Obs.
       Age                                25.606        24.972       0.669         33             36
       Male                               0.939          0.972       0.642         33             36
       High School or More                0.636          0.528       0.293         33             36
       Married                            0.333          0.444       0.341         33             36
       Referred to Company                0.545          0.611       0.607         33             36
       Prior Experience (Years)           5.417          4.625       0.541         33             36
       Grew Up Locally                     0.727         0.750       0.860         33             36
Notes: Column 1 shows the mean value for post-intervention new entrants to treatment teams. Column 2
shows the mean value for post-intervention new entrants to control teams. Column 3 shows the p-value from a
regression testing the statistical difference between the two groups.




               Table A.11: Summary Statistics on Discussions about Intervention

                                                                      Mean      Std dev      N
              Panel A: Workers
              Discussed with manager                                  .1357      .3427      685
              Discussed with colleagues                               .2272      .4193      682
              Discussed with other teams                              .0321      .1765      684
              Hear other teams provide feedback (control)             .1101      .3132      690
              Panel B: Managers
              Discussed with workers                                  .1818      .3901       44
              Discussed with other managers                           .2727      .4505       44
              Discussed with their supervisors                         .25       .4380       44



                                                                                                                   53
                  Table A.12: Heterogeneity by Treatment of Networks (Shares)

                                                 Total      Product      Manage         Life      Positive
                                                  KPI          KPI         KPI         Satis.       Mood
                                                  (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)
   Network Share Treated                         0.190        -0.595       0.102       0.290        0.247
                                                (0.396)      (0.378)      (0.198)     (0.166)      (0.607)
   Treated X Network Share Treated               0.606      2.398          0.176      -0.0421      0.0285
                                                (0.502)      (0.582)      (0.302)     (0.233)      (0.770)
   Treated                                      1.255       2.706         0.693       0.358         0.643
                                                (0.586)      (0.813)      (0.403)     (0.138)      (0.417)
   Lag DepVar                                  0.421        0.748        0.515       0.293        0.418
                                               (0.0714)     (0.0695)     (0.0554)    (0.0346)     (0.0304)
   Obs                                           1123          1098        1123         1126        1125
Notes: Regressions include controls for randomization strata, enumerators and second treatment. Standard
errors clustered at the team level are shown in parentheses. ***, **, * denotes significance at the 1, 5 and 10%
levels respectively.




                                                                                                                   54
