                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                DOLLAR SAFETY AND THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CYCLE

                                       Zhengyang Jiang
                                     Arvind Krishnamurthy
                                         Hanno Lustig

                                      Working Paper 27682
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27682


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2020




We thank Jonathan Wallen and Xu Lu for research assistance. We thank Rohit Lamba, Pierre-
Olivier Gourinchas, Victoria Ivashina, Helene Rey, Jesse Schreger and seminar participants at the
UC-Berkeley, CEBRA, University of Chicago, ECB, Federal Reserve Board, Harvard University,
Macro-Finance Society, NBER CF and IFM meeting, Northwestern University, Reserve Bank of
India, Stanford University, Tsinghua, and AFA for their comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Zhengyang Jiang, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Hanno Lustig. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Dollar Safety and the Global Financial Cycle
Zhengyang Jiang, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Hanno Lustig
NBER Working Paper No. 27682
August 2020
JEL No. E4,F3,G15

                                           ABSTRACT

We build a model of the global financial cycle with one key ingredient: the demand for safe
dollar assets. The model matches patterns of dollar borrowing and currency mismatch, the U.S.
external balance sheet, low U.S. interest rates and exorbitant privilege, spillovers of the U.S.
monetary policy to the rest of the world, and the dollar as a global risk factor. In doing so, we lay
out a novel transmission mechanism through which the U.S. monetary policy affects the currency
market and the global economy.

Zhengyang Jiang                                   Hanno Lustig
Kellogg School of Management                      Stanford Graduate School of Business
Northwestern University                           655 Knight Way
2211 Campus Drive                                 Stanford, CA 94305
Evanston, IL 60610                                and NBER
zhengyang.jiang@kellogg.northwestern.edu          hlustig@stanford.edu

Arvind Krishnamurthy
Stanford Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
akris@stanford.edu
1    Introduction

The U.S. and the dollar play a central role in the international financial system. This role

manifests itself as follows:

    Fact 1: Dollar convenience yield. Safe dollar bonds have low returns, especially for foreign

investors (see Du, Im and Schreger, 2018; Krishnamurthy and Lustig, 2019).

    Fact 2: Dollar debt dominance. There is a large quantity of dollar-denominated bonds in the

world; outsized relative to the wealth share of the U.S. in the world (see Shin, 2012; Cetorelli and

Goldberg, 2012; McCauley, McGuire and Sushko, 2015; Ivashina, Scharfstein and Stein, 2015;

Bruno and Shin, 2017). Moreover, these dollar bonds are issued by both U.S. and non-U.S.

entities, including banks, firms, and governments (see Bruno and Shin, 2014; Maggiori, Neiman

and Schreger, 2017).

    Fact 3: Dollar safety. During global downturns, the dollar currency appreciates and the

dollar bonds' prices rise (see Jiang, Krishnamurthy and Lustig, 2018a,b).

    Fact 4: Global financial cycle. The U.S. monetary policy has an outsized role in macroe-

conomic outcomes for countries around the world (see Rey, 2013; Miranda-Agrippino and Rey,

2015). Conversely, the monetary policy of other large economies does not appear to be as

important to the global cycle (see Gerko and Rey, 2017)

    Fact 5: U.S. exorbitant privilege. The U.S. external portfolio resembles a levered carry

position, which longs risky foreign assets and shorts safe dollar assets. This levered position

earns an "exorbitant privilege" (see Gourinchas and Rey, 2007; Gourinchas, Rey and Govillot,

2010; Gourinchas, Rey and Truempler, 2012).

    Fact 6: Dollar risk factor. The currency return on the dollar is a global risk factor (see

Lustig, Roussanov and Verdelhan, 2014).

    This paper offers a model to explain all of these facts of the global dollar-driven cycle in a

unified framework. The model's central ingredient is the assumption that world investors are

willing to pay a premium, a convenience yield, to own safe U.S. dollar denominate bonds. With

this assumption, we show that all of the facts 1 to 6 arise naturally.

Evidence on the safe dollar premium: Figure 1(a) illustrates the safe dollar premium that

                                                 2
               0 20




                                                                                   0 20
               -40




                                                                                   -40
       basis




                                                                           basis
               -80




                                                                                   -80
                                                                                                                    Treasury Basis
                                                      Treasury Basis                                                1-3Y Corp Basis
                                                      LIBOR Basis                                                   1-7Y Corp Basis
               -120




                                                                                   -120
                      2008   2010     2012     2014    2016                                2005         2010         2015

                                        date                                                               date



                      (a) Treasury and LIBOR basis                                        (b) Corporate and Treasury basis

                                    Figure 1: Treasury, LIBOR, and Corporate Basis.


Panel (a): Treasury basis is the spread between 1-year U.S. Treasury bonds and foreign government bond
yields, swapped into dollars. LIBOR basis is the same construction but using LIBOR rates. Data is from
2005 to 2017. Foreign in both cases refers to the average across a sample of developed economies. Panel
(b): Treasury basis is as defined above. The corporate basis is constructed from a sample of corporate
bonds issuing in dollars and foreign currencies, as described by Liao (2018). The 1-3Y corporate basis is
the average corporate basis of companies with credit ratings from AA- to AAA and maturities of 1 to
3 years. The 1-7Y basis is an average for companies with credit ratings from BBB- to AAA and across
maturities from 1 to 7 years. Foreign in both cases is a sample of developed economies.



is the main input into our analysis.1 The black line plots the "Treasury basis", which is the

spread between 1-year U.S. Treasury bonds and foreign government bond yields, swapped into

dollars. Dollar Treasury bonds have a lower yield than the foreign bonds. The observation that

the U.S. Treasury basis is negative was made by Du, Im and Schreger (2018).

    Why is the basis negative? We argue that the basis reflects the high value that investors

place on cash dollar safe assets, i.e., the convenience yield on dollar safe assets. The short-term

U.S. Treasury bond being the par-excellence of world safe assets especially reflects this valuation

and hence the figure reveals a time-varying valuation of dollar safe bonds. The foreign bond

plus a currency swap reflects this valuation to a less extent because it is an imperfect substitute
   1
     In addition to the empirical support for the safe dollar phenomenon provided by the figures, there are theo-
retical models that aim to explain the safe-dollar phenomenon. See He, Krishnamurthy and Milbradt (2018) for
an explanation that revolves around the depth of the U.S. Treasury market and the relative fiscal strength of the
U.S. government. See Maggiori (2017) for an explanation based on the better financial system of the U.S. See
Gopinath and Stein (2019) and Chahrour and Valchev (2017) for an explanation that ties together the role of the
dollar in trade invoicing and the demand for dollar safe assets. We take the assumption as given and explore its
implications for other aspects of the international monetary system. The contribution of our paper then is that
we identify the essential element of the reserve currency paradigm that drives the global financial cycle.



                                                                       3
for the cash Treasury bond. See Jiang, Krishnamurthy and Lustig (2018a) for further details

and empirical support.

   The convenience yield is also reflected in private dollar bonds. Figure 1(a) also plots the

LIBOR basis, defined analogously, reflecting the spread between dollar LIBOR and foreign

LIBOR, swapped into the dollar. The two bases move together, indicating the convenience yield

on dollar safe assets is also reflected in private bank deposit rates. When investors demand

more safe dollar bonds, they drive down the yield on both dollar Treasury bonds and dollar

bank deposit rates, relative to their swapped foreign counterparts. Figure 1(b) plots the basis

for safe corporate issuers from Liao (2018). We also plot the Treasury basis for comparison. We

again see that the Treasury and the corporate bases move together, but the Treasury basis is

typically wider than the corporate basis.

   The evidence in Figures 1(a) and 1(b) measures deviations from covered interest rate parity.

We can observe the safe dollar phenomenon also from unhedged realized returns, where the

convenience yields are even larger. Table 1, drawn from Krishnamurthy and Lustig (2019), offers

data on this point. We use the Treasury International Capital System (TIC) Data from 1980:Q1

to 2019:Q2 on the net purchases of Treasurys by foreigners and compute the actual returns to

these purchases. For the computations, we assume that purchases are of the entire Treasury

market (Barclays U.S. Treasury Index). The dollar-weighted measure uses actual purchases to

compute an internal rate of return on the trading strategy conducted by foreign investors. The

time-weighted column is the return on a counterfactual where these investors simply executed

a buy-and-hold strategy over the period.

   There is a large gap of up to 9.34% between the time-weighted and dollar-weighted returns.

Foreign investors, both official and private, have particularly bad market timing. They buy

Treasury bonds and the dollar when they offer low returns and sell them when they offer high

returns. The gap is both due to poor market timing on bonds and on the dollar exchange rate.

The Nominal USD column measures the return to the strategy in USD; that is, excluding the

gains and losses on the currency. The gaps here are around 5%. They buy Treasury bonds

when they offer low returns and sell them when they offer high returns. We interpret these gaps



                                              4
              Table 1: Returns to foreign investors on purchases of Treasury bonds


We report the average returns to foreign investors from their purchases and sales of the U.S. Treasury
bonds, from 1980:Q1 to 2019:Q2. The dollar-weighted measure uses actual purchases of foreign investors
from the Treasury International Capital System to compute an internal rate of return on the trading
strategy conducted by foreign investors. The time-weighted column is the return on a counterfactual
where these investors simply executed a buy-and-hold strategy over the period.

    Treasury Investor     Currency Denomination       Dollar-weighted     Time-weighted     Gap
    Official + Private    Local Currency                    5.43              13.74         8.32
                          Nominal USD                       5.46              10.33         4.87
    Private               Local Currency                    4.41              13.75         9.34
                          Nominal USD                       4.90              10.81         5.91


as evidence that foreign investors are willing to pay a substantial premium to own safe dollar

bonds. This observation, Fact 1: Dollar convenience yield, is the key input into our model as

we detail next.

Analysis: Our model includes productive units (interpreted as firms and banks) operating in

the U.S. and in the foreign countries. These productive units make production and financing

decisions, subject to a standard credit friction that limits debt capacity as a function of future

revenues. We embed this production model in a new general equilibrium model of exchange rate

determination with convenience yields. Lastly, we trace out the propagation of U.S. monetary

policy via the interaction between the credit friction and the exchange rate mechanism.

   We start with the firm side. Given our assumption that investors impute a convenience

yield on safe dollar claims, it follows almost immediately that firms will have an incentive to tilt

their liabilities towards issuing dollar claims to satisfy the convenience demand of investors. A

multi-national in Brazil may issue some local currency Real bonds but will also have an incentive

to tilt its liabilities towards dollar bonds. The same applies to firms in every country around

the globe, with the tilt always being towards the dollar to exploit the convenience yield. U.S.

borrowers will also issue dollar claims and benefit from the convenience yield.

   The financing pattern is thus just the mirror of the convenience yield observation, and thus

explains Fact 2: Dollar debt dominance detailed above. Informally, observers often make the

argument that emerging market firms borrow in dollars because the interest rate in dollars is

                                                  5
lower than that of home. Without a convenience yield on dollar claims, the argument needs

further assumptions. That is, in the case that U.I.P. holds the lower dollar interest rate is

matched by a high expected dollar appreciation so that a borrower should expect a greater

future debt burden when contracting dollar liabilities. A typical further assumption is that due

to risk-shifting or bailout possibilities the borrower does not internalize the cost of this future

debt burden (Schneider and Tornell, 2004). But, crucially this argument suggests that emerging

market firms should all be borrowing in the lowest interest rate currency -- say Yen or Swiss

Francs rather than Dollars. The convenience yield hypothesis is specifically about the dollar.2

       In our model, the convenience yield that world investors assign to safe dollar assets is deter-

mined by the supply of safe dollar bonds: Given a downward sloping world convenience-demand

curve for safe dollar bonds, a decrease in the aggregate supply of safe dollar bonds leads to

an increase in the equilibrium convenience yield, and in turn, a rise in the value of the dollar.

Our model has a well-defined concept of the quantity of "dollar liquidity," associated with the

quantity outstanding of safe dollar bonds.

       Then, we derive an expression for the dollar's exchange rate whereby the convenience yield

enters as a "dividend" on owning the dollar. As a result, an increase in the convenience yield

drives up the foreign exchange value of the dollar, as in Fact 3: Dollar safety. As the quantity

of safe dollar bonds determines the equilibrium convenience yield, it also enters exchange rate

determination and helps explain dollar exchange rate patterns.

       Our financial market determination of exchange rates is closest to Gabaix and Maggiori

(2015) in that the demand and supply of dollars determines exchange rates. However, unlike

Gabaix and Maggiori (2015), we associate the "dollar" with safe dollar bonds. Thus, for example,

we interpret the increase in the value of the dollar in a crisis as in part due to a reduction in the

supply of safe dollar bonds (i.e., because previously safe bonds turn unsafe), creating a dollar
   2
     We also note that the negative basis illustrated in Figure 1(a) cuts against the low-yield explanation. If firms
are selling dollar debt because their absolute yields are low, then lenders will need some compensation to absorb
all of this debt. All things equal, this will push up the relative swapped yield on dollar debt compared to foreign
debt. We would then expect that the basis will be positive not negative. This argument also applies to the
common search-for-yield explanation of investors. If low U.S. yields causes U.S. investors to search for foreign
yield, then they effectively are less willing to absorb dollar debt, pushing up the swapped yields on dollar debt
compared to foreign debt.




                                                         6
shortage. Jiang, Krishnamurthy and Lustig (2018a,b) provide evidence for the convenience

yield/dollar relationship. Likewise, actions by the Federal Reserve to increase the supply of

safe dollar bonds via crediting foreign central banks with dollar reserves, under the swap lines,

should be expected to reduce convenience yields and depreciate the dollar.

       U.S monetary policy shocks impact dollar bond supply and exchange rates leading to the

asymmetric spillover effects of Fact 4: Global financial cycle. We model monetary policy trans-

mission along the lines of Bernanke and Blinder (1992)'s credit channel. Tighter monetary

policy reduces the present value of collateral cash flows and constrains borrowing, leading to a

reduction in employment and output. Suppose the U.S. tightens its monetary policy, say for

domestic reasons. Then the value of the dollar exchange rate rises for two reasons: (i) its interest

rate rises (the standard uncovered interest rate parity channel); and (ii) the tightening reduces

the supply of dollar bonds issued by the production units. The second channel renders dollar

bonds scarcer and raises its convenience yield, further raising the dollar exchange rate.

       As the firms around the world borrow in the dollar and face a currency mismatch on their bal-

ance sheets, they suffer additional losses since the dollar-denominated debt appreciates against

their local currency-denominated revenues. Given the financial constraint, these losses will im-

pact production and hiring decisions and lead to declines in foreign output.3 U.S. output also

falls due to the monetary tightening, but the effect on the U.S. firms will be through an increase

in the flow cost of credit, while the impact for foreign firms will be through a revaluation effect

on the stock of their dollar debt. This effect on the foreign firms can plausibly be as large if not

larger than the impact on the U.S. firms, so that U.S. monetary policy can generate significant

financial spillovers for other countries as Fact 4 indicates.4 An accelerator effect also kicks in:

the higher value of dollar raises foreign firms' leverage, exacerbates the dollar shortage, increases

the dollar convenience yield, appreciates the dollar, and so on.

       In our model, the U.S. is a supplier of safe dollar bonds to the rest of the world, thus explain-
   3
     See Aguiar (2005), Bleakley and Cowan (2008), and Kalemli-Ozcan, Kamil and Villegas-Sanchez (2016) for
evidence on the real impact of currency mismatch.
   4
     Akinci and Queralto (2018) offers a related model to explain monetary policy spillovers. In their model, the
U.I.P. wedge is affected by monetary policy via credit market frictions. They show that the endogenous movement
in the wedge gives rise to monetary policy spillovers.




                                                       7
ing the balance sheet characterization of Gourinchas and Rey (2007) (Fact 5: U.S. exorbitant

privilege). On average, the U.S. earns a carry trade return by holding foreign bonds with higher

yields and selling dollar bonds with lower yields. In states when the dollar appreciates, this

carry trade leads to losses to the U.S. This pattern of gains and losses resembles the "exorbitant

privilege/exorbitant duty" of Gourinchas, Rey and Govillot (2011). However, there is a nuance

associated with the exorbitant duty in our model. Since the U.S. losses in the carry trade are

associated with an increase in the convenience yield, future carry trade returns are expected to

be high, and the present value of the U.S. profits (i.e. its exorbitant privilege) would rise. This

capitalization effect arises because we associate the exorbitant privilege with a convenience yield

rather than a risk premium. As a result, a global crisis can lead to a net gain in the U.S. wealth.

We argue that this capitalization gain offers a further explanation for why the U.S. is a natural

seller of safe dollar bonds. In a crisis, the value of the U.S. asset base rises relative to foreign

countries, and we present evidence consistent with this point from the Global Financial Crisis.

   Our analysis also highlights channels of contagion. Shocks to one foreign country will impact

other foreign countries but will have limited spillover effects to the U.S. Suppose that a shock

tightens financial constraints in one foreign country. As is standard in financial accelerator

models, this shock will lead to a reduction in this foreign country's output. However, to the

extent that this country reduces its supply of safe dollar claims, the dollar exchange rate will

appreciate and create further losses to other foreign countries' dollar borrowers. In this way, a

shock in one foreign country will lead to contagion, through the dollar balance sheet mismatch,

to other foreign countries. Since the U.S. firms do not face the currency mismatch, impact on

the U.S. will be limited to trade and expenditure switching channels, which are absent in our

model. In other words, our model generates a fundamental asymmetry in shock transmission

between the center--the U.S.--and the periphery--foreign countries. Negative foreign shocks

lead to a flight to the dollar which further spreads around the non-U.S. world. The dollar is

thus a global risk factor, as in Fact 6: Dollar risk factor.

   These asymmetric spillover effects suggest instability in the international monetary system.

Indeed, our model identifies a new Triffin dilemma (Triffin, 1960). In the context of the Bretton-



                                                 8
Woods system where the dollar was the de-jure center country, Triffin foresaw an emerging

imbalance. He argued that as world demand for dollar reserve assets grew with the world

economy, the U.S. will inevitably be in the position of supplying such assets, but their backing

is the limited by the supply of U.S.-held gold. The erosion of backing will eventually lead to a

run on the dollar and the collapse of the international monetary system. Today, we live in a

world where backing is not provided by gold and is instead provided by revenue streams of firms

and governments.

    But in a world with a de-facto dollar standard, there is a version of the Triffin dilemma that

reappears. Dollar assets are provided by both U.S. firms and foreign firms. But crucially, foreign

firms do so by taking on currency mismatch. As world demand for dollar grows, the incentive

for both U.S. and foreign firms to supply dollar assets will grow. In particular, if world demand

growth exceeds the growth in U.S. produced asset supply, the result will be growth in currency-

mismatched balance sheets around the world. The conclusion is that financial spillovers and the

global financial cycle may grow in importance.

    This paper is laid out as follows. Section 2 lays out the U.S. block of the model. Section 3

explains the international asset market equilibrium and exchange rate determination. Section 4

considers the foreign country and presents our main results on international spillovers. Section

5 concludes. We include an Appendix in a separate file. Part A presents the model's parameter-

ization and proof. Part B presents empirical evidence consistent with the model's mechanisms.

Part C discusses additional theoretical issues on hedging.



2    U.S. Model

The model has three blocks: U.S., Foreign, and World Safe Asset Investors. We begin with

the U.S. block, highlighting the monetary transmission mechanism and the supply of U.S. safe

assets, which we refer to as dollar liquidity.

    We consider the U.S. economy with an infinite horizon. Time is discrete and indexed as

t = 0, 1, 2, .... U.S. households are modeled as living in overlapping generations (OLG). A unit

mass of households are born and work at date t, save their wages until date t + 1 at which time

                                                 9
                                          ¯ units of labor which they supply at date t.
they consume. Households are endowed with L

   We define the households' utility over date t + 1 consumption as


                                                Et [ct+1 ].                                   (1*)


For now, consumption is in terms of the single U.S. good. In Section 3, we embed the U.S. block

in an international model, and replace Eq. (1*) with Eq. (1+) that describes utility over both

home and foreign goods.

   Households can work for firms (F), which we will think of as large corporates/banks. These

firms are run by managers subject to a standard agency problem that limits borrowing. A

manager at time t has capital of kt . The manager can liquidate the capital for kt goods at time

t. The manager can also freely convert any goods into new capital. Thus the price of capital

relative to goods will be one in equilibrium.

   The manager can hire labor lt and produce goods, which take one period to produce. Given

lt labor and kt capital, the production technology gives output at date t + 1 of


                                 f (lt , kt ) = at (lt + kt ),   at > 1,                       (2)


where at is productivity which is known at time t.

   The production technology in Eq. (2) is linear, and capital and labor are perfect substitutes.

This modeling assumption has two implications that help simplify the analysis. First, the price

of capital and wages will be equal in any interior equilibrium. Furthermore, since capital can be

liquidated for goods, the price of capital and goods will also be equal in an interior equilibrium.

We don't think much is at stake in making these simplifications rather than adopting say a more

standard Cobb-Douglas form.

   We denote the price level (in terms of the non-traded good) at date t as pt . Firms hire

workers at date t and pay them for their labor. As noted, in equilibrium the wage rate and

the price of capital have to be equal to the price of the good. Thus the nominal wage and the

nominal price of capital are both pt as well.


                                                    10
   The inflation rate is defined as
                                                    pt+1
                                            t =          - 1.                                (3)
                                                     pt

   Let nt denote the wealth of the manager at date t in real terms. The managers die with

probability  at the end of each period, and at death, consume their wealth. A manager

maximizes the expected utility:
                                           
                                                 (1 -  )t-1 nt .                             (4)
                                           t=1


2.1   Borrowing constraint

Since it takes one period to produce goods, the firms need to borrow for production inputs

labor and capital. To raise money to pay wages, firms issue nominal one-period bonds at the

nominal interest rate it . Let bt denote the nominal amount of borrowing. Then, the firm's

budget constraint is

                                        pt nt + bt = pt (lt + kt ).

   We assume that firms face financial constraints. A firm has debt capacity equal to a fraction

 < 1 of the expected output in the next period, f (lt , kt ). So the maximal nominal amount of

funding a firm can raise at time t is

                                               · pt+1 · f (lt , kt )
                                        bt                           .                       (5)
                                                    1 + it

   We focus on a parameterization under which at  1 + it - t > at always. In this case, the

marginal product of investment exceeds the real interest rate so that firms borrow and produce

at the maximal scale, but not too much so that the maximal scale implies an infinite quantity

of production.

   We substitute from the debt constraint, (5), into the firm's budget constraint to find:

Proposition 1. At time t, a firm's equilibrium labor and capital input satisfies

                                                           1
                               lt + kt  nt                              .                    (6)
                                                 1 - at (1 + it - t )-1


                                                     11
     This proposition shows that employment and capital are decreasing in the real interest rate

(it - t ), increasing in productivity at , and increasing in the manager's net worth nt . Since we

require that (1 + it - t ) - at > 0, this ratio is well-defined.

     Given these expressions, the firm's real profits at t + 1 are

                                                                     at (1 - )
                    nt+1 = f (lt , kt ) - f (lt , kt ) = nt ·                          .        (7)
                                                                1 - at (1 + it - t )-1

     Lastly, each period a fraction  of managers die and consume their wealth. To facilitate the
                                                                                ¯ units of
steady-state analysis, we assume that the same number of managers are born with N

capital. Let Nt denote the aggregate net worth of the firm sector in real terms. Its law of motion

is
                                                     at (1 - )           ¯.
                        Nt+1 = (1 -  ) · Nt ·                          +·N                      (8)
                                                1 - at (1 + it - t )-1

2.2     Monetary policy and price setting

We introduce sticky prices and wages so that monetary policy affects the real interest rate it - t .

First, we suppose that the central bank sets the nominal interest rate it . This could be either

via setting the interest on reserves or setting the growth rate of money; our model does not

depend on these particulars.

     Second, we assume that at beginning of period t, firms choose the wage for hiring wt as well

as the price for the output good pt+1 . These prices are held constant until date t + 1. The

monetary authority sets the one-period interest rate it after prices are set. Thus the inflation

rate t is set before the nominal interest rate it is chosen and hence policy controls the real

interest rate.

     Monetary policy transmission works through price stickiness. In explaining the mechanisms

of the model, little would be lost if we assumed that prices are fixed for all time. However, we

opt instead to introduce a simple optimal price setting mechanism. We assume that workers

can work in an alternative sector, called the informal (I) sector. The I-sector has productivity




                                                    12
of one at all times, and its production function is linear in labor alone:


                                                  f (lt ) = lt .


   The I-sector unit is owned by households, and faces no debt-capacity constraints. Loosely,

think of this as an endeavor where people work for their neighbors. The I-sector also sets wage

for hiring wt and the price for the output good pt+1 , and holds these prices constant for one

period. The expected profit of an I-sector unit as a function of its pricing and hiring decision is:


                         Et [pt+1 lt - wt (1 + it )lt ] = pt+1 lt - wt (1 + Et [it ])lt .


   Profit maximization implies that,

                                              pt+1
                                                   = 1 + Et [it ];                              (9)
                                               wt

in other words, the I-sector sets prices so that the expected real interest rate is zero, thus

equating the cost of capital and the marginal rate of transformation of labor into goods.

   Next, note that since the labor and goods market are competitive. It then follows that the

wages wt and wt are equal, and they are equal to price for the capital good pt . Also,


                                                 pt+1 = pt+1 .


That is to say, prices and wages are set based on the optimality condition for the I-sector. Eq.

(9) becomes
                                         pt+1  p
                                              = t+1 = 1 + Et [it ];
                                          pt    pt

it should be apparent that the I-sector is introduced primarily as a modeling device to describe

optimal price-setting.

   For comparison, an F-sector firm faces a similar profit maximization problem when setting

prices, but with productivity at > 1. Since this sector faces financial constraints in hiring labor,



                                                       13
profit maximization only gives the inequality:

                                              pt+1
                                                   at  1 + Et [it ].
                                               pt


2.3      Market clearing, output, and debt supply

There are two market clearing conditions. Labor market clearing is


                                                            ¯
                                                  Lt + Lt = L,


where we again use capital letters to denote aggregate quantities. We assume parameters such

that Lt > 0 always. This guarantees that the I-sector is active and its optimality condition

determines the expected inflation rate.

       Capital market clearing is

                                                    Kt = Nt .

All of the manager's wealth is invested in capital. Note that this condition means that the F-

sector's wealth and capital are always equal. With some abuse of terminology, when describing

the equilibrium, we use wealth and capital interchangeably.

       Output across both sectors at date t + 1 is,


                                                      ¯ - Lt )
                              Yt+1 = at (Lt + Kt ) + (L
                                                             (at - 1)             ¯
                                      = at Kt 1 +                                +L                            (10)
                                                        (1 + it - t ) - at

       Output is increasing in capital Kt and productivity at , and decreasing in the real interest

rate it - t .5

       For future reference we also define the "private safe debt supply" of the U.S. as the aggregate
   5
    Note that workers are indifferent between the I-sector and the F-sector since wages are the same in both
sectors. In writing Eq. (10), we have specified an equilibrium where labor is allocated to the F-sector up to their
capacity to pay, and the rest to the I-sector. We can construct the equilibrium as follows. Suppose that the
F-sector, which is more profitable, offers a wage of pt + , so that workers strictly prefer working in the F-sector.
As   0, we have our specified equilibrium.




                                                        14
real borrowing of the U.S. F-sector firms:

                                              · pt+1 · f (lt , kt )
                                     Bt =                           .                        (11)
                                                (1 + it ) · pt

The asset supply is decreasing in the interest rate and increasing in capital and productivity.

We will see that it plays an important role in the international safe asset equilibrium.


2.4   Impulse response to a monetary policy shock

We suppose that the central bank has an inflation target of ¯ . Then, the central bank is expected

to set Et [it ] = ¯ . We evaluate the impact of the monetary policy shock, t , where


                                             it = ¯ + t .                                    (12)


   This completes the description of the U.S. block of the model. The model has one state

variable, the net worth of the F-sector managers Nt . The steady state level of net worth solves,

                                                      aSS (1 - )   ¯.
                            N SS = (1 -  ) · N SS                +·N                         (13)
                                                       1 - aSS

                          SS
                           (1-)
We require that (1 -  ) a1-a SS
                                         ¯ < N SS to ensure stable dynamics around the
                                < 1 and  N

steady state.

   To illustrate the impact of monetary policy, we consider the impulse responses to a one-time

monetary policy shock t . We calibrate the model at the quarterly frequency, and consider a

0.25% shock to the quarterly nominal interest rate at time t + 1 (which is equivalent to a 1%

shock to the annualized interest rate). After time t + 1, the nominal interest rate returns to its

steady-state level 0. We trace out the impact of this shock beginning from the steady-state of

the model. Figure 2 illustrates the impulse responses.

   A surprise tightening of monetary policy at t +1 reduces the debt capacity of firms on impact.

As a result, the F-sector hires less labor (bottom-left panel) in t + 1. Firms make less profits

both because the margins (at+1 - (it+1 - t+1 )) decline and because the debt capacity falls. The



                                                   15
                0.25                            1                               0

                 0.2
                                              0.5                            -0.05
                0.15
                                                0                             -0.1
                 0.1
                                              -0.5                           -0.15
                0.05

                  0                            -1                             -0.2
                       0   5   10   15   20          0   5    10   15   20           0   5   10   15   20


                  0                             0                               0

                -0.5                                                          -0.5
                                              -0.5
                  -1                                                            -1
                                               -1
                -1.5                                                          -1.5

                  -2                          -1.5                              -2
                       0   5   10   15   20          0   5    10   15   20           0   5   10   15   20


              Figure 2: Impulse response to a U.S. monetary policy shock of 0.25%


We consider a 0.25% shock to the U.S. quarterly nominal interest rate it+1 in period t + 1. The top-left
panel plots it , with the x-axis in periods. The top-middle panel plots the price level pt . The top-right
panel plots output yt as a percent deviation from the steady-state value. The bottom panels plot hiring
(lt ), capital (Kt ) and borrowing (Bt ) in the F-sector, all as percentage deviations from their steady-state
values. See Table 2 for parameter values.



lower profits leads to a fall in capital K in the following period t + 2 (bottom-middle panel).

Output falls in period t + 2 as labor is allocated to the less productive I-sector, and further at

t + 3, as the shock leads to a fall in capital Kt+2 . The private dollar debt supply, Bt , which is

equal to debt capacity, also falls on impact as illustrated in the bottom-right panel.

    As in financial accelerator models (see Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist, 1996), the effect of

the initial interest rate shock persists even after the shock disappears, through a propagation

mechanism via the damage to capital K . Capital returns gradually to its steady-state level as

profits accumulate and new firms enter. Output, labor, and debt supply are below steady-state

through this entire path.




                                                             16
3     International Equilibrium and Dollar Liquidity

In this section, we embed the U.S. block into a world asset market equilibrium. Building on our

earlier work (see Jiang, Krishnamurthy and Lustig, 2018a), we consider a representative safe

asset investor who determines the exchange rate dynamics.


3.1    Safe asset investors

There are risk-neutral world investors who own world bonds paying interest rate it . We assume

these bonds pay in a world good that is consumed by these world investors. We also set the price

of this good to be one at all dates, without loss of generality. The world investors do not value

the non-tradable good produced by U.S. firms. So any investments in dollars must be converted

back to world currency for consumption. Denote the nominal exchange rate in world-per-dollar

as St (the log rate is denoted st ). Our sign convention means that a stronger dollar is associated

with a higher value of St . The real exchange rate is Et = St pt (the log rate is denoted et ).

    We suppose that world safe asset investors place an extra convenience yield of t to own

dollar liquidity, which in the model are the dollar bond issued by any firms. Let Qt denote the

amount of the dollar bond held by the world investors. We construct such an equilibrium in the

next section. For now, we assume that the world safe asset investors are risk-neutral, and note

that their optimality condition requires that


                                   it + t = it - (Et st+1 - st ).                                 (14)


The return to owning dollar bonds plus the convenience yield must equal the return to owning

world bonds, accounting for the expected appreciation of the exchange rate.

    In real terms, this uncovered interest parity (U.I.P.) condition becomes:


                                                    
                                    Et et+1 - et = rt - rt - t ,                                  (15)


               are the U.S. and foreign real interest rates; i.e. the nominal rate minus expected
where rt and rt

inflation.

                                                 17
   When world safe asset demand rises (high t ), then the dollar appreciates today and has an

expected depreciation. This is the condition we derive in our other work (see Jiang, Krishna-

murthy and Lustig, 2018a), which considers the case of risk-averse world investors so that the

U.I.P. condition also reflects a currency risk premium. As the risk premium is not central to our

present analysis, we set this aside and derive Eq. (15) for risk-neutral world investors.

   We iterate on this equation forward and find

                                                        
                                                                      
                              et = Et          j + Et          (rj - rj )+e
                                                                          ¯.                (16)
                                        j =t            j =t


   The term e
            ¯ = limt et is a constant because we assume that the real exchange rate is

stationary. From Eq. (16) we see that the dollar exchange rate moves both because of shocks
                                                                                    ). Jiang,
to safe asset demand (t ) and shocks to the real interest rate differential (rj - rj

Krishnamurthy and Lustig (2018a) presents evidence to support these points.


3.2   Dollar supply and the intermediation of the U.S. carry trade

A U.S. bond holder can earn a "carry trade" profit by selling U.S. bonds and investing in foreign

bonds since:

                                it - it - (Et st+1 - st ) = t > 0.


   We next describe the equilibrium in which the U.S. engage in this carry trade while the world

safe asset investors take the opposite position. This quantity dimension has been a central focus

of the empirical and theoretical literature on safe assets. We are interested in explaining how

the quantity of safe asset holdings impacts equilibrium exchange rates, carry trade profits, and

the dynamics of the trade balance.

   To focus on a determination of exchange rates by the financial side, we adopt a similar

approach to Gabaix and Maggiori (2015) in describing foreign asset trade. We suppose that

U.S. households do not participate in the foreign exchange market. Instead, a set of banks

intermediate the carry trade into the world bonds. More precisely, there is a measure  < 1 of

banks. For each of these banks, it can contact exactly one (young) working U.S. household and


                                                   18
offer to take a deposit of dt from this household. The bank is assumed to have monopoly power

over the depositor (as in Drechsler, Savov and Schnabl (2017) and Duffie and Krishnamurthy

(2016)) and can dictate the deposit rate iD
                                          t . Once the bank receives the deposit, it can use this

fund to trade with world safe asset investors in the foreign exchange market.

       So, if a (young) working U.S. household is paired up with a bank, it can invest its nominal

wage income of pt lt either in the U.S. dollar bonds issued by firms at interest rate it , in central

bank deposits at rate it , or in private bank deposits at rate iD
                                                                t . Given depositors' outside option

to invest in dollar bonds and central bank deposits, it follows that the deposit rate is also

iD
 t = it .
          6


       The banks' equity owners consist of (old) U.S. households as well as world investors. A bank

maximizes the value of equity which is equivalent to maximizing the bank's expected profits.

In raising dt deposits from the household, the bank receives dt units of the dollar bonds. The

bank can hold these dollar bonds, or sell these dollar bonds to safe asset investors in return for

their world bonds.7 Let h$      w
                         t and ht denote the bank's holdings of the U.S. bonds and the world

bonds. The bank's budget constraint is


                                                  hw    $
                                                   t + ht = dt .



       The expected profit to the bank from this portfolio choice is:


                                             
                                        hw                           $
                                         t (it - (Et st+1 - st )) + ht it ,                                     (17)


subject to a short-sale constraint on the dollar bonds:


                                                      h$
                                                       t  0.                                                    (18)
   6
     Note our assumption that  is strictly less than one is important to pin down the rate on the U.S. dollar
bonds at it . The fraction 1 -  > 0 of U.S. households invest their wages in central bank deposits and U.S. dollar
bonds issued by firms. Since central bank deposits pay it and some firms bonds are held in equilibrium by these
households, it follows that the firm bonds must also pay it .
   7
     Alternatively, and realistically, we can think of the bank as using the dollar bonds as collateral against a repo
loan from the safe asset investor.




                                                         19
   Note that the first term in Eq. (17) is the return on running the "carry" trade of investing

in the world bond, it - it - (Et st+1 - st ) = t > 0, which is positive on average. Since the bank

is risk-neutral, it maximizes expected profits by picking the corner solution where the short-sale

constraint binds:

                                       hw           $
                                        t = dt and ht = 0.


   The bank thus holds no U.S. dollar bonds and invests only in world bonds. In aggregate,

the bank sells a fraction  of the U.S. safe bonds to the world safe asset investors. Define the

real dollar liquidity produced by the U.S. as:


                                            Qt = Bt .                                         (19)


   World investors hold this dollar liquidity, earning a low return on this investment. In turn,

banks earn an expected premium on their provision of liquidity. Define bank profits in units of

the world good as
                                             
                               b
                               t+1 = Qt Et (it - it - (st+1 - st )) ,                         (20)

where we note that the expected carry profits Et [b
                                                  t+1 ] are proportional to t :



                                       Et [b
                                           t+1 ] = Qt Et t .



   The positive return on the carry trade stems from the "exorbitant" privilege of the U.S in

producing safe dollar assets, consistent with the analysis of Gourinchas and Rey (2007).

   Last, we suppose that the world investor's convenience yield for dollar bonds is downward

sloping in quantity:

                                  t = (Qt ) with  (Qt ) < 0.                                  (21)

We note that since the U.S. firm borrowing Bt falls when the nominal interest rate it rises, the

U.S. monetary policy impacts the exchange rate through two channels: a rise in it increases

the real interest rate rt and hence the real exchange rate et directly through the U.I.P. relation,

and indirectly through a reduction in the dollar liquidity Qt and a corresponding rise in the

                                                 20
convenience yield t .

    In our simulations below, we parameterize the convenience yield function as


                                      t = ¯ -   (Qt - QSS ) +  .                                          (22)
                                                              t



3.3    Discussion of safe assets

The function (Qt ) describes world investors' safe asset demand. Here Qt are the bonds issued

by U.S. firms. We comment on some modeling questions.

    · The safe asset literature focuses on convenience yields on U.S. Treasury bonds and financial

      sector debt: Plausibly, (·) takes as argument an aggregate of different safe bonds including

      Treasuries, repos, bank deposits, AAA corporates, etc. It would be straightforward to

      add Treasury bonds to the model, issued by the government and funded by taxes on

      households. In particular, the dollar liquidity Qt should also include these safe assets.

      Consistent with this mechanism, Krishnamurthy and Lustig (2019) presents evidence that

      relates convenience yield movements to QE announcements.

    · If more U.S. entities could issue safe debt, would not the convenience yield effects disap-

      pear? The short-sale constraint, Eq. (18), is an important one. Without this constraint

      we would expect that banks sell all of their dollar bonds to satisfy foreign safe-asset de-

      mand and short-sell even more dollar bonds as long as t > 0 (presumably, selling enough

      quantity to the point that safe-asset investors' demand for safe dollar bonds is satiated

      and t = 0). The central mechanism in our model is that dollar safe assets are in short

      supply and are only created by firms. Realistically, banks are also creators of dollar safe

      assets, but are limited in doing so by capital constraints, e.g., as described in Du, Tepper

      and Verdelhan (2017) or Gabaix and Maggiori (2015).8 Finally, one can think of the bonds

      of our models as an amalgam of financial sector debt and non-financial sector debt; our
   8
     We could enrich the model by introducing financial frictions into the bank's carry trade operations as in
Gabaix and Maggiori (2015). In this case, the friction may result in an interior optimum where both hwt and ht
                                                                                                              $

are positive and affect equilibrium exchange rates, as Gabaix and Maggiori (2015) show. We can see this most
clearly by noting that in Eq. (19), the quantity Qt will fall, and as a result t will rise, and the equilibrium
exchange rate will be affected by the financial friction.


                                                      21
      firms are the representative producer.

   · If U.S. households or firms could enter international markets, would not the convenience

      yield disappear? The key assumption is not segmentation but rather the short-sale con-

      straint on dollar bonds. If U.S. entities could own foreign bonds and short-sell dollar bonds,

      then the supply of dollar bonds rises and the convenience yield falls. We introduce U.S.

      banks and household segmentation primarily to clearly delineate the carry trade profits.

   · Can you talk about safe assets in a model in which all bonds are risk-free? Our model

      describes bonds rather than safe or risky bonds. We have not embellished the corporate

      finance of the modeling. The key economic mechanism of our model is that certain adverse

      shocks reduce the supply of bonds (Qt ). In a model with risky and safe bonds, adverse

      shocks would turn some safe bonds risky and thereby reduce the supply of safe bonds.


3.4       Trade balance and external assets

We have thus far described how the equilibrium quantity of the carry trade affects the con-

venience yield and the exchange rate. We next discuss the implications of our model for the

dynamics of the U.S. trade balance and external assets.

    First, we adjust our earlier definition of household preferences from Eq. (1*) to allow for

trade in goods and thus describe the trade dynamics. The generation-t U.S. household maximizes

utility

                       Et+1 [ H log ct+1,H + T log ct+1,T + X log xt+1 ] ,                     (1+ )

and we normalize by setting H + T + X = 1. Here, ct+1,H is consumption of the U.S. home

good and ct+1,T is consumption of the world good. The term xt+1 is a bequest of bank equity

shares left to generation t + 1, which we introduce to connect the exorbitant privilege (i.e. carry

profits) of the U.S. banks with the U.S. households' consumption decision and trade balance.

The generation-t households receive xt worth of shares of bank equity and at t + 1 these shares

are worth xt Vt+1 + b
                    t+1 /Vt . Here Vt+1 is the market value of the bank, in units of the world

good, and b
          t+1 are bank earnings defined in Eq. (20). In particular, we define the net bank



                                                22
payments to the U.S. households in foreign currency units as

                                                     b
                                                     t+1
                                       BPt+1 = xt        .                                 (23)
                                                     Vt

   The generation-t households then allocate their wealth between consumption and a bequest

to the next generation. Their budget constraint is


                                                               ¯ + xt    Vt+1 + bt+1
         Et+1 ct+1,H + ct+1,T + xt+1 = wt+1  Et+1 (1 + it - t )L                       .   (24)
                                                                              Vt

   We have written the budget constraint in units of the world good. The left-hand side consists

of expenditures on the home good, the world good, and the bequeathed wealth in terms of bank

equity. The right-hand side is total resources, denoted as wt+1 , which consists of wage income

and the value of bank equity, plus earnings, bequeathed by the previous generation.

   Finally, we acknowledge that although we model the U.S. household's consumption decisions

as a function of the exchange rate et+1 and the exorbitant privilege, we do not explicitly model

a world consumer who values U.S. goods and accommodates the U.S. trade balance. The world

investors in our model impute a convenience yield on U.S. safe assets, in proportion to how

much they hold. At the real exchange rate determined by this motive, they are assumed to have

infinitely elastic demand for U.S. and foreign goods.

   The following proposition characterizes the international trade and investment equilibrium:

Proposition 2. (a) In equilibrium, the U.S. trade balance (import minus export) in foreign

currency units is
                                                   ¯ - (T + H ) wt+1 .
                        T Bt+1 = Et+1 (1 + it - t )L                                       (25)

   (b) The U.S. households bequeath a fixed fraction of their wealth to the next generation,


                                        xt+1 = X wt+1 ,                                    (26)




                                               23
and this law of motion gives rise to the following steady-state household bequest,

                                         X                               ¯
                            xSS =                   E SS (1 + iSS -  SS )L.                                    (27)
                                     1 - X (1 + r )

       We require that X (1 + r ) < 1 for the steady-state bequest and wealth to be well-defined

(if the bequest parameter X is too large, wealth diverges). This expression is strictly positive

indicating that the household holds a positive share of bank equity in steady state. The earnings

from this ownership of banks is the capital account surplus and finances a trade deficit.9

       To better understand the trade dynamics of the model, it is useful to express trade balance

and wealth in real dollar units,

                         T Bt+1                    ¯ - (T + H ) wt+1
                                    = (1 + it - t )L
                          Et+1                                  Et+1
                           wt+1                    ¯ + xt         Vt+1 + bt+1         1
                                    = (1 + it - t )L                                       .
                           Et+1                                        Vt           Et+1

       Trade balance dynamics are described by the wealth dynamics wt+1 /Et+1 . Wealth dynamics

are in turn affected by both the current carry trade profit b
                                                            t+1 and the present value of future

carry trade profits Vt+1 . All else equal, a decline in U.S. wealth leads to an improvement of the

trade balance as the U.S. household reduces consumption of home and foreign goods.
                                                               b,SS                                  xSS
       The steady-state value of bank equity is V SS =         r      and the household owns         V SS
                                                                                                            fraction

of the banking sector. Multiplying this share times the earnings of the banking sector gives that,


                                         -T B SS = BP SS = xSS r .


In other words, in the steady state the U.S. finances its trade balance (imports minus exports)

entirely using the dividend payments from the banks, which in turn are profits from the banks'
   9
     If there is no shock after period T > 0, the model will eventually return to the steady state. For t         T,
household income Et+1 (1 + it - t )L ¯ reverts to its steady-state value, and the realized return on the bank equity
is 1 + r . Then,
                                                           ¯ + X (1 + r ) · xt .
                             xt+1 = X E SS (1 + iSS -  SS )L

Since 0 < X (1 + r ) < 1, starting from any initial value of xt , lims xt+s = xSS .




                                                        24
carry trade.


3.5           Impulse response function

The model with the exchange-rate equilibrium still has a single state variable, Nt . The steady-

state capital level is given as before from equation (13).

    Figure 3 plots the impulse response to a 0.25% shock to the nominal interest rate in period

t + 1. The U.S. output behaves exactly the same as in the U.S.-only model. The new results

are in the following panels. The rise in the U.S. interest rate reduces safe asset supply, the U.S.

dollar liquidity Qt+1 , and hence increases the convenience yield, t+1 . The dollar appreciates

at date t + 1 both because of the rise in the nominal interest rate it+1 and the increase in the

convenience yield t+1 . Krishnamurthy and Lustig (2019) presents evidence for this convenience

yield channel of monetary policy from examining event-day responses around both conventional



  0.25                                0                             0                            1.2

   0.2
                                   -0.05                          -0.5                          1.15
  0.15
                                    -0.1                            -1                           1.1
   0.1
                                   -0.15                          -1.5                          1.05
  0.05

      0                             -0.2                            -2                             1
          0     5   10   15   20           0   5   10   15   20          0   5   10   15   20           0   5   10   15   20


   0.8                             0.04                           3.38                             0

   0.6                             0.03                           3.37                          -0.01

   0.4                             0.02                           3.36                          -0.02

   0.2                             0.01                           3.35                          -0.03

      0                               0                           3.34                          -0.04
          0     5   10   15   20           0   5   10   15   20          0   5   10   15   20           0   5   10   15   20


                    Figure 3: Impulse response to a U.S. monetary policy shock of 0.25%


We consider a 0.25% shock to the U.S. nominal interest rate it+1 in period t + 1. The top-left panel
plots it , with the x-axis in periods. The rest of the panel traces out the endogenous variables in the U.S.
economy. All except for the trade balance, the bank payments, the carry profits, and the banks' equity
value are expressed as percentage deviations from their steady-state values. The bank carry profits are
in the units of the world good, and the U.S. trade balance are in dollar units. See Appendix Table 2 for
parameter values.



                                                              25
and unconventional monetary policy announcements.

   The U.S. banks run a carry trade that is long the foreign currency and short the dollar.

As the dollar appreciates on impact, the U.S. banks suffer a loss at time t + 1. Subsequently,

they earn higher profits as the convenience yield t+k rises. This pattern of losses and gains

is reflected in the panel of the banks' carry profits b
                                                      t . The value of bank equity, measured in

foreign currency, rises on impact because the present value of bank profits is increasing in the

expected convenience yield t+k .

   In this parameterization, bank equity value declines in dollar terms because the dollar ap-

preciates more than the foreign-currency value of bank equity. As a result, U.S. wealth falls and

the U.S. household reduces consumption, leading to a reduction of the U.S. trade deficit.


3.6   Discussion: international financial equilibrium

We note that our model of the international financial equilibrium captures important features

of the world economy post-Bretton Woods.

   · Steady-state interest rates in the U.S. satisfy:


                                               r - r = .


      We can understand this relation by inspecting Eq. (16). To maintain a constant real

      exchange rate et , the real interest rate in the U.S. must be lower than the real interest rate

      abroad by exactly t . The result is consistent with observations linking safe asset demand

      to the low steady-state real interest rate ("R-star") in the U.S (see Caballero, Farhi and

      Gourinchas, 2008).

   · Changes in the demand for safe dollar assets impact the dollar exchange rate. That is,

      there is a financial demand component to exchange rate determination, which is strongly

      supported by the data as we explain in Jiang, Krishnamurthy and Lustig (2018a).

   · The U.S. is a world financial intermediary. It provides safe dollar assets to the world

      and recycles these flows into a carry trade return, earning an "exorbitant privilege." The

                                                 26
      position of the U.S. is not an artifact of the exchange rate system, as argued by Despres,

      Kindleberger and Salant (1966) in their well-known minority view. This view, which was

      written in response to Triffin (1960)'s critique of the Bretton-Woods system, posited that

      the U.S., having the deepest and most liquid financial markets in the world, will naturally

      be in a position of providing liquid assets to the world and earning a premium from this

      financial service.

      However, note that the steady-state net foreign asset (NFA) position of the U.S. is zero in

      our model. The U.S. is simply long foreign bonds and short dollar bonds, earning a spread

      on this position. Our model does not speak to the trends in the NFA which are evident in

      the data.

   · Through the lens of the model, some arguments about the international monetary system

      appear invalid. Triffin (1960) and Dooley and Garber (2005) argue that in order for non-

      U.S countries to obtain their desired dollar assets, these countries have to run a trade

      surplus vis-a-vis the U.S. to gain dollars. In our model, the rest-of-the-world trades their

      assets to the U.S. to source dollar assets; the trade account does not have to enter as

      the source for dollar assets. This point is also made by Despres, Kindleberger and Salant

      (1966). Nevertheless it is the case that if there is a dollar premium, then the U.S. will earn

      a return on this trade and will use it to cover imports from the rest-of-the-world.

   Lastly it is useful to contrast our convenience yield mechanism for the exorbitant privilege

with the risk-sharing mechanism of Gourinchas, Rey and Govillot (2010) and Maggiori (2017).

In their models, the U.S. provides safe assets to the rest of the world as part of a risk-sharing

arrangement. Gourinchas, Rey and Govillot (2010) rationalizes the U.S. balance sheet as due to

the U.S. being less risk averse than foreign, as a result of which the U.S. shorts bonds to the rest

of the world and holds a levered claim on the world endowment. Foreign holds the safe claim

issued by the U.S., and effectively holds a less risky claim on the world endowment. Maggiori

(2017) derives this portfolio preferences from differences in financial development, rather than

differences in risk aversion. In both models, the mechanism of exorbitant privilege is driven by

risk premium: the U.S. earns a risk premium on its levered risk portfolio most of the time, but

                                                27
in the event of a world downturn, such as a global financial crisis, the U.S. pays out on the

insurance and transfers wealth to the rest of the world.

   A key implication of this risk-sharing mechanism is that the U.S. on average runs a current

account deficit, but in a crisis runs a surplus as it pays out on the insurance it provides to the

rest of the world. Gourinchas, Rey and Truempler (2012), studying the global financial crisis,

compute that the U.S. loses $2.2 trillion to the rest-of-the-world on its net-foreign-asset position

from 2007Q4 to 2009Q1, and interpret this loss as corresponding to the insurance payment.

   In our model, the world pays a convenience yield to own dollar assets. Because it is a

convenience yield, as opposed to a risk premium, the U.S. earns a seigniorage from providing

safe dollar claims without incurring the crisis liability. In fact, the convenience yield may rise

in a crisis, leading to even higher present and future profits from this seigniorage. This last

implication highlights a new mechanism at work in our model. As we discuss next, it provides

a novel perspective on the U.S. as a safe asset provider to the world.

   Figure 4 illustrates this point in the context of a simulated flight-to-dollar episode. In Panel

A, we trace the impulse response to a safe asset demand shock. We increase the convenience yield

(t+1 ) in period t + 1 unexpectedly by setting t+1 = 0.1% (10 basis points), which gradually

dissipates with an autocorrelation of 0.8. The shock increases the convenience yield and the

value of the dollar. The shock also has no impact on U.S. output or dollar liquidity, which are

determined entirely by U.S. productivity and monetary policy. The bottom-left figure in the

panel traces the impact of bank equity value. We note that bank equity value rises in foreign

currency reflecting higher future carry trade profits. However, when converted back to dollars,

the dollar's appreciation almost perfectly offsets the rise in the banks' profits. This should be

expected in our model. To a first order, the value of bank profits is the discounted present value

of the dollar liquidity Qt+j -1 multiplied by the convenience yield,

                                           
                                                  Qt+j -1 t+j -1
                                  Vt  Et                         ,
                                                    (1 + i )j
                                           j =1




                                                    28
while the exchange rate is the sum of expected future convenience yield:

                                                                            
                                     st = Et           t+j + Et                (it+j - it+j ).
                                                j =0                    j =0



                      0.2                                                                    0.5
                                                         1.1                                 0.4
                      0.1
                                                                                             0.3
                        0
                                                        1.05                                 0.2
                      -0.1
                                                                                             0.1

                      -0.2                                 1                                   0
                             0   5    10   15     20           0   5    10      15   20            0   5   10   15   20


                     0.04                              3.375                               -0.02

                    0.035
                                                        3.37
                                                                                          -0.025
                     0.03
                                                       3.365
                    0.025
                                                                                           -0.03
                                                        3.36
                     0.02

                    0.015                              3.355                              -0.035
                             0   5    10   15     20           0   5    10      15   20            0   5   10   15   20

                   (a) Panel A: Impulse responses to a safe asset demand shock of 10 basis
                   points

                      0.2                                                                    0.5
                                                         1.1                                 0.4
                      0.1
                                                                                             0.3
                       0
                                                        1.05                                 0.2
                     -0.1
                                                                                             0.1

                     -0.2                                 1                                   0
                            0    5    10   15    20            0   5    10     15    20            0   5   10   15   20


                     0.04                              3.375                               -0.02

                    0.035
                                                        3.37
                                                                                          -0.025
                     0.03
                                                       3.365
                    0.025
                                                                                           -0.03
                                                        3.36
                     0.02

                    0.015                              3.355                              -0.035
                            0    5    10   15    20            0   5    10     15    20            0   5   10   15   20

                   (b) Panel B: Impulse response to a safe asset demand shock of 10 basis
                   points and a U.S. nominal interest rate shock of -10 basis points

          Figure 4: Effect of a flight-to-dollar shock on capitalized carry trade profits


The shocks in both panels dissipate with an autocorrelation of 0.8. In Panel A we plot the impulse
response to a safe asset demand shock of 10 basis points. In Panel B we plot the impulse response to a
safe asset demand shock of 10 basis points and a U.S. nominal interest rate shock of -10 basis points.
The bank carry profits are in the units of the world good, and the U.S. trade balance are in dollar units.
See Table 2 for parameter values.




                                                                       29
                                                                              
Both Vt and st reflect a common convenience yield term Et                     j =0 t+j   which to a first-order

offset each other.

       In Panel B, instead of fixing the U.S. monetary response to the flight-to-dollar, we suppose

that the Fed lowers interest rates by 10 basis points, partially offsetting the flight-to-dollar as

well as inducing an expansion in Qt . In this case, we see that the convenience yield does not

rise as much (because Qt rises), and the dollar appreciation is also smaller (since it falls and

the convenience yield rise is more muted). The rise in Qt allows banks to expand carry trade

operations and induces higher future profits, although the current flow from profit from the

carry trade turns negative. Bank equity value rises in both dollar and foreign currency terms,

reflecting the present value of future carry trade profits. Bank payments to the U.S. households

are negative in the first period and then turn positive. To a first-order, the U.S. trade balance

remains stable as these effects offset.      10


       The rise in future seigniorage profits in this example illustrates a broader point regarding

the specialness of the U.S. If one only considers the current flow profits from the carry trade,

the U.S. loses money in a crisis as in Gourinchas, Rey and Govillot (2010); however, accounting

for the future, there is a net transfer of wealth to the U.S. due to the future carry trade profits.

We argue that the future-value effect is another rationale behind why the U.S. is a safe-asset

provider to the rest of the world: it is naturally hedged against crises. Gourinchas, Rey and

Truempler (2012) compute that the U.S. loses $2.2 trillion to the rest-of-the-world on its net-

foreign-asset position from 2007Q4 to 2009Q1. We perform a related but broader computation.

We compute that the total market value of traded wealth in the U.S. (equities, bonds, and

deposits held by both U.S. and non-U.S. entities) falls by $5.5 trillion over this period. See

the Section B.2 of the Appendix for the details of this computation. The same measure for

the five largest wealth non-U.S. countries (Canada, Germany, France, Great Britain, Japan) is

$9.8 trillion, when measured in dollars. See Figure 5. That is, on a relative basis, the U.S.
  10
     As this discussion makes clear, the novelty of our analysis is that a convenience yield is capitalized into
wealth in terms of the future value of carry trade profits. In our analysis, we have associated this profit with
U.S. banks. It is plausible that the banks are global banks rather than just U.S. banks and the profits flow to
the foreign owners of these banks as well as to the U.S. owners. Indeed in our setup, the equity of the banks are
owned by both U.S. and foreign agents. It is also plausible that some of the convenience yield profits flow to firms
and is capitalized into the value of corporate equity.



                                                        30
gains $4.3 trillion in present value terms relative to the rest-of-the world, while the rest-of-the-

world receives a flow transfer equivalent to $2.2 trillion via the net-foreign-asset position. These

patterns indicate that the U.S. and rest-of-the-world share financial risks almost perfectly and

offer another rationale behind the U.S. role as safe asset provider. The stochastic patterns of

convenience yields hedge the U.S. when issuing safe dollar bonds. Jiang et al. (2019) make a

similar point in the context of the U.S. government's fiscal capacity.

   Our convenience yield mechanism also helps resolve another puzzle raised by Maggiori (2017).

In his risk-sharing model, the U.S. transfers wealth to the rest of the world in a crisis. As a

result, the foreign consumption of U.S. goods would rise, absent other forces, causing the foreign

currency to appreciate relative to the dollar in real terms. But as Maggiori (2017) notes, these

crisis predictions regarding trade surplus and the dollar depreciation appear at odds with the


                                                      65,000



                                                      60,000
                        Financial Wealth (Billions)




                                                      55,000



                                                      50,000



                                                      45,000



                                                      40,000



                                                                          US    RoW




                                                         Figure 5: U.S. and RoW Financial Wealth


We graph the total market value of traded wealth in the U.S. (equities, bonds, and deposits issued in
the U.S. and held by both U.S. and non-U.S. entities) in black-dashed line. The same measure for the
five largest wealth non-U.S. countries (Canada, Germany, France, Great Britain, Japan) is graphed in
red. Wealth is measured in dollars and not local currency. Note that in order to measure the gains and
losses of the U.S. and non-U.S. investors, one must also measure the gain/loss on the net foreign asset
position and net this against the measures graphed. See the Section B.2 of the Appendix for underlying
computations.




                                                                           31
patterns in the 2007--2009 global financial crisis. Maggiori (2017) suggests a resolution by

introducing higher trade costs in crisis states. Our mechanism offers a different resolution of

this puzzle. The U.S. on net gains wealth, on a relative basis, in crisis states via the future carry

trade profits. This wealth gain offsets the carry trade losses and can thus be consistent with the

dollar appreciation in the crisis without having to appeal to increased trade costs.



4      Dollar Spillovers

We next introduce a representative foreign country to trace the impact of U.S. monetary policy

and dollar safe asset demand on the rest of the world. This country has households and firms

who provide labor, produce, and consume. The foreign model is more streamlined than the U.S.

model because we set aside sticky prices and focus on the monetary transmission mechanism.


4.1     Foreign households and firms

The foreign country produces and consumes the world tradable good. The law of one price

holds: the price of the domestic tradable good and the world tradable good are equal. Prices

are not sticky. The world interest rate is it > 0 which the country takes as given; i.e., we make

the "small open economy" assumption.

    Households in the foreign country are OLG. Their utility function is,

                                                 1
                                        Et [          c       
                                                       t+1 - lt ]                                 (28)
                                               1 + it


where ct+1 is consumption of the world traded good. Note that labor enters as a linear disutility

cost and there is no bound on lt (as we had assumed in the U.S. model). The discount factor
 1
1+i    is chosen to match the world interest rate. Other than these aspects, the rest of the model
   t

mirrors the U.S. model.

    Suppose that the goods price at date t + 1 is p                        
                                                   t+1 and wages at t are pt . A household is

willing to supply a unit of labor at disutility cost of one to receive pt goods which is then saved

at interest rate it and used to purchase   p
                                             1
                                                  of goods at t + 1. Given the linear household utility
                                            t+1




                                                    32
function it follows that,

                                        1                
                                                    pt
                               -1 +          (1 + it )      = 0  p     
                                                                  t = pt+1 .
                                      1 + it           pt+1


We furthermore set these prices to be 1 for simplicity.

   Firms in the foreign country produce the traded output good using labor and input of traded

goods using the production technology:


                                        
                                   f (lt , kt ) = a         
                                                   t (lt + kt ),   a     
                                                                    t > it .               (29)


Firms are run by managers. These managers have wealth at date t of nt units of the good. They

die with probability   at the end of each period, and at death, consume their wealth. Thus

they maximize,
                                            
                                                 (1 -   )t-1   nt.                         (30)
                                           t=1

   Foreign firms may choose to borrow in foreign currency or in dollars. First, suppose that the

firm only borrows in the foreign currency. This case follows readily from our U.S. analysis. The

firm can promise repayments up to  a         
                                    t (lt + kt ). The firm raises foreign currency debt at the

interest rate of i                                                                 
                  t up to this maximum amount and uses the proceeds to hire labor lt . The firm

budget constraint gives,
                                                             1
                                      lt + kt = nt                                         (31)
                                                     1 -  at (1 + it)
                                                                      -1


and firm profits are:

                                                                       a       
                                                                        t (1 -  )
                        t
                          ,local
                                 = (1 -  )a                
                                           t (lt + kt ) = nt ·                         .   (32)
                                                                   1 -  at (1 + i
                                                                           
                                                                                 t)
                                                                                    -1


                                                               and invest these funds at the
   Households that work for this firm receive their wages of lt

world interest rate of it until date t + 1 when they consume.

   Next, take the case where foreign firms choose to borrow in dollars from world investors

rather than in foreign currency. Why would they do this? It is because borrowing in dollars and



                                                       33
taking the exchange rate risk is "cheap":


                                      it + (Et st+1 - st ) < it                                (33)


i.e. because of the convenience yield on dollar claims. Indeed a firm that chooses this dollar

option will raise strictly higher resources at date t from the bond issue, hire more labor, and

make more profits at t + 1 compared to the case of foreign currency borrowing.

   It is worth pausing and noting the mechanism behind "cheap." Informally, observers often

make the argument that emerging market firms borrow in dollars because the interest rate in

dollars, it , is lower than that of home, it . Without a convenience yield on dollar claims, i.e. if

it + (Et st+1 - st ) = it , the argument needs further assumptions. That is, in the case that U.I.P.

holds the lower dollar interest rate is matched by a high expected dollar appreciation so that

a borrower should expect a greater future debt burden when contracting dollar liabilities. A

typical further assumption is that due to risk-shifting or bailout possibilities the borrower does

not internalize the cost of this future debt burden. For example, the borrower discounts the

future debt burden at   < 1, so that the effective borrowing cost as perceived by the borrower

is it +   (Et st+1 - st ) < it . But this argument suggests that emerging market firms should all

be borrowing in the globally lowest interest rate currency ­ say Yen or Swiss Francs rather than

Dollars. The convenience yield hypothesis is specifically about the dollar. Dollar borrowing is

cheaper because the demand for dollar safe assets generates a wedge in the U.I.P condition, as

in Eq. (33). We could imagine a richer model in which the risk-shifting and the convenience

yield explanation are both present. In this case, for a borrower with discount factor   , the

perceived cost of dollar borrowing is,


                       it +   (Et st+1 - st ) = i                  
                                                 t -  t - (1 -  )(it - it ).



The attraction of dollar borrowing relative to local currency borrowing at it stems from both

t > 0 and the lower dollar borrowing rate, it - it > 0. Countries with high local interest rates,

it , and high risk-shifting problems, 
                                            1, will opt for borrowing the globally lowest interest


                                                 34
rate (e.g., Yen). In comparison, countries with intermediate interest rates and risk-shifting

problems will opt for borrowing in dollars. This is a testable implication of the model, although

we are unaware of research pursuing this implication.

   The foreign firm's dollar borrowing in the model captures the oversea dollar borrowing mar-

ket, such as the Eurodollar market. Shin (2012) documents that European banks' dollar assets

and liabilities are of the same order of magnitude as U.S. banks' dollar assets and liabilities. Shin

(2012) reports numbers of about $10 trillion in 2010, indicating the relevance of these entities

in the world dollar market. Shin (2012) also makes the point that a substantial amount of this

activity reflects European banking activities where both borrowers and lenders are in dollars

­ that is, these are truly global dollar banks. Moving from the bank to country perspective,

Lane and Shambaugh (2010) document the large net dollar liabilities of non-U.S. countries. Mc-

Cauley, McGuire and Sushko (2015) puts this number at $8 trillion in 2014. These numbers

underscore the importance of the non-U.S. dollar borrowing and lending markets.

   The following proposition characterizes a foreign firm's borrowing and profits if it has access

to dollar funding.

Proposition 3. The equilibrium quantity of dollar debt a foreign firm issues is

                                                          a
                                    Q        
                                     t St = nt
                                                            t
                                                                    .                           (34)
                                                  1 + it -  t -  at


   The foreign firm's profits based on the realization of st+1 are,

                                        (1 -  ) -  (st+1 - Et [st+1 ])(1 + it - t )
                                                                                    -1
            t
              ,dollar
                      (st+1 ) = n   
                                 t at                                                  .        (35)
                                                  1 -   a        
                                                         t (1 + it - t )
                                                                        -1



   We can compare this last expression for profits to that in Eq. (32). Note that the profits

depend on the realized exchange rate movement, st+1 - Et [st+1 ]. If the dollar unexpectedly

appreciates, then net worth falls because of currency mismatch. The effect is also increasing in

leverage,  . That is, more dollar debt relative to local currency assets exacerbates this risk.

Also notice that when t > 0, the effective interest rate on borrowing is lowered to it - t ,

resulting in higher profits compared to Eq. (32). The benefit of dollar borrowing is cheaper

                                                     35
financing, driven by the positive convenience yield, while the cost is exposure to exchange rate

risk.

    To close the foreign block of the model, we suppose that every firm in the economy is a

conglomerate composed of two divisions. One division, in fraction  , is the "multi-national"

that can raise dollar financing and does so to reduce costs.11 The other part (1 -  ) is the local

business that only can raise local financing. The conglomerate pools its capital at the end of

every period and splits it equally between its two divisions in the next period. This conglomerate
                      is the only foreign state variable; i.e., we do not need to keep track of
modeling means that kt

the capital in each type of firm when solving for equilibrium.

    The total foreign profit at date t + 1 is the sum of profits from the two divisions of the

conglomerate:

                                                                 (1 -  )
        (1 -  )t
                 ,local
                        +  t
                             ,dollar
                                     = a   
                                        t Nt (1 -  )
                                                            1 -   a          -1
                                                                    t (1 + it )
                                                (1 -  ) -  (st+1 - Et [st+1 ])(1 + it - t )
                                                                                            -1
                                          +                                                              ;
                                                          1 -   a        
                                                                 t (1 + it - t )
                                                                                -1



note that since t > 0, the multi-national finances itself more cheaply and produces more output

than the local business. The cost is currency mismatch which may lead to larger debt repayments

than expected.

    In this model, foreign firms also produce dollar safe assets. We define the global dollar

liquidity as Qt + Qt . We thus alter the international market equilibrium to take global liquidity

as the argument:

                            t = (Qt + Q      ¯               SS   
                                       t ) =  -  (Qt + Qt - Q ) + t .                                         (36)
  11
     We are making a parametric assumption here that the multinational's borrowing choice is at the corner where
dollar borrowing is preferred. Although firms are risk neutral, the financial constraint of our model induces a
                                                                                                        
benefit from hedging. In states of the world with high t , the marginal value of unit of net-worth (kt   ) is high.
We can see this by comparing Eq. (32) and (35). In high t states, the dollar will be appreciated so that a firm
will want to have more resources in this state. As a result, dollar borrowing is riskier in a meaningful way than
local currency borrowing. We discuss the issue further in Appendix C.




                                                        36
4.2   Equilibrium and steady state

We assume that new firms are born each period with capital of N  . Then the dynamics of net

worth are:
                                           ,local
                     Nt          
                       +1 = (1 -  )((1 -  )t      +  t
                                                       ,dollar        ¯
                                                               ) +  · N                        (37)

where we have noted that t depends on the realized exchange rate at date t + 1.

   The equilibrium has two state variables, (Nt , Nt ). The non-stochastic steady state satisfies

Eq. (13) and
                      
                     NSS = (1 -   )((1 -  ) ,local
                                           SS      +   ,dollar
                                                      SS
                                                                      ¯ .
                                                               ) +  · N                        (38)

In order to compute impulse response paths, we need to tackle a more complex problem than in

previous sections. The equilibrium convenience yield and exchange rate are functions of (Nt , Nt ),

and the dynamics of Nt is a function of the equilibrium convenience yield and exchange rate.

We solve this fixed-point problem iteratively: for a given shock at t + 1, we compute the path

of the state variables and convenience yield given an initial guess of the linear map between

the state variables and convenience yield. Then given the path of the convenience yield we

compute the exchange rate at t + 1 and the implied path of the state variables, etc. We iterate

until convergence. Given that the model has only a single shock at t + 1, this problem is fairly

tractable.


4.3   Monetary policy spillovers

Figure 6 presents the effects of monetary policy tightening in the U.S. on the foreign country

and shows the spillover of U.S. monetary policy to the rest-of-the-world, which is a central result

of our analysis. We also present the effects on the U.S. for comparison. Blue corresponds to the

U.S., and red to the foreign country. Tightening at t + 1 leads to an appreciation in the dollar,

st+1 rises, inducing losses to the multinationals. As a result, K  , foreign output, and Q fall at

date t + 1. Note that the fall in Q further amplifies the shock since it tightens safe asset supply,

increases , and adds to the dollar appreciation.

   Capital and output rise sharply in t + 2. This is because the losses are reversed in period


                                                37
  0.25                           0.05                            0.5                          0.5

   0.2                              0                             0
                                                                                                0
  0.15                           -0.05                          -0.5
                                                                                              -0.5
   0.1                            -0.1                            -1
                                                                                               -1
  0.05                           -0.15                          -1.5

     0                            -0.2                            -2                          -1.5
          0   5   10   15   20           0   5   10   15   20          0   5   10   15   20          0   5   10   15   20


   0.5                            1.2                            0.8

     0
                                 1.15                            0.6
   -0.5
                                  1.1                            0.4
    -1
                                 1.05                            0.2
   -1.5

    -2                              1                             0
          0   5   10   15   20           0   5   10   15   20          0   5   10   15   20


                  Figure 6: Impulse response to a U.S. monetary policy shock of 0.25%


We consider a 0.25% shock to it in period t + 1 of the model. In blue we plot the response of U.S.
variables while in red we plot foreign variables. The top-left panel plots it , with the x-axis in periods.
The top-second panel plots output, as a percentage deviation from steady-state. The top-right panels plot
F-sector labor and capital, as percentage deviation from their steady-state values. The bottom panels
plot dollar liquidity, the convenience yield, real dollar exchange rate, U.S. bank carry profits, all except
the last as percentage deviations from their steady-state values. See Appendix Table 2 for parameter
values.



t + 2 as the high convenience yield lowers the cost of borrowing dollars for foreign firms and

hence leads to high profits and fast capital growth. In the figure, they overshoot the steady-state

levels, but this result is parameter dependent. With other parameters, the model produces a

fall and then recovery in output.

    One aspect of transmission that may not be obvious on first glance is that monetary policy

tightening changes the expected flow cost of borrowing indirectly through  and not through

a direct i channel. Consider a hypothetical new foreign firm with a clean balance sheet that

borrows in dollars at time t + 1 after it+1 is raised 25 basis points. One may think that as

the firm borrows in dollars and dollar rates are higher, this firms' expected cost of borrowing

is increased by 25 basis points. But this is not correct. The expected borrowing cost, in local




                                                            38
currency, is:

                                       it+1 - (Et+1 st+2 - st+1 ) = it+1 - t+1 .


Holding t+1 constant, we can see that the firms' borrowing cost only depends on it+1 . The

exchange rate movements offset the 25 basis point change in it+1 . However, as noted, t+1 rises

when it+1 is increased which results in a decrease in the dollar borrowing cost for the foreign

firm (and not an increase). Of course the net effect on foreign firms depends both on the balance
                   and this flow cost effect.
sheet effect via Kt

    Figure 7 presents a different experiment. We lower at for the U.S. unexpectedly at date

t + 1. The impact on the U.S. (blue) is as expected: borrowing, F-capital, F-labor, and output

all fall. The effect is persistent through the financial accelerator effects of the model. The

effects on foreign are novel. The U.S. recession leads to a decline in dollar liquidity, an increase



    0                           0.5                             2                           2

                                                                0
                                  0                                                         0
  -0.5
                                                                -2
                                -0.5                                                        -2
                                                                -4
    -1
                                 -1                                                         -4
                                                                -6

  -1.5                          -1.5                            -8                          -6
         0   5   10   15   20          0   5   10   15   20          0   5   10   15   20        0   5   10   15   20


    2                           1.8                            2.5

    0                                                           2
                                1.6
    -2                                                         1.5
                                1.4
    -4                                                          1
                                1.2
    -6                                                         0.5

    -8                            1                             0
         0   5   10   15   20          0   5   10   15   20          0   5   10   15   20


                       Figure 7: Impulse Responses to U.S Productivity Shock.


We consider a -1% shock to the U.S. productivity at in period t + 1. In blue we plot the response of U.S.
variables while in red we plot foreign variables. The top-left panel plots it , with the x-axis in periods. The
top-second panel plots output, as a percentage deviation from steady-state. The top-right panels plot
F-sector labor and capital, as percentage deviation from their steady-state values. The bottom panels
plot dollar liquidity, the convenience yield, real dollar exchange rate, U.S. bank carry profits, all except
the last as percentage deviations from their steady-state values. See Appendix Table 2 for parameter
values.



                                                          39
in the convenience yield and an appreciation in the U.S. dollar. As a result of the currency

mismatch, foreign firms suffer temporarily. The economics here are exactly as in the case of the

U.S. monetary policy tightening.

   The effects documented in Figure 7 reveal a financial spillover. The U.S. recession leads to

a recession abroad, but the channel is not via reduced demand for foreign goods (as we have

left this channel out of the model) but rather through the impact on dollar liquidity and the

exchange rate.

   In practice, the emergence of this spillover will depend on the response of U.S. monetary

policy. If the U.S. lowers interest rates, there is an offsetting force that weakens the dollar, and

the net effect depends on the shock and the U.S. response. Our analysis of this section highlights

the channels through which U.S. shocks spillover to foreign firms.


4.4   Foreign financial shock

We next consider shocks to foreign firms and show that such shocks affect foreign countries, as

expected, but have a limited impact on the U.S. In conjunction with the results of the previous

section, this result shows a fundamental asymmetry in the way shocks transmit across the globe.
                                                               
   Figure 8 plots the impulse response to a shock that reduces t+1 unexpectedly by 5%. We
                                                                               
assume that the shock dissipates with autocorrelation of 0.7. The reduction in t +1 tightens the

financing constraint on foreign firms. As a result, borrowing, output, and hiring fall. The effect

is magnified through the impact on the exchange rate. There is effectively a flight-to-dollar as

the global dollar liquidity shrinks. The convenience yield rises and the dollar appreciates, which

then amplifies the shock through the impact on foreign firms' balance sheets.

   Finally, this pledgability shock creates contagion across foreign countries. Figure 9 illustrates.

We consider an extension of our model in which there are two foreign countries, each of measure

one-half (i.e. 50% of the size of the foreign block of the prior setup). When the pledgeability

shock hits the first foreign country in period t + 1, global dollar liquidity drops. As a result,

the convenience yield rises and the dollar appreciates. This then feeds back to both foreign

countries by deteriorating the balance sheets of all foreign dollar borrowers. After period t + 1,



                                                40
   75                               0                            0                           0

   74                             -0.2                           -5
                                                                                             -1
   73                             -0.4                          -10
                                                                                             -2
   72                             -0.6                          -15
                                                                                             -3
   71                             -0.8                          -20

   70                              -1                           -25                          -4
          0    5   10   15   20          0   5   10   15   20         0   5   10   15   20        0   5   10   15   20


      0                             2                            4

   -5                             1.8
                                                                 3
  -10                             1.6
                                                                 2
  -15                             1.4
                                                                 1
  -20                             1.2

  -25                               1                            0
          0    5   10   15   20          0   5   10   15   20         0   5   10   15   20


                        Figure 8: Impulse Responses to Foreign Pledgability Shock


We reduce the foreign F-sector's cash flow pledgeability  unexpectedly by 5% at time t + 1. The shock
dissipates with autocorrelation of 0.7. In blue we plot the response of U.S. variables while in red we
plot foreign variables. The top-left panel plots it , with the x-axis in periods. The top-second panel
plots output, as a percentage deviation from steady-state. The top-right panels plot F-sector labor and
capital, as percentage deviation from their steady-state values. The bottom panels plot dollar liquidity,
the convenience yield, real dollar exchange rate, U.S. bank carry profits, all except the last as percentage
deviations from their steady-state values. See Appendix Table 2 for parameter values.



both foreign countries' capital recovers, but the shocked foreign country's recovery is slower as

the pledgability shock is persistent. In our parametrization, the second foreign country bounces

back and overshoots steady-state output. This is because the convenience yield remains low due

to the shock to the first country and hence financing terms are actually better for the second

country.


4.5           A new Triffin dilemma

The patterns described by our model rationalize many patterns in the world. The importance of

U.S. shocks for the world help explain the global financial cycle of Rey (2013). The asymmetry

that foreign shocks have limited impact on the U.S., but not other foreign countries, also squares

with experience ("spillovers but limited spillbacks") of many emerging markets (see Mishra and



                                                            41
   75                             0.2                             5                           1

   74                               0                             0
                                                                                              0
   73                             -0.2                            -5
                                                                                              -1
   72                             -0.4                          -10
                                                                                              -2
   71                             -0.6                          -15

   70                             -0.8                          -20                           -3
        0      5   10   15   20          0   5   10   15   20          0   5   10   15   20        0   5   10   15   20


   10                             1.5                             2

                                  1.4
    0                                                            1.5
                                  1.3
  -10                                                             1
                                  1.2
  -20                                                            0.5
                                  1.1

  -30                               1                             0
        0      5   10   15   20          0   5   10   15   20          0   5   10   15   20


            Figure 9: Impulse Responses to Foreign Pledgeability Shock and Foreign Contagion


We consider two foreign countries. We reduce the first foreign country's F-sector cash flow pledgeability
 unexpectedly by 5% at time t + 1. The shock dissipates with autocorrelation of 0.7. In blue we plot
the response of U.S. variables, in solid red we plot that of the first foreign country's variables, and in
dashed-red we plot that of the second foreign country's variables. See Appendix Table 2 for parameter
values.



Rajan, 2016). Finally, the importance of the dollar as a risk factor for foreign countries is

also apparent from the model. Papers such Lustig, Roussanov and Verdelhan (2014), Verdelhan

(2018) and Wiriadinata (2018) present compelling evidence that the dollar is a priced risk factor.

   In traditional open-economy macroeconomic models, these patterns would not arise. A

country with free capital mobility and floating exchange rates would be able to use domestic

monetary policy to largely insulate themselves from foreign shocks. Moreover, there should be

no inherent asymmetry between U.S. and foreign. See Bernanke (2017).

   Indeed the patterns of our model are more consistent with the pre-floating Bretton-Woods

period where the dollar was the de-jure center country of the world monetary system. Our

analysis shows that as long as there is dollar safe asset demand, the world economy even with

floating exchange rates and free capital mobility will operate under a de-facto dollar standard.

In the context of the earlier Bretton-Woods system, Triffin (1960) famously argued that as the



                                                            42
rest of the world needs dollar assets, and as such demand scales with world growth, the U.S.

will inevitably produce dollar assets whose backing will erode with time. He foresaw a collapse

where he hypothesized a run from dollar assets into gold, which in 1970 proved prescient.

       In the post-Bretton Woods system as well as our model, dollar assets are produced by both

the U.S. and firms in foreign countries. A U.S. dollar asset is just a claim whereby the writer of

the claim agrees to pay back one-dollar of value. Whether this claim is written by a U.S. firm

or a foreign firm matters only for the currency mismatch created on the issuer's balance sheet.

U.S. firms have dollar revenues and can issue such claims with less mismatch; foreign firms will

take on mismatch when making dollar promises. Thus in the context of the model, Triffin's logic

turns on the balance between the growth in demand for dollar assets (i.e., global GDP growth),

and the capacity of asset supply to keep up with this demand. But, unlike in Triffin's analysis,

this supply need not be tied to U.S. growth; it can just as well arise from foreign GDP growth.12

       There is a new version of the Triffin dilemma that arises from our analysis. As demand

for dollar assets rises, currency mismatch around the world will inevitably rise. That is, the

problem of the dollar for the rest of the world will only grow larger over time. The core issue

that the current dollar standard poses for the world economy is not one of instability of the

reserve currency but rather one of asymmetric financial spillovers.13 Indeed in many respects,

the de-facto dollar standard poses a greater problem for the world than the de-jure standard

of Bretton-Woods. In that standard, the center country acknowledged its centrality explicitly

and bound itself to a set of rules to stabilize the international monetary system. In the current

de-facto standard, the international monetary system lacks such rules.

       What can foreign countries do to respond to the shocks we have considered? Foreign mone-

tary policy is a weak instrument to deal with the problem of dollarized borrowing as has been

emphasized by many scholars. Lowering interest rates stimulates some sectors in the local econ-
  12
     There is an additional argument that undercuts the Triffin conjecture. There is not enough gold out there
to support the liquidation of dollar assets into gold. (See He, Krishnamurthy and Milbradt, 2018) for this size
argument.
  13
     Farhi, Gourinchas and Rey (2011) make a related point on the modern version of the Triffin dilemma. They
argue that the core issue is one of the U.S. government running out of the fiscal capacity needed to generate the
dollar assets that the world needs. Our analysis broadens this point, since safe dollar assets can be provided by
both the U.S. government and the private sector.




                                                       43
omy, but also depreciates the exchange rate and hence contracts the dollarized sectors of the

economy. Thus, effectively foreign countries have blunt ex-post instruments to deal with shocks.

Their only option is to use ex-ante instruments such as capital controls and hoarding of foreign

reserves. The basic fact of the international equilibrium is that when the dollar is the safe-asset

currency of choice and only the U.S. has the structure to cheaply create dollars, privately via

claims backed by dollar-revenue firms as in our model and publicly via central bank and fiscal

policy, volatility in foreign countries via the flight-to-safety loops are unavoidable.14



5     Conclusion

Our model of the global financial cycle starts from the global demand for dollar-denominated

safe assets. The model delivers a dollar-driven global financial cycle that matches the U.S.

balance sheet relative to the ROW, exorbitant privilege, monetary policy spillovers, contagion

across non-U.S. countries, and the dollar as a global risk factor. In tying together these disparate

phenomena, our analysis calls attention to the importance of understanding the dollar safe-asset

demand phenomena. There has been a growing body of theoretical work on the topic. See in

particular Farhi and Maggiori (2017), Maggiori (2017), He, Krishnamurthy and Milbradt (2018),

and Gopinath and Stein (2019). Discriminating among the explanations offered in these theories

is an important challenge for future research.




  14
     We have side-stepped hedging considerations and pecuniary externalities in the choice of debt denomination
that arise in dynamic models with financial constraints. See the Appendix section C. With financial constraints, a
pecuniary externality emerges whereby foreign borrowers will not internalize the impact of their currency mismatch
on other firms in the economy.


                                                       44
References

Aguiar, Mark. 2005. "Investment, devaluation, and foreign currency exposure: The case of

  Mexico." Journal of Development Economics, 78(1): 95­113.

Akinci, Ozge, and Albert Queralto. 2018. "Exchange rate dynamics and monetary spillovers

  with imperfect financial markets." FRB of New York Staff Report, , (849).

Bernanke, Ben S. 2017. "Federal reserve policy in an international context." IMF Economic

  Review, 65(1): 5­36.

Bernanke, Ben S., and Alan Blinder. 1992. "The Federal Funds Rate and the Channels of

  Monetary Transmission." American Economic Review, 82(4): 901­921.

Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist. 1996. "The Financial Accelerator

  and the Flight to Quality." The Review of Economics and Statistics, 78(1): 1­15.

Bleakley, Hoyt, and Kevin Cowan. 2008. "Corporate dollar debt and depreciations: much

  ado about nothing?" The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(4): 612­626.

Bruno, Valentina, and Hyun Song Shin. 2014. "Cross-Border Banking and Global Liquid-

  ity." The Review of Economic Studies, rdu042.

Bruno, Valentina, and Hyun Song Shin. 2017. "Global dollar credit and carry trades: a

  firm-level analysis." The Review of Financial Studies, 30(3): 703­749.

Caballero, Ricardo J, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2003. "Excessive dollar debt: Financial

  development and underinsurance." The Journal of Finance, 58(2): 867­893.

Caballero, Ricardo J, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas. 2008. "An

  equilibrium model of" global imbalances" and low interest rates." American economic review,

  98(1): 358­93.

Cetorelli, Nicola, and Linda S Goldberg. 2012. "Banking globalization and monetary

  transmission." The Journal of Finance, 67(5): 1811­1843.


                                              45
Chahrour, Ryan, and Rosen Valchev. 2017. "International medium of exchange: Privilege

  and duty." Boston College Department of Economics.

Despres, Emile, Charles Kindleberger, and Walter Salant. 1966. "The Dollar and World

  Liquidity: A Minority View." Economist, 526­529.

Dooley, Michael P, and Peter M Garber. 2005. "Is it 1958 or 1968? Three notes on the

  longevity of the revived Bretton Woods system." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,

  2005(1): 147­209.

Drechsler, Itamar, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl. 2017. "The deposits channel of

  monetary policy." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(4): 1819­1876.

Duffie, Darrell, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2016. "Passthrough efficiency in the Feds

  new monetary policy setting." 1815­1847.

Du, Wenxin, Alexander Tepper, and Adrien Verdelhan. 2017. "Deviations from Covered

  Interest Rate Parity." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 23170.

Du, Wenxin, Joanne Im, and Jesse Schreger. 2018. "The US Treasury Premium." Journal

  of International Economics.

Farhi, Emmanuel, and Matteo Maggiori. 2017. "A Model of the International Monetary

  System." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(1): 295­355.

Farhi, Emmanuel, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, and Helene Rey. 2011. Reforming the

  International Monetary System. Centre for Economic Policy Research.

Gabaix, Xavier, and Matteo Maggiori. 2015. "International liquidity and exchange rate

  dynamics." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(3): 1369­1420.

Gerko, Elena, and H´
                   el`
                     ene Rey. 2017. "Monetary Policy in the Capitals of Capital." Journal

  of the European Economic Association, 15(4): 721­745.

Gopinath, Gita, and Jeremy C Stein. 2019. "Banking, Trade, and the Making of a Domi-

  nant Currency." Harvard University.

                                             46
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Helene Rey. 2007. "International financial adjustment."

  Journal of political economy, 115(4): 665­703.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Helene Rey, and Kai Truempler. 2012. "The financial crisis

  and the geography of wealth transfers." Journal of International Economics, 88(2): 266­283.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Helene Rey, and Nicolas Govillot. 2010. "Exorbitant Priv-

  ilege and Exorbitant Duty." Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan

  IMES Discussion Paper Series 10-E-20.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Helene Rey, and Nicolas Govillot. 2011. "Exorbitant Priv-

  ilege and Exorbitant Duty." London School of Economics Working Paper.

He, Zhiguo, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Konstantin Milbradt. 2018. "A Model of Safe

  Asset Determination." American Economic Review.

Ivashina, Victoria, David S. Scharfstein, and Jeremy C. Stein. 2015. "Dollar Fund-

  ing and the Lending Behavior of Global Banks*." The Quarterly Journal of Economics,

  130(3): 1241­1281.

Jiang, Zhengyang, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Hanno Lustig. 2018a. "Foreign Safe

  Asset Demand and the Dollar Exchange Rate." Stanford GSB Working paper.

Jiang, Zhengyang, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Hanno Lustig. 2018b. "Foreign Safe

  Asset Demand for US Treasurys and the Dollar." AEA Papers and Proceedings, 108: 537­41.

Jiang, Zhengyang, Hanno N Lustig, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Mindy Z Xiaolan.

  2019. "The Government Risk Premium Puzzle." Available at SSRN 3333517.

Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Herman Kamil, and Carolina Villegas-Sanchez. 2016. "What

  hinders investment in the aftermath of financial crises: Insolvent firms or illiquid banks?"

  Review of Economics and Statistics, 98(4): 756­769.




                                              47
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Hanno Lustig. 2019. "Mind the Gap in Sovereign Debt

  Markets: The U.S. Treasury basis and the Dollar Risk Factor." 2019 Jackson Hole Economic

  Symposium.

Lane, P.R., and J.C. Shambaugh. 2010. "Financial Exchange Rates and International Cur-

  rency Exposures." The American Economic Review, 100(1): 518­540.

Liao, Gordon Y. 2018. "Credit migration and covered interest rate parity." Working Paper,

  Federal Reserve Board.

Lustig, Hanno, Nikolai Roussanov, and Adrien Verdelhan. 2014. "Countercyclical cur-

  rency risk premia." Journal of Financial Economics, 111(3): 527­553.

Maggiori, Matteo. 2017. "Financial intermediation, international risk sharing, and reserve

  currencies." American Economic Review, 107(10): 3038­71.

Maggiori, Matteo, Brent Neiman, and Jesse Schreger. 2017. "International currencies

  and capital allocation."

McCauley, Robert N, Patrick McGuire, and Vladyslav Sushko. 2015. "Global dollar

  credit: links to US monetary policy and leverage." Economic Policy, 30(82): 187­229.

Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia, and H´
                                elene Rey. 2015. "World asset markets and the global

  financial cycle." National Bureau of Economic Research.

Mishra, Prachi, and Raghuram Rajan. 2016. "Rules of the monetary game." Reserve Bank

  of India Working Paper Series, 4.

Rey, Helene. 2013. "Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy

  Independence." Jackson Hole Paper.

Schneider, Martin, and Aaron Tornell. 2004. "Balance sheet effects, bailout guarantees

  and financial crises." The Review of Economic Studies, 71(3): 883­913.

Shin, Hyun Song. 2012. "Global banking glut and loan risk premium." IMF Economic Review,

  60(2): 155­192.

                                             48
Triffin, Robert. 1960. Gold and the Dollar Crisis: The Future of Convertibility. New Haven,

  CT: Yale University Press.

Verdelhan, Adrien. 2018. "The share of systematic variation in bilateral exchange rates." The

  Journal of Finance, 73(1): 375­418.

Wiriadinata, Ursula. 2018. "External debt, currency risk, and international monetary policy

  transmission."




                                             49
    Appendix for Dollar Safety and the Global Financial Cycle
    Zhengyang Jiang, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Hanno Lustig



A     Model Appendix

A.1     Parameter Values

                     Parameter                                  Notation    Estimate
                                                  U.S.
                     Pledgibility                                            0.825
                     Firms' Exit Rate                                         0.48
                     Productivity                                  a
                                                                   ¯         1.055
                     Share of Global Banks                                    0.5
                     Aggregate Labor                                ¯         7.5
                     Steady-State Interest Rate                    ¯i         0.00
                     Steady-State F-Sector Capital               k SS          1
                                      Global Safe Asset Investors
                     Steady-State Convenience Yield                ¯
                                                                              0.01
                     Convenience Yield Per Dollar Liquidity                  0.025
                                                 Foreign
                     Pledgibility                                             0.74
                     Firms' Exit Rate                                         0.48
                     Productivity                                 ¯
                                                                  a          1.055
                     Share of Firms that Can Borrow Dollar                    0.5
                     Aggregate Labor                               ¯          7.5
                     Interest Rate                                ¯
                                                                  i           0.01
                                                                  SS,
                     Steady-State F-Sector Capital              k              1
                                           Implied Parameters
                                                                   SS
                     Steady-State U.S. F-Sector Labor                         6.71
                                                                  SS,
                     Steady-State Foreign F-Sector Labor                      3.48
                     New U.S. F-Sector Capital                    kN          0.54
                     New Foreign F-Sector Capital               k N,          0.75
                     Steady-State U.S. Dollar Liquidity         QSS           3.36
                     Steady-State Foreign Dollar Liquidity      QSS,          1.78
                     Steady-State U.S. Bank Profits             b,SS          0.03
                     Steady-State U.S. Trade Balance           T B SS        -0.03

                                   Table 2: Parameter Values.



    We calibrate the model to make qualitative points. The steady-state U.S. interest rate is 0% and the
steady-state foreign interest rate is 1%. The steady-state convenience yield on U.S. bonds is also 1%, so
that the real exchange rate is stationary with a steady-state value of 1.
    We normalize the U.S. and foreign steady-state capital to 1. The F-sector productivity is 1.055


                                                    50
whereas the I-sector productivity is normalized to 1. We also pick other production parameters so that a
0.25% increase in quarterly interest rate leads to 0.2% decline in output and 2% decline in the F-sector's
employment.
        The share of global banks  is chosen to be 0.5 so that half of the dollar safe assets issued by the
U.S. is held by the foreign safe asset investors. The steady-state foreign dollar liquidity QSS, is chosen
to be 1.78 so that half of the dollar safe assets is issued by the foreigners.


A.2         Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1 Combining the budget constraint with the borrowing constraint,

                                                · pt+1 · at (lt + kt )
                                   pt nt +                             = pt (lt + kt )
                                                      1 + it

which implies

                                                   1                              1
                          lt + k t = n t                         nt                            .
                                           1 - at (pt1+
                                                     +1 /pt )           1 - at (1 + it - t )-1
                                                        it


Proof of Proposition 2 When the old household buys or sells bank shares, it trades with world
investors (or to be consistent with our segmentation assumptions, the household trades with banks who
broker the trade with world investors). Since world investors are long-lived, we can price bank equity
using their discount rate. Then, the equity value of the banking sector (in units of world goods) at time
t is,
                                                                
                                                                       b t+j
                                                       Vt =                    .                       (39)
                                                              j =1
                                                                     (1 + r )j

Note that bank equity is valued at the non-convenience discount rate of r . As we will see, bank equity
is a risky security whose dollar value fluctuates with the value of the dollar. That is, in keeping with the
thrust of our model, bank equity is not a safe dollar claim and thus should not carry a convenience yield.
        The first-order conditions for the household are,

                                                         H
                                                                     = µEt+1 ,
                                                       ct+1,H
                                                         T
                                                                     = µ,
                                                       ct+1,T
                                                          X
                                                                     = µ,
                                                         xt+1




                                                                   51
where µ is the Lagrange multiplier on the budget constraint. Log utility implies that expenditure shares
are proportional to the alphas. Combining these equations and using the budget constraint we find that,

                                                      1
                                                µ=
                                                     wt+1

    Total imports (in foreign currency value) are,


                                             ct+1,T = T wt+1


total exports are,
                                                        ¯ - H wt+1 .
                                      Et+1 (1 + it - t )L

    By definition, the trade balance (expressed in foreign currency units) is,


                                                        ¯ - (T + H ) wt+1 .
                             T Bt+1 = Et+1 (1 + it - t )L                                            (40)


    In the steady state, the trade deficit must be matched by a payment from abroad. Steady-state bank
profits b,SS are positive
                                            b,SS = QSS E SS SS                                       (41)

and proportional to SS . The U.S. household owns shares in the banking sector and thus receives a
dividend proportional to b,SS . To compute how much dividends the U.S. household receives, we need
to compute xSS . The F.O.C. for the bequest gives that X wt+1 = xt+1 . Using the expression for wt+1
from the budget constraint, we find that,


                                  ¯ + xSS (1 + r ) =            X                               ¯
     xSS = X E SS (1 + iSS -  SS )L                                        E SS (1 + iSS -  SS )L.   (42)
                                                            1 - X (1 + r )

Proof of Proposition 3 Suppose that the firm sells Q                               
                                                    t dollars of bonds and raises Qt St units of

goods in this way. We impose the financial constraint that the maximum number of dollar bonds issued
by this firm is,
                                  Q                               
                                   t (1 + it )Et St+1   at (kt + Qt St )                             (43)

    On the left is the expected repayment on the bonds in units of foreign currency. On the right is the
amount of output in time t + 1 that can be pledged as collateral. As before, the financial constraint
places a limit on the maximum face value of bonds issued, parameterized by  . Also note that since the


                                                     52
payment is in dollars and involves exchange rate risk, we have used Et St+1 in the constraint. We will
assume shocks are small enough that there is no default in equilibrium (e.g., wealth nt is large enough

that the firm-owners can absorb losses).
    We note that dollar safe asset demand implies the U.I.P violation:

                                                      St+1
                                        (1 + it )Et         1 + it - t .
                                                       St

Then, solving for Qt , with Eq. (43) binding, we find that:


                                                a                          a
                      Q        
                       t St = nt
                                                  t
                                                               n 
                                                                 t
                                                                            t
                                                                                    .                 (44)
                                   (1 + it )Et St+1 /St -  at      1 + i         
                                                                        t - t -  at


    And profits, based on the realization of st+1 are,


              t
                ,dollar
                        (st+1 )   = a                   
                                     t (nt + Qt St ) - Qt (1 + it )St+1

                                  = a               
                                     t nt + Qt St (at - (1 + it + st+1 - st ))
                                                      a
                                  = a        
                                     t nt + nt
                                                         t
                                                                (at - (1 + it + st+1 - st ))
                                              1 + i          
                                                   t - t -  at
                                                              
                                         (1 -  ) + it - t -  (it + st+1 - st )
                                  = at nt                                      .
                                                   1 + i          
                                                        t - t -  at


    Since
                                         st = Et [st+1 ] + it + t - it,


we rewrite the profits expression to find:

                                                (1 -  )(1 + i          
                                                             t - t ) -  (st+1 - Et [st+1 ])
                    t
                      ,dollar
                              (st+1 ) = n   
                                         t at                                               .
                                                           1 + it - t -  a
                                                                
                                                                            t




B     Empirical Evidence

B.1    The Treasury Basis and 

In Jiang, Krishnamurthy and Lustig (2018a), we present empirical evidence in support of Eq. (16) that
relates the real exchange rate, et , to the convenience yield, t . Key to our empirical work is a measure
of t . We explain this measurement in the context of our model in this section.
    Suppose that world safe asset investors value safe dollar claims differentially. In particular, suppose
that dollar claims issued by firms carry a convenience yield of t but dollar claims issued by the U.S.


                                                         53
government, safer and more liquid, carry a convenience yield of (1 + )t where  > 0. What are these
government bonds? Suppose that the government imposes a tax on the I-sector of t . The tax is used to
back a government bond. We take the limit as t goes to zero so that the equilibrium is exactly as in the
model we have analyzed, but can also price this almost zero supply of the government bond.
    For firm dollar bonds we had posited,


                                        it + Et st+1 - st = it - t ,



and used this equation to derive the U.I.P. condition in (14). For government bonds, we posit that,


                                                         
                                    iT
                                     t + Et st+1 - st = it - (1 + )t ,



where iT
       t is the interest rate on the one-period U.S. Treasury bond. We subtract these two expressions

to find that,
                                              it - iT
                                                    t = t .


So that the spread on the left is proportional to the convenience yield. In Jiang, Krishnamurthy and
Lustig (2018a), we consider the case where there may be a convenience yield on both U.S. and world
bonds, but with a larger convenience yield on U.S. bonds. In this case, the appropriate measure of t is
proportional to:
                                                          T,
                                          it - iT
                                                t - it - it  .

We construct this difference (or more precisely, the negative of this difference) using Treasury bond rates
and forward exchange rates, and denote the resulting measure as the "Treasury basis." We have plotted
the basis in Figure 1(a) and 1(b) for the crisis and post-crisis sample.


B.2     Construction of Wealth Data

We measure wealth in three asset classes: bonds, equities, and deposits. We measure the total outstanding
quantities, measured in local currency, in these asset classes as of December 2006 for each of Germany,
France, Great Britain, Japan, United States, and Canada. The quantities is assembled using data from
country central banks, the BIS, the World Bank, and the London Stock Exchange. To construct the time
series of these wealth measures, we use the Bloomberg Barclays Aggregate Bond total return (unhedged)
indices for each country and apply these returns to bonds. For equities, we use total return series for



                                                    54
the S&P500 (U.S.), Nikkei 225 (Japan), FTSE All-Share Index (Great Britain), CAC 40 Index (France),
Deutsche Boerse AG German Stock Index (Germnay), and S&P/TSX Composite Index (Canada). We
use interest rates from the OECD for the deposits. Finally, we convert wealth from local currency to
dollars using foreign exchange spot rates from the Federal Reserve.



C     Hedging considerations

We have side-stepped a nuance involving the risk associated with currency mismatch in our main analysis.
This section explains the issue in further detail. Although all agents have linear utility, the financial
constraint creates an incentive to hedge which affects financing choices. The hedging results of this
section are not novel. Although the model is somewhat different, the substance of our results are quite
close to that of Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2003).
    Suppose that, as in our analysis, shocks are realized at time t + 1, and there are no further shocks.
Define the value of wealth to a manager as,

                                                          
                                                                        k-(t+1)
                                 V   (nt+1 , t+1 )   =           (1 -   )           nk.
                                                         k=t+1


Next suppose that  is a choice variable of the manager. That is, we dispense with the exogenous multi-
national/local split. Given that  > 0 for date t + 1 and beyond, managers will always set  = 1. Thus
the wealth accumulation equation is,

                                         nt+1        a (1 -  )
                                              =
                                          nt    1 -  a (1 + i - t )-1

and we find that,
                                                                                                         
                                                                              k-1
                                         ((1 -   )a (1 -  ))k-(t+1)                             1
      V (n               
          t+1 , t+1 ) = nt+1 
                              
                                                                                           a (1 + i -  )-1
                                                                                                           
                                                                              j =t+1
                                                                                     1 -              j
                                 k=t+1


This value function is linear in wealth because the firm is risk neutral. However, the term in the sum
depends on the state at time t + 1. Define the marginal value of wealth in the state at date t + 1 where
the convenience yield is t+1 as,
                                                                                         
                                                                        k-1
                                 ((1 -   )a (1 -  ))k-(t+1)                   1
             m(t+1 ) =                                                   a (1 + i -  )-1
                                                                                         
                                                            j =t+1
                                                                   1 -              j
                         k=t+1




                                                             55
The key property of this marginal value is that it is increasing in j (for each j ). In states of the world
with higher 's, a firm can lever up and make more profits, for any level of wealth. As a result, the
marginal value of wealth is higher in high  states.
    Next consider the choice of dollar and local currency borrowing at date t. The firm solves:


max Et [(1 -   )n                                                                           
                 t+1 +  nt+1 m(t+1 )]  max Et [nt+1 ]Et [(1 -  ) +  m(t+1 )] + covt [nt+1 ,  m(t+1 )]
                                             



where,
                                        1 -                 (1 -  ) -  (st+1 - Et [st+1 ])
            n        
             t+1 = at nt (1 -  )                  -1 + 
                                   1 -  at (1 + it )           1 -  a         
                                                                      t (1 + it - t )
                                                                                      -1


m(t+1 ) is like a stochastic discount factor in this optimization problem and drives hedging considerations.
    The term Et [nt+1 ] is increasing in  when t > 0. On average, increasing dollar borrowing leads
                                                                                                    dnt+1
to greater profits. But the covariance term covt < 0 and decreasing in  . First, we note that       dst+1   is
negative and linear in  . Higher dollar debt means that wealth is more sensitive to changes in the value
of the dollar. Next, note that high t+1 states are also high st+1 states. Thus, the covariance term is
negative and proportional to  .
    We then have a simple risk-return trade-off. If t is sufficiently high, then the cost savings on taking
on dollar debt is high enough that the solution is at the corner where  = 1. We can think of the
case we have analyzed earlier as corresponding to such a parametrization. For lower values of t , risk
considerations enter the picture and the solution is at an interior where  < 1. If risk is high enough,
then it is possible that the solution sets  = 0.
    Finally, we note that these hedging considerations will also make the private choice of  too high
relative to the choice of a planner of the foreign country. This is due to a pecuniary externality of the
model that is familiar from Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2003). Given that the result is not novel, we
only mention it in passing. As  rises, currency mismatch rises. If a shock arises (such as tightening
of U.S. monetary policy) which appreciates the dollar, then firms will suffer losses and as a result the
equilibrium Q will fall. But this will lead to a higher value of t+1 and feedback to a higher value
of st+1 . The planner takes this feedback into account when choosing  and will set a lower value of 
than the private sector. In our model, as in Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2003), firms will undervalue
the hedging benefit of local currency debt and overexpose themselves to currency mismatch. The new
insight of our paper relative to Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2003) is that this the currency mismatch
externality is particularly a problem when it comes to dollar borrowing.




                                                    56
