                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    A HISTORY OF PRICING POLLUTION (OR, WHY PIGOUVIAN TAXES ARE NOT
                         NECESSARILY PIGOUVIAN)

                                    H. Spencer Banzhaf

                                     Working Paper 27683
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27683


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2020




I thank the Alliance for Market Solutions (AMS) for generous support of this research. I also
thank Nathalie Berta, Elodie Bertrand, Maxime Desmarais-Tremblay, Steve Medema, Malcolm
Rutherford, Kerry Smith, and participants in a 2020 virtual History of Economics Society ses-
sion for valuable comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by H. Spencer Banzhaf. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
A History of Pricing Pollution (Or, Why Pigouvian Taxes are not Necessarily Pigouvian)
H. Spencer Banzhaf
NBER Working Paper No. 27683
August 2020
JEL No. B2,H23,Q2,Q5

                                          ABSTRACT

The standard history of modern environmental economics often views it as an application of A.C.
Pigou's theory of externalities, refined over the decades and applied to environmental problems in
the 1960s, when the first detailed pro-posals for pricing pollution were outlined by Allen Kneese,
Thomas Crocker, John Dales, and others. However, the historical literature has noted problems
with this narrative, including a 30-year gap in discussions of such applications and few actual
citations to Pigou. This paper offers a simple explanation for this puzzle: Namely, pollution
pricing is not (necessarily) Pigouvian. It argues that the early applied literature on the topic was
rooted more in questions about common property resources and increasing returns from
developing natural re-sources. Both topics were treated by broad literatures by the 1960s,
including distinctly American traditions not particularly associated with Pigou.


H. Spencer Banzhaf
Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Georgia State University
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302
and NBER
hsbanzhaf@gsu.edu
                              A History of Pricing Pollution
                  (Or, Why Pigouvian Taxes are not Necessarily Pigouvian)

                                       H. Spencer Banzhaf




1. Introduction

From the publication of Rachel Carson's Silent Spring in 1962 to the first Earth Day in 1970, the
1960s witnessed a turning point in environmental thinking and politics. Social and political move-
ments turned from the conservation of natural resources needed for production to a new post-war
focus on the good life and aesthetic consumption (Hays 1982, 1987). Contemporaneously, econ-
omists turned from comprehending their own discipline in terms of "material welfare," to compre-
hending it in line with Lionel Robbins's definition in terms of tradeoffs and opportunity costs
(Backhouse and Medema 2009a,b). This turn created space to redefine the relationship between
economics and the environment to account for households' values for preservation, however im-
material or "spiritual" they might be, as the idea of "consumption" became ever broader and more
abstract (Banzhaf 2019).

       Numerous economists jumped into this space, from Robert Solow and Joseph Stiglitz to
Kenneth Boulding and Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen on questions of sustainability, from Kenneth
Arrow to James Buchanan on externalities, or William Baumol, Wallace Oates, and Martin Weit-
zman on pollution pricing, among many others. But of all economists working on pollution pricing
in the era, Allen V. Kneese (1930-2001) was the widely acknowledged leader. In The Economics
of Regional Water Quality Management (1964), Kneese, an economist at Resources for the Future,
introduced detailed proposals for "effluent charges" on emissions of pollutants into waterways.
Shortly thereafter, Thomas Crocker (1966) and John Dales (1968a) introduced proposals for trad-
ing pollution rights, later known as the tradable permit or cap-and-trade approach.

       The conventional narrative is that such work picked up where A.C. Pigou had left off some
30 years before in The Economics of Welfare (1932) (Berta 2019, Pearce 2002, Sandmo 2015, de
Steiguer 2006). According to this way of thinking, Pigou had developed his theory of external
economies and diseconomies in the first third of the 20th Century using environmental as well as
other examples. Though the idea lay neglected for some decades, when economists began to take

                                                -1-
up environmental issues in the late 1950s and 1960s, they picked up Pigouvian models and policy
tools (the familiar "Pigouvian tax") to address them. A corollary to this theory is that Ronald
Coase's "Problem of Social Cost" (1960) was an early response to this trend, introducing a rival
approach of property rights and trading in lieu of corrective pricing. Environmental economists
and their policy proposals can then be classified by the extent to which they are Pigouvian or
Coasean or some hybrid.

       In this paper, I argue that, while this Pigouvian box was undeniably an important source
for economists in the 1960s thinking about externalities, it was but one of many. Nobody likes
neat boxes, and it is cheap work historically to blur their boundaries, but logical categories are
necessary. My claim here is not just that the "Pigouvian" and "Coasean" boxes are too neat, but
that we have missed entire boxes altogether, and perhaps the ones at eye level on the shelf. In the
US, first-generation specialists in environmental economics had been trained in agriculture and
natural resources and/or in regional development, fields which had their own well-established
canon covering questions of land use, property rights, indivisibilities, incentives, and so forth,
much of it bearing American institutionalist marks stamped by Richard Ely and his students. Try-
ing to understand such work in terms of debates between Cambridge and LSE is a categorical
mistake.

       As Medema (2020a) has recently emphasized, one problem with the conventional narrative
is that it's impossible to trace an unbroken line from Pigou to the environmental work of the 1960s.
In the intervening decades, Pigou's ideas on external (dis)economies had evolved into today's con-
cept of externalities, but without much reference to real-world applications. As Medema tells the
story, the line was lost but then reconnected: When environmental applications began to loom
larger, the revised Pigouvian theory was simply "grafted into" the emerging field of environmental
economics. In this paper, I offer a different explanation. In the first half of the 20th Century,
Pigou's ideas about the divergence between the private value of investments and social net product,
though important, never really were as unique as the later literature came to imply. Though the
moniker "Pigouvian" was adopted around 1970, the name should not be confused with hereditary
lineage.

       Though there were continuous lines of thought running through the period in American
economics, the lines run back to the economics of land use and resource development, not to Pigou.


                                                -2-
These traditions had developed their own distinctive schools of thought about the economies of
scale of resource development and the poor incentives of open access to common resources.

          Section 2 of this paper gives an overview of Pigou's discussion of social benefits and costs
as well as the secondary literature that has by now well established the difficulties with linking his
work to the emerging field of environmental economics in the 1960s. Section 3 introduces the
work of Allen Kneese, the leading expert in the era on pollution pricing, and discusses its relation-
ship to Pigou, Coase, and other sources; Section 4 similarly introduces the work of Thomas
Crocker and John Dales on tradable pollution rights. Section 5 situates their work in the historical
context of agricultural and applied resource economics.

2. The Pigouvian Tradition

The standard history of environmental economics begins with the work of A.C. Pigou (1877 -
1959), the Cambridge economist famous for his theory of the potential divergence between private
benefits and costs (values that are captured by markets) and social benefits and costs.1 Following
Bator (1957, 1958), economists today would refer to these effects--especially as they relate to
environmental problems--as "externalities." Externalities are famously hard to define, but,
roughly speaking, they represent an unpriced effect on third parties, uninvolved in an economic
transaction or decision. 2

          In The Economics of Welfare (1932), Pigou identified three groupings of situations where
he thought there is a divergence between private and social benefits and costs. Pigou's second
grouping is the one closest to what we now think of as externalities. This represents a situation
where

          One person A, in the course of rendering some service, for which payment is made,
          to a second person B, incidentally also renders services or disservices to other per-
          sons . . ., of such a sort that payment cannot be exacted from the benefited parties
          or compensation enforced on behalf of the injured parties. (p. 183)

Pigou gives several examples of such services that certainly could be read as a kind of proto-



1
    For background, see Medema (2009, Ch. 3), Aslangeigui and Oakes (2015), and Kumekawa (2017).
2
  Classic attempts to wrestle with the definition of externalities include Viner (1932), Meade (1952), Sci-
tovsky (1954), Bator (1958), Buchanan and Stubblebine (1962), and Arrow (1969). For historical over-
views of the concept, see Papandreou (1994), Lagueux (2010), Berta (2017), and Medema (2020a).

                                                    -3-
environmental economics. "Uncompensated services are rendered," he says,

       when resources are invested in private parks in cities; for these, even though the
       public is not admitted to them, improve the air of the neighbourhood. The same
       thing is true--though here allowance should be made for detriment elsewhere--of
       resources invested in roads and tramways that increase the value of the adjoining
       land. . . . It is true, in like manner, of resources devoted to afforestation, since the
       beneficial effect on climate often extends beyond the borders of the estate owned
       by the person responsible for the forest. . . . It is true of resources devoted to the
       prevention of smoke from factory chimneys: for this smoke in large towns inflicts
       a heavy uncharged loss on the community, in injury to buildings and vegetables,
       expenses for washing clothes and cleaning rooms, expenses for the provision of
       extra artificial light, and in many other ways. (p. 184)

Pigou gives other examples as well, including Mill's example of a lighthouse aiding ships; private
lamps at house doors, which illuminate the street; and basic scientific research. Thus, Pigou's
discussion seems like a natural source for economic thinking about environmental problems.

       Though Pigou's importance to environmental economics cannot be denied, a story about
environmental economics being developed through direct applications of Pigou's theory of exter-
nalities runs into three difficulties. First, Pigou's analysis was much wider ranging than today's
theory of externalities, so it was not obviously focused on environmental harms and similar issues.
As already noted, Pigou considered three groupings of effects. The first includes situations where
productive investments might potentially be made by people who do not own the instrument of
production being maintained or enhanced. A notable example is tenant farmers, who do not have
the full incentive to enhance the fertility of the land they are renting; indeed they have an incentive
to let it depreciate rapidly in the years before their lease expires (Pigou 1932, pp. 174-83).

       Pigou's third grouping comprises situations, discussed earlier by Alfred Marshall, where
there are increasing or decreasing returns at the industry level or even between industries (pp. 213-
28). This portion of Pigou's theory was the most controversial, and Pigou steadily revised his
analysis, retreating from some of the stronger versions of the argument that he had espoused earlier
in his career, which involved external effects on land and resource rents (McDonald 2013,
Aslanbeigui and Oakes 2015, Medema 2020a). Notably from the standpoint of the history of
American resource economics, much of this was a transatlantic debate, with Pigou's ideas mediated
through Young (1913, 1928), Knight (1924), Viner (1932), and Ellis and Fellner (1943) as well as
Meade (1952). Even so, in the fourth edition of The Economics of Welfare (1932), Pigou gave the


                                                  -4-
example of the cotton industry, which when it operates on a larger scale takes on a structure of
increasing specialization among firms, with some firms weaving and some spinning, some spin-
ning fine counts and others course. In such cases, he argued, investment enters the industry to the
point where the marginal firm is indifferent to entering, but nevertheless its entrance increases
economic rents for other firms, thus creating a divergence between the private value of investment
and the social net product.

          Pigou's work spawned a large literature sorting out the nuances of these three situations
and how they inter-relate. 3 While this is not the place to focus on the subtleties of those relation-
ships, it is enough for my purposes to note that, first, because he was writing a large volume about
welfare, Pigou's discussion is inherently synthetic, so not all the material found in it is uniquely
his. Second, while in retrospect it is easy to pick out the bits that resemble a proto-environmental
economics, when taken as a whole, at the time Pigou's discussion did not obviously apply to envi-
ronmental problems.

          The second difficulty with a linear history from Pigou to modern environmental economics
is that, as emphasized previously by other observers, while it is the second of Pigou's groups that
today is most closely associated with the idea of "externalities," that actually was the group most
ignored in the literature until at least the late 1950s, with passing references to smoking chimneys
or traffic congestion viewed as "curiosities" or, in Baumol's (1952) words, "freakish exceptions." 4
Two decades later, with environmental economics on a swift assent, Kneese commented:

          Environmental pollution has existed for many years in one form or another. It is
          an old phenomenon, and yet in its contemporary forms it seems to have crept up on
          governments and even on pertinent professional disciplines such as biology, chem-
          istry, most of engineering, and, of course, economics. A few economists, such as
          Pigou, wrote intelligently and usefully on the matter a long time ago, but generally
          even that subset of economists especially interested in externalities seems to have
          regarded them as rather freakish anomalies in an otherwise smoothly functioning
          exchange system. Even the examples commonly used in the literature have a whim-
          sical air about them. We have heard much of bees and apple orchards and a current
          favorite example is sparks from a steam locomotive--this being some eighty years
          after the introduction of the spark arrester and twenty years after the abandonment


3
    For discussion, see Lagueux (2010), McDonald (2013), Berta (2017), and Medema (2020a).
4
  On this point, see Lagueux (2010), Lane (2014), Sandmo (2015), Berta (2020a), and especially Medema
(2020a).

                                                  -5-
        of the steam locomotive. (1971a p. 2)

In other words, there was a large gap between the time Pigou wrote about what we would now call
externalities and references to it in the literature, at least by those that took it seriously. This gap
raises the possibility that other currents were at work during the period.

        The third--and most surprising--difficulty with the Pigouvian origin of environmental
economists is that, even as economists like Meade, Scitovsky, Bator, and Buchanan did begin to
talk more about "externalities" and environmental examples, actual specialists in environmental
economics hardly referenced Pigou at all until about 1970. When environmental economists in
the 1960s did refer to Pigou, it usually was limited either to welfare economics very broadly or to
Pigou's discussion of our defective telescopic faculty and the resulting excessively rapid depletion
of natural resources. 5 Even more to the point, they rarely mentioned him when discussing pricing
access to environmental resources, not only for "green" uses like recreation, but even for "brown"
uses like depositing wastes. Though today economists might naturally refer to such prices as
"Pigouvian taxes," at the time they were known simply as "effluent charges" (e.g. Kneese 1964),
without making a connection to Pigou. As I show in the next section, the Pigouvian terminology
didn't enter widespread circulation until the 1970s.

        Of course, one possible reason economists might not have attributed their ideas to Pigou is
that his ideas had become so embodied in economics, so taken for granted, that they did not warrant
citation. 6 If it was merely the negative evidence of what environmental economists did not say,
that explanation might be satisfactory. However, as I show in the following sections, the argu-
ments used by first-generation environmental economists, along with the hints from those refer-
ences that they do make, suggest stronger links to the agricultural economics literature and insti-
tutionalist analysis of common property.

3. Allen Kneese and Effluent Charges

In the 1960s, Allen V. Kneese (1930-2001) was the widely acknowledged leader in the economics

5
 E.g., Krutilla (1967). See Collard (1996) and Kula (1998 Ch. 6) for historical discussion of Pigou's views
on resource depletion.
6
  Medema (2020a) discusses some evidence in support of the idea of an "oral tradition" as mentioned by
Coase (1960). Kneese himself noted that "Economists have long held that technological spillovers can be
counteracted by levying taxes on the unit 'responsible' for the diseconomy and by paying a subsidy on the
'damaged' party" (1964 p. 56), indicating such a tradition looms in the background.

                                                    -6-
of pollution pricing. 7 Extensively cited, Kneese's Economics of Regional Water Quality Manage-
ment (1964) and other works were considered the first systematic treatment of the topic and cer-
tainly the most definitive. 8

          Kneese earned his PhD in economics from Indiana University, with a dissertation on mar-
ket power and exclusive dealing in the farm machinery, automobile, and petroleum industries
(Kneese 1956). After graduating, he worked at the University of New Mexico and at the Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City, where he first turned to researching water resources problems in the
American West. At what was still an early stage in his career, Kneese moved to Resources for the
Future (RFF) in 1961. 9 He established himself as a leader in the field, artfully using RFF grants
and conferences to shape the community's research agenda. He was a founding editor of the jour-
nal Water Resources Research. Later, as environmental economics, alongside other sub-disci-
plines, was formalizing its institutions in the 1970s, Kneese was front and center, serving as the
first president of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists and founding editor
(along with his collaborator, Ralph d'Arge) of its flagship publication, the Journal of Environmen-
tal Economics and Management (JEEM).

          Kneese's first forays into the economics of water resources addressed the traditional prob-
lem of developing them as inputs into material production, particularly in the context of water
shortages in the American West (Kneese 1960). Like other works at the time on this surging
subject, 10 Kneese adopted a welfarist perspective on the problem, discussing "normative problems
in the evaluation of water resources development projects." As a logical point of departure, he
began with what he characterized as Pigouvian welfare economics, essentially the interpretation
of market prices as marginal social values generally, as in Pigou's national dividend, but not the
divergence of private and social values specifically. But then Kneese's next move was to dismiss
this older Pigouvian approach as too simplistic in its treatment of interpersonal comparisons of

7
    See Nishibayashi (2019) for a historical discussion of Kneese and his work.
8
  Fort et al. (1959) presented an earlier proposal for a "smog tax," published as a RAND report, but it did
not circulate widely and appears to have been forgotten until its rediscovery ten years later. For those
interested in trivia, the report was the first "publication" for both William Niskanen and William Sharpe.
9
 See Kneese (1988) for a brief autobiographical statement, including a summary of early intellectual influ-
ences.
10
  E.g. Eckstein 1958, Krutilla and Eckstein 1958, McKean 1958, Hirshleifer, De Haven, and Milliman
1960.

                                                     -7-
utility, it now being superseded by the "new welfare economics" of Hicks and others. 11

          Kneese also identified Pigouvian external economies as a key concept in normative project
evaluation, but only as refined by Ellis and Fellner and others. Interestingly, at this stage he barely
mentioned pollution in connection to this idea. Instead, he emphasized external economies (more
so than diseconomies) from increasing the scale of resource development. For example, surface-
water irrigation might recharge aquifers used by neighboring farms for irrigation; upstream storage
improves the efficiency of down-stream hydro-electric power; etc. Most generally, an expanding
market in a rural area may contribute to an increase in regional economic efficiency by facilitating
the division of labor (1960 pp. 311-12).

          It was around this time that Kneese moved to RFF. As discussed in Banzhaf (2019), RFF
was evolving at this time from its initial emphasis on the scarcity of natural resources needed for
development and economic growth to a new one on the scarcity of environmental amenities. Hired
by John Krutilla and Irving Fox, Kneese joined RFF as part of this pivot, leading up a new research
program on water quality.

          After his move to RFF, Kneese turned immediately to the study of water pollution, pub-
lishing initial thoughts on the subject (Kneese 1962, Kneese and Nobe 1962). Kneese wanted to
apply a welfarist, benefit-cost perspective on the pollution problem, but he also wanted to forego
the traditional approach of evaluating a policy already formulated by engineers into one that em-
beds the economics into the design of multipurpose development of entire river systems. In this,
Kneese was following recent trends including work by his RFF colleague John Krutilla (Krutilla
and Eckstein 1958) and especially by the Harvard Water Program (Maass et al. 1962), which
Kneese later singled out as the "apogee" of work on the design of multiple use water systems
(Kneese 1988). 12

          Kneese identified several characteristics of water resources that raised unique policy prob-
lems, including, among others:

      1. Water resources are highly mobile and highly variable in quantity and quality in time and
         space, so water quality must be treated probabilistically;

11
  Likewise, John Krutilla, Kneese's long-time RFF colleague, depicted his own career retrospectively as
having played out against the backdrop of just these issues (Krutilla 1981).
12
     See Banzhaf (2009) for further discussion of the Harvard Water Program and its relationship with RFF.

                                                     -8-
   2. They do not respect political boundaries;
   3. They have multiple purposes, provided by the same resource simultaneously and/or se-
      quentially;
   4. A particular use provides benefits and imposes costs on different groups separated geo-
      graphically;
   5. They are (at least nominally) publicly owned

(Kneese and Nobe 1962 pp. 46-7). According to Kneese, distortions from the marginal-benefit-
equals-marginal-cost rule arise because, given these realities, private producers cannot enter the
market and produce socially desirable value while still covering their costs. Economies of scale,
indivisibilities in jointly supplied outputs, and external economies and diseconomies all impede
the potential to collect sufficient revenue. Examples of such external effects include the recharging
of aquifers resulting in land drainage problems; decreases in dissolved oxygen resulting in fish
kills; hydroelectric power altering stream flow, which in turn hinders navigation; and irrigation
which results in sedimentation of water, thereby increasing treatment costs for municipalities.
Thus, whereas Kneese's RFF colleague Marion Clawson wrestled with how to think about meas-
uring benefits of investments in public lands, in a paradigm where norms were determined by the
revenues that could be raised in a realistic market institution (Banzhaf 2010a), here Kneese thinks
about the problem in reverse: Realistic revenues fails to capture the normative benefits, as deter-
mined outside the market by an economic model of optimization.

       In Kneese's view, all this creates a role for planning, but logically consistent plans would
require two forms of aggregation. First, geographically, the planning area must be sufficiently
wide to encompass these and other relevant effects, so that upstream and downstream tradeoffs
were captured in the planner's field of vision. Second, to trade off the competing ends of water
resources (e.g. for deposition of wastes upstream or recreation downstream), one would have to
aggregate across services. Obviously, Kneese argued, one cannot maximize a mix of different
services measured in incommensurate physical units. So "the question of weighting alternate phys-
ical outputs in some meaningful commensurable manner inevitably arises and the weights logically
must represent some measure of relative social worth" (p. 449). If pollution damages and abate-
ment costs both are denominated in dollars, then marginal costs can be equated across abatement
alternatives and to marginal damages of foregoing abatement. This could be achieved through "a
system of charges and bounties" (p. 459).


                                                 -9-
        This system of effluent charges, mentioned only in passing in 1962, evolved into the cen-
terpiece of Kneese's best-known work, The Economics of Regional Water Quality Management
(1964), which was further expanded and revised in collaboration with Blair Bower, an engineer,
in 1968 as Managing Water Quality: Economics, Technologies, Institutions. This work was per-
ceived at the time to be the definitive statement of pollution pricing. As indicated by the subtitle
of the 1968 book, at the outset it is evident that Kneese combined (i) the economic logic of external
diseconomies and property rights; (ii) a materials balance logic of production, residual wastes, and
transport of those wastes across space; and (iii) institutional concerns. As he wrote in the intro-
duction of Regional Water Quality Management,

        [The] economic institutions on which we customarily rely to balance costs and re-
        turns--the interaction of market forces in a private enterprise system--do not per-
        form this function satisfactorily for waste disposal. Aesthetic nuisance in a stream
        destroys public values that are not marketable. In deciding how to dispose of its
        wastes, an upstream firm or city is not forced to take into account the costs imposed
        upon downstream water users.... Under some circumstances there are economies
        of scale in waste disposal that cannot be realized by an individual firm or city acting
        independently.

           Because of these features of waste disposal, market forces are supplemented in
        a variety of ways. Appeals are made to civic responsibility.... Damaged parties
        may resort to adversary proceedings in courts of law. Financial inducements to
        encourage waste treatment by municipalities are offered by the federal government,
        and storage to augment low flows is provided at federal expense. .... But in the
        application of these practices there has not been a systematic balancing of costs and
        returns to achieve optimum benefits.... (p. 4)

In short, when market institutions fail to equate marginal costs and benefits of an activity, other
institutions must take their place. But so far, he said, the array of regulatory responses, while
perhaps moving the outcome in the right direction, were not efficient.

        Kneese's preferred solution was a system of spatially differentiated effluent charges, ideally
set at the marginal damages of emissions. 13 Although he was optimistic about progress being
made in the nonmarket valuation of pollution damages, especially in the area of outdoor recreation


13
   Kneese also considered subsidies (or bounties) for pollution abatement as an option, but felt it raised
additional implementation issues. For example, if under optimal resource allocations a firm reduced its
pollution by exiting the market, the owners of that non-existent firm would still have to receive their sub-
sidy. The extent of the symmetry between pollution taxes and subsidies became an active research question
around this time. See Baumol and Oates (1975) for a literature review from the period and summary.

                                                   -10-
(see Banzhaf 2010a, 2018) and environmental health (e.g. Weisbrod 1961), he acknowledged that
it was not yet practical to estimate the marginal damages from pollution.

       Accordingly, Kneese proposed the alternative of ambient quality standards, in which the
authority mandates a minimum level of water quality to be maintained downstream. Discussing
the duality between prices and quantities, he argued that this standard too could best be met by
charging fees equal to the marginal costs of meeting it. Although not equating them to marginal
damages, this more pragmatic approach would still have the virtue of equating the marginal costs
of reducing downstream injuries across various margins of adjustments (reductions in the output
of dirty goods, changes in the production process, end-of-pipe controls, water storage and dilution,
etc.). Kneese proposed a trial-and-error approach that, essentially, involved groping for the un-
known "supply" of pollution abatement. That is, the regulator would impose initial prices on up-
stream pollution emissions (effluent), observe how much pollution was reduced at various down-
stream points, and then adjust the prices to meet the target. Applications using Kneese's approach
soon followed, demonstrating the potential cost savings using linear programs to find least-cost
solutions (Johnson 1967, Davis 1968).

       From his discussion, it might appear that Kneese's vision was a grand plan requiring the
superior knowledge of a social planner, including marginal damages and marginal abatement costs
across various activities all spatially differentiated. In fact, Kneese disavowed any such interpre-
tation. To the contrary, he stressed the fact that with effluent charges, the market--not a planner--
would find the way to reduce pollution (or just pay the charge if pollution reductions were too
expensive). In a static world of given abatement costs, the charges provided the incentive for firms
to select those abatement technologies that were most cost-effective. In the long run, they provided
dynamic incentives to find new ways to reduce pollution at lower cost.

Effluent Fees and Pigouvian Taxes

Viewing the history of economics in retrospect, it is natural to interpret Kneese's effluent fees as
an application of Pigouvian remedies to market failures, albeit one enriched with technical and
institutional details (Berta 2019, 2020a, Pearce 2002, Sandmo 2015, de Steiguer 2006). But, as
such histories themselves have noted, this story raises the question of, first, why there a large
lacuna in the Pigouvian literature on environmental externalities from the 1930s to '60s and, sec-



                                                -11-
ond, why, when it supposedly re-appeared, Pigou was not actually much mentioned in the envi-
ronmental literature.

             Kneese's work epitomizes these gaps between Pigou and pollution pricing. After his dis-
cussion of normative problems in evaluation of water development problems (Kneese 1960),
which discussed Pigouvian welfare economics as a stage in utilitarian thinking generally, Kneese
did not cite or mention Pigou at all until the end of the decade. Kneese was not alone in this.
According to JSTOR, the term "Pigouvian tax" (or close variants 14) appeared first in Buchanan
and Stubblebine (1962) and only 12 times in the decade of the 1960s. Nor can this be attributed
to a general disinterest in the topic. Until about 1972, others working on similar topics or com-
menting on policy proposals to levy fees on pollution--from Nobel laureates to applied

                Annual JSTOR Hits Related to "Pigouvian Tax"
 35

 30

 25

 20

 15

 10

     5

     0
      1960         1965      1970       1975        1980          1985   1990

                               Hits       5-Year Moving Average


practitioners--cited Kneese without mentioning Pigou, apparently treating his work as original.
A Google Scholar search yielded only 65 hits mentioning Kneese and Pigou between 1962 and
1972, 982 hits mentioning Kneese but not Pigou, and 2,110 mentioning Pigou but not Kneese. 15
So it appears that, at this time, the environmental literature on effluent charges and the Pigouvian



14
  Including "Pigovian" instead of "Pigouvian," "taxes" as well as "tax," and "Pigou" in conjunction with
"corrective tax" or "effluent fee" or "effluent charge."
15
  Examples of prominent papers or authors citing Kneese but not Pigou include Crocker (1968), Dales
(1968a,b), Davis (1968), Freeman and Haveman (1972), Johnson (1967), Mills (1966), Montgomery
(1972), Ostrom and Ostrom (1965), and Solow (1972). The search was conducted on May 28, 2020 and
excluded hits where Kneese was author or editor.

                                                    -12-
literature on externalities were operating in quite distinct spheres.

            At the turn of the decade, the term "Pigouvian tax" appeared in Baumol's review of Bu-
chanan's Cost and Choice and in Baumol and Oates (1971). In that paper, Baumol and Oates
provided a formal proof of Kneese's argument that an effluent fee could induce the least-cost
method for meeting an arbitrary environmental objective, even if it was not optimal in the sense
of equating marginal costs to marginal damages (see Berta 2020a for discussion). In doing so,
they described Kneese's work as part of a "Pigouvian tradition." At this point, references to Pigou
increased rapidly (see figure). By the end of the decade, Kneese himself was putting it in these
terms (Ayres and Kneese 1969, Kneese and Mäler 1973) and it was enshrined in textbooks and
prominent literature reviews (Baumol and Oates 1975, Fisher and Peterson 1976). Thus, the idea
that pollution prices are almost synonymous with "Pigouvian" may have been a reinterpretation
first made by Coase and Buchanan, and then consolidated by Baumol and Oates. 16 But it was a
reinterpretation of an existing body of work already developed separately from worries about
Pigou's place in the canon.

            Rather than talk about his approach as Pigouvian, Kneese was, ironically, more apt to talk
of it in Coasean terms (Nishibayashi 2019). In Regional Water Quality Management, his opening
moves in his economic analysis (after a chapter on "technical and engineering facts") were to take
the reader through a tour of market efficiency, with external diseconomies presenting a potential
exception to the superiority of markets. He then quickly introduced Coasean (1960) bargaining as
one possible way for markets to consider downstream costs of waste disposal (pp. 40-47), making
this one of the first treatments of Coase's negotiating result in the environmental economics liter-
ature. 17

            Interestingly, Kneese interpreted the negotiating result in terms of Coase's earlier logic
from the "Nature of the Firm" (Coase 1937). Wrote Kneese,

            When such technological links are "internal" to a decision unit, the result may be
            considerably different than if they are external. To take a simple example, a farmer
            may find that a small stream on his property will irrigate either an upstream plot A

16
  Medema (2020a) suggests that, ironically, it was perhaps Buchanan's and Coase's attacks in the 1960s on
Pigouvian economics that built up the idea that the approach was inherently Pigouvian.
17
  See Medema (2014a,b, 2019) on the Coase theorem in the environmental economics literature of the
1960s and '70s, including Kneese's role.

                                                    -13-
        or a downstream plot B, but not both. .... In deciding whether to irrigate plot A,
        the farmer will consider the return lost on plot B, and plot A will be irrigated only
        if its return is higher. Consequently, the resource will be allocated in the way that
        maximizes the value of production. If, however, plot B is on another farmer's land
        and the owner of plot A cannot sell his right to the water, the owner of plot A will
        not consider the return lost on plot B in determining whether to irrigate plot A. If
        plot B actually presents the superior productive opportunity, failure to irrigate it
        because the water is preempted upstream is a technological external diseconomy.

           Now suppose that the owner of plot A can sell his right to the water and that the
        farmer owning plot B can afford to, and has an incentive to, pay more for the water
        than it is worth if applied on plot A. In this case, the efficient result would once
        again be produced. (p. 41)

In this way, Kneese believed the question of external diseconomies is intrinsically intertwined with
questions of property rights and market institutions, so it cannot be examined solely through tech-
nical relationships. Erstwhile diseconomies can be internalized either through negotiation (Coase
1960) or through merger (Coase 1937), but either way the logic is similar. 18

        Because of high transactions costs, Kneese thought that Coase's negotiation result was un-
likely to be relevant to water pollution problems. He also thought that the idea of a single firm
internalizing all the services provided by water within a relevant drainage basin was as undesirable
as it was unrealistic. Operating so many enterprises would have high administrative costs. Addi-
tionally, the benefits of internalizing externalities would be at least partially offset by the creation
of monopoly power.

        Nevertheless, Kneese found this notion of the basin-wide firm to be useful as an organizing
principle, and it was an idea he would continue to revisit throughout his career (e.g. Kneese and
Schultze 1975). As with the single farm with plots A and B, Kneese suggested the basin-wide
firm would be a "natural decision unit" in the sense that it would internalize externalities. It could
own upstream plants that benefit from releasing wastes, but also charge levies for downstream
recreation use. Then the firm will equate the marginal costs of pollution control at the upstream
plants to one another, but also to the marginal damages of effluent on foregone recreation values.
In making this point, Kneese drew explicitly on Coase (1937) as well as Stigler (1946) and Davis



18
  See Bertrand (2015) for the connections between Coase's two classic articles; her discussion is highly
pertinent to Kneese's treatment.

                                                 -14-
and Whinston (1962).19

        Kneese drew three lessons from this artifice of the basin-wide firm. First, administrative
agencies ideally would operate at the geographic scale of the water basin. In this way, they would
have jurisdiction over all the relevant effects, internalizing them. Second, they should think in
terms of economic incentives, such as those provided by effluent charges. Third, like a firm, they
should think in terms of maximizing economic value, by minimizing costs and making economic
tradeoffs between upstream and downstream activities. In this sense, Kneese was extending the
logic of Coase's theory of the firm, but whereas Coase limited the institutional choice to either
expanding the boundaries of the firm or trading among firms, Kneese enlarged it to include regu-
latory agencies with their own optimal boundaries and the ability to change the terms of trade
among regulated firms.

        Kneese was no more Coasean than he was Pigouvian. My point is not to place him in the
Coasean box instead of the Pigouvian one, but to suggest that, when we see (i) that the quintessen-
tial texts on effluent fees from the period do not even mention Pigou, (ii) that they spend more
time talking about Coasean models, and yet (iii) that they relate those models to decidedly non-
Coasean policy remedies, then we should begin to suspect that more is going on here than a simple
Pigouvian-Coasean dichotomy. In Section 5, I will return to an alternative interpretation linking
pollution pricing to American work on property rights and open access resources as well as eco-
nomic development with increasing returns to scale. For now, I will limit the implications to three
things that Kneese's analysis of the basin-wide firm reveals about his work.

        First, Kneese thought in terms of rich and detailed political, legal, and economic institu-
tions. Ideas like external diseconomies were not just technological relationships, they were em-
bedded in social relationships, which required a comparative analysis of which institutions could


19
  As noted previously, Kneese (1964) is an early application of the Coase theorem. How this theorem
came into the environmental economics literature is a matter of some speculation (Medema 2014a,b).
Given Kneese's graduate training in industrial organization, and his later citation to Stigler and to an edition
of Coase's paper reproduced in the 1952 Stigler-Boulding reader, Kneese was probably already familiar
with "The Nature of the Firm." Coupled with the fact that Kneese (1962) discussed the idea of the basin-
wide firm without mentioning the negotiating result, a likely explanation is that Kneese was already think-
ing along these lines by working through the logic of "The Nature of the Firm"--not the "Problem of Social
Cost." Medema (2020b) suggests that Jerome Milliman, who was visiting RFF around this time, may have
pointed Kneese to the "Problem of Social Cost." If so, it is plausible that it fit comfortably into Kneese's
existing thoughts on the subject.

                                                     -15-
deliver more value. Kneese combined microeconomic theory with detailed case studies, such as
his study of the Genossenschaften, the cooperative associations governing water in the Ruhr Val-
ley, which used pollution prices among other tools (1964, Ch. 7; Kneese and Bower 1968, Ch. 13).

       Second, just as he tended to institutional details, Kneese modeled the physical details of
the production process, in contrast to most neoclassical models that treat production at a high level
of abstraction. 20 These details included attention to spatial relationships, such as the locations of
economic activity and waste disposal, the delivery of services, and the effects of upstream wastes
on downstream water quality. They also included how energy and materials are passed through
the production process to jointly produce marketed outputs and wastes. In his seminal work on
water quality, these physical relationships led him to conclude that water quality needs to be both
analyzed and managed at the geographic scale of the water basin. In later work, these ideas
evolved into a more general emphasis on the conservation of materials and energy (Ayres and
Kneese 1969, Kneese et al. 1970). Once the balance of materials and energy were introduced as
economic constraints on the joint production of material wealth and environmental quality,
Kneese's logic later led him to conclude that, even if deposition was decreased in a watershed,
wastes still had to go somewhere. The typical US policy approach of focusing on water quality,
air quality, and solid waste separately was misguided because the flow of materials could cross
over from one medium to another.

       Finally, by modeling pollution through the lens of the basin-wide firm, Kneese combined
external effects that Pigou would have separated into his second category (the one most similar to
today's "externalities" and which Pigou illustrated by e.g. chimney smoke) and his third (econo-
mies and diseconomies among firms). While Kneese certainly understood the importance of non-
rivalry and indivisibility, within the internal logic of the model of the basin-wide firm, upstream
water development does not so much affect the public good of individual recreational use of water
as it affects the productivity of the recreation industry. It effects the supposed downstream firm
selling recreation services (tickets to a private beach). Accordingly, the model of the basin-wide
firm allowed Kneese to address pollution questions using the same benefit-cost framework that



20
  On this point, see RFF (2001 quoting K. Smith) and Nishibayashi (2019). Nishibayashi interprets
Kneese's work as following a two-step approach that begins with engineering-economic studies followed
by institutional studies.

                                                -16-
resource economists had constructed to address questions about resource development, questions
of economies of scale and scope that were inherent to large-scale water projects. These were the
questions that the first generation of environmental economists had been trained to address earlier
in their careers (Banzhaf 2009, 2010a, 2019). As discussed above, they were also Kneese's point
of entry into work on water resources.

4. Pollution Permits: Thomas Crocker and John Dales

In the Pollution Pricing family tree, the first cousin to effluent charges is the tradable permit ap-
proach, now often called cap-and-trade, under which the right to pollute a fixed quantity can be
traded in the market. Whereas effluent charges or pollution taxes set a price on pollution, allowing
the market to determine the quantity demanded at that price, tradable permits set an upper bound
on the quantity of pollution, allowing the market to determine the price at that quantity supplied.
Shortly after Kneese began writing on effluent fees, two economists introduced the idea of such
pollution markets, Thomas Crocker and John Dales. 21 Of the two, Crocker eventually had a longer
and more active career in environmental economics, yet Dales's work on pollution prices was more
immediately influential, with Crocker's early contributions largely recognized in retrospect as trad-
able pollution permits entered mainstream policy discussions.

           Thomas Crocker (b. 1937) received his PhD in agricultural economics from the University
of Missouri in 1967, working predominantly with Mason Gaffney, whom he followed to the Uni-
versity of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, where he completed his dissertation and other early work on
pollution pricing before eventually landing at the University of Wyoming, where he spent most of
his career. (See Crocker 2011 for autobiographical details.)

           John Dales (1920-2007) was a natural resource economist who spent most of his career at
the University of Toronto. He received his dissertation from Harvard in 1953, working with Walter
Isard, a leading economist in regional studies. 22 Like other economists of the period who began
to work on environmental issues, much of Dales's early work focused on water resources develop-
ment, with a strong historical-institutionalist flavor. A sampler of his published titles gives a taste,
starting with his dissertation, The Hydro Electric Industry in Quebec, 1898-1940 (1953) and such


21
     See Berta (2020b) for a recent comparison of Crocker's proposal and Dales's.
22
     Interestingly, this is the same year, and same advisor, as John Krutilla.

                                                       -17-
other publications as "Fuel, Power, and Industrial Development in Central Canada" (1953), The
Protective Tariff in Canada's Development (1966), and a comment on "Primary Products and Eco-
nomic Growth" (1967).

        While on a sabbatical leave in the late 1960s, Dales turned to the economics of pollution
problems, publishing his thoughts in Pollution, Property and Prices (1968a), by far his best-known
work. The book, which he describes as an "economico-legal" proposal for dealing with pollution
(p. vi), introduces the benefit-cost logic of pollution abatement, but also limits it to a logical or-
ganizing principle. Setting benefit-cost analysis up as a strawman, Dales knocks it for having a
host of measurement problems that prevent it from being a reliable empirical guide in practice (pp.
34-8, 44-50). In language that would be echoed in Demsetz's "nirvana fallacy" (1969), Dales ar-
gued that benefit-cost logic had the potential to be deceptively simple, seemingly "solving" diffi-
cult social problems when, in fact, "they were solved because we took great pains to adopt as-
sumptions that made them solvable" (p. 36). Unlike the blackboard, realistic solutions to real-
world problems, he said, required humility and recognition that ignorance is endemic to policy
making (39-40).

        Rather that focus on the intractable question of what is to be done, then, Dales turned to
the economico-legal question of how it was to be done. His answer: Devise a system of property
rights and other incentives that would let the market solve the benefit-cost problems. Even here,
he said, there is no perfect solution, because private agents in the market, free riding, still will not
fully reflect social values in their decisions, even as public agencies do not know the true values.
Dales's proposed compromise was that a Water [or Air] Control Board set up a market by creating
a certain number of pollution Rights, each giving the bearer the right to discharge one ton of
wastes. 23 If the number of Rights is binding on pollution emitters, they will have scarcity value
(p. 93). This approach would have the advantage, he argued, of (i) having lower administrative
and policing costs than traditional regulations; (ii) of providing more certainty over the level of
environmental quality than pollution charges, which would require a good deal of trial-and-error
to find the price that induced the desired quality (p. 82); and (iii) of still achieving that level of
environmental quality at the lowest cost possible.


23
 Note Dales's use of big-R "Rights," in contrast to the "tradable permits" that later developed in US policy.
Dales had envisioned a stronger property right than the privileges granted by permits.

                                                    -18-
       Whereas Dales proposed what today would be called a system of emissions rights, Crocker
proposed what today would be called ambient rights. The former lumps a group of polluters to-
gether and allows them to trade emissions 1:1, regardless of where those emissions end up, the
latter lumps together all polluters who affect a specific region and allows them to trade at a ratio
commensurate with their effect on that region. Each source would have to buy permits in separate
markets for each region it affects, with relative prices between sources proportionate to their rela-
tive effects in each region. Thus, if Source 1 is further upwind from Region A than Source 2, it
might need to buy fewer Region-A permits for each ton of its emissions than does Source 2. Sim-
ilarly, he envisioned inter-temporal variation in prices (with permits earmarked to specific seasons
of the year or times of day). Thus, Crocker envisioned a much more elaborate system of rights
than did Dales.

       As did Dales, Crocker conceded there was no perfect system, so the real question was the
relative merits of a given institutional design. But tradable pollution rights, he felt, have the com-
pelling advantage of leveraging the information-signaling power of the market price system while
sidestepping "all the guesswork involved in attempting to estimate individual estimator and recep-
tor preference functions" (1966 p. 81). He also felt they were much more practical than effluent
charges or subsidies. "Although the theoretical results of varying taxes and/or subsidies and of
observing actual market-determined prices may be similar," he argued,

       Unless the control authority is willing to vary its taxes and subsidies over rather
       wide ranges for each receptor and emitter site and for each time period being con-
       sidered, it will be posed with the technically impossible problem of estimating
       ranges of preference functions for which it has no information." (p. 82)

As Crocker (2011) recalls it, his ideas initially were developed in reaction to Kneese's proposals,
and later he would take Kneese on more directly (Crocker 1968, 1972). Crocker took it for granted
that achieving an ambient standard was the most important goal of pollution pricing, so he felt
pollution charges were too indirect a method, requiring knowledge about the price-abatement re-
lationship or excessive experimentation to learn it. Curiously, he did not seem to feel his own
system had similar difficulties, though it required information about the transmission of pollution
from each source to each receptor to set the correct trading ratios.




                                                 -19-
Pollution Trading in Context

How shall we situate pollution trading in the context of the extant economics literature on exter-
nalities and property rights? Dales noted his intellectual debts to Coase's "Problem of Social Cost"
as well as Charles Reich's "The New Property," and also to Scott Gordon's (1954) work on "The
Economics of a Common-Property Resource" (pp. 110-1). He also cited Kneese (1964) as an
important point of reference. For his part, Crocker was sparing in his citations in his early work,
but later did discuss his proposals in relation to Kneese's and Gordon's model of the commons
(1967, 1968, 1972).

        What is clear from the outset is that there is absolutely no reference in either Crocker's
work or Dales's to Pigou. Of course, they contrasted their ideas to Kneese's effluent charges, but
Kneese's work, as I've argued, is not obviously Pigouvian either. If anything, its institutional ap-
proach bore some affinity to Coase's.

        That brings us to the Coasean origins of marketable pollution rights, if any. Many standard
summaries of environmental economics do draw the connection (e.g. Tietenberg 2010, Stavins
2011). On the other hand, Berta and Bertrand (2014) and Medema (2014a) have taken the opposite
view, arguing that while cap-and-trade bears passing resemblance to Coase's (1959) proposal to
auction bandwidth, it is closer in spirit to Arrow's (1969) model of complete competitive markets
than to Coase's vision of bilateral bargaining. While Dales (1968) acknowledges "owing much"
to "The Problem of Social Cost," it appears to be more for its general connection between law and
economics.

        As I've argued elsewhere, personally I do believe there is enough affinity between Coasean
ideas and pollution trading to warrant making the association, if for no other reason than that Coase
himself was proud to accept credit for the idea. 24 Although Coase's vision was more about bilateral
bargaining than today's liquid permit markets, in fact, in the US, actual pollution trading policies
did evolve out of experience with bilateral trades, in particular EPA's "bubble" and "offset" pro-
grams. 25 More generally, pollution trading can fairly be described as Coasean insofar as it (i)

24
  For expansion of the points summarized here, see Banzhaf (2010b, 2020) and Banzhaf, Fitzgerald, and
Schnier (2013).
25
  In the US, the 1970 Clean Air Act prohibited new sources of emissions in counties designated as being
in "non-attainment" with ambient air quality standards, while also regulating emissions of existing sources
more stringently. To lighten the costs of these regulations, in the mid-1970s the US EPA introduced an

                                                   -20-
clarifies property rights to environmental resources like the atmosphere and introduces enforce-
ment mechanisms for violations of those rights; (ii) reduces transactions costs by commodifying
pollution, with clear units of measurement and centralized market platforms; and (iii) allows trad-
ing. Such trading becomes more Coasean in character the more salient are trades between greens
and browns that endogenize the final quantity of pollution released--that is, when the "cap" in
"cap-and-trade" is an upper bound on pollution and environmentalists can retire pollution rights--
in contrast to fixed caps allocated only among polluters. In a Coasean worldview, such green-
brown trades are linked to the idea of reciprocal harm associated with the opportunity costs of
using the atmosphere for one use versus another (e.g. deposition of wastes vs. maintenance of
health, property and, today we might add, ecosystem services).

        Such reciprocal costs were a linchpin in Crocker's presentation of pollution trading. Even
if, he said, a marginal decrease in pollution increased net benefits, yet still,

        We are no more justified in making the would-be emitter endure all the costs of
        "pure" air while the would-be receptor receives all the benefits than we are in bur-
        dening the receptor with all the costs of "dirty" air while the emitter collects all the
        benefits. (1966 pp. 62-3)

In this, Crocker disagreed with Kneese, who held up the polluter-pays principle of effluent charges
as one of its virtues. Elaborating, Crocker added that

        One would therefore expect the market to allocate the air's two value dimensions
        according to the criteria of economic efficiency. Receptors and emitters could be
        expected to exchange rights to the life- and property-supporting dimensions and the
        waste-disposal dimension until . . . the difference between total cost savings to
        emitters and total damage costs to receptors was maximized.
           However, so far society has generally been unable to define property rights to
        air..." (1966 p. 65)

Such trades have signaling potential, he said, to reveal the economic value of air resources. While
such green-brown trades also face free-rider problems on the green side of the market (pp. 66, 84),
at least early on Crocker appeared to be sanguine about the potential to overcome such issues.


offset program to allow new sources in non-attainment areas if they could find an existing source to reduce
their emissions by 1.2 tons for each ton of new emissions. Later, in 1979, the program was extended to
include trades among existing sources. These programs had narrow geographic scopes, involved bilateral
trades with no central market, and had to be individually approved by EPA. But it is widely believed that
experience with these programs created a level of comfort with pollution trading that paved the way for
later cap-and-trade programs such as the 1990 acid rain program. See Tietenberg (2006) for details.

                                                   -21-
       Dales too cracked open the door to such trades between the green and brown sides of the
market. "Conservation groups," he said, "might well want to buy up some rights merely in order
to prevent their being used. In this way at least part of the guerilla warfare between conservation-
ists and polluters could be transferred into a civilized 'war with dollars'" (1968a pp. 95-6). Else-
where, though, he minimized this possibility, characterizing his proposal as nothing more than an
administrative tool. In contrast to "true" or "natural" markets, which involve "two-way communi-
cation between sources of supply and demand," he described his artificial market as providing only
one-way communication, transmitting the government's decisions about the cap on pollution to the
users but without the reverse feedback, so that the resulting scarcity value has no effect on the
quantity of pollution supplied, nor does the value of the competing amenity use (1968b pp. 803-
4). "In the end," he said, "it is you and I who are going to elect the politicians who are going to
decide how much pollution we are going to have" (1968a p. 104).

       Before long, Crocker too had come to the same conclusion, arguing the free-rider problem
would undermine green-brown trades (Crocker 1972). As pointed out by Berta (2020a), at this
point, then, cap-and-trade proposals resembled the pollution charges suggested by Kneese and
Baumol and Oates (1971) insofar as they were a program for efficient cost-minimization, rather
than for achieving optimal pollution levels. Soon, additional work extending Dales's model would
place it more in the style of work by the Cowles Commission, which highlighted the duality be-
tween Kneese's prices and Crocker and Dales's tradable quotas. Montgomery (1972), picking up
on Dales's (1968b) emphasis on the artificiality of the markets, essentially crossed Dales's model
with that of Arrow (1969), embedding it in an Arrow-Debreu model of competitive equilibrium. 26
Weitzman (1974a) reimagined it as an application of socialist command-and-control over quanti-
ties, interpreted as dual to Lange-Lerner price controls. 27 Such interpretations tend to minimize
the potential for green-brown trades, emphasizing allocation among polluters of a fixed aggregate
quantity.

       At most, then, Coase was but one touchpoint in the intellectual network in which pollution


26
  See Berta (2017, 2020a) and Berta and Bertrand (2014) for discussion of this approach to modeling
externalities and its relationship to cap-and-trade.
27
  Even here, the connection to property rights remains: Weitzman, interestingly, at the time was also
working on common property and enclosure movements, albeit from a more heterodox perspective (Weit-
zman 1974b, Cohen and Weitzman 1975).

                                                -22-
trading operated, as it was for Kneese's proposals for effluent charges. And Pigou was hardly
mentioned. As I discuss in the next section, if we are hunting for the intellectual history of pollu-
tion pricing, the recurring references to Gordon's (1954) work on common property are a more
promising lead to follow.

5. Alternative Sources for Pollution Pricing

As influential as Pigou and Coase obviously have been, I suggest it is simply a categorical mistake
to interpret the history of pollution pricing, at least as it developed in the US, through the lens of
old rivalries between Cambridge and LSE. In fact, the pioneers of American environmental eco-
nomics were trained in agricultural and natural resource economics or regional economics, were
steeped in applied work, and had their own American literature and history of applied practices on
which to draw (Banzhaf 2009, 2010, 2019).

        The connection--or lack thereof--to Pigou can perhaps best be elucidated by revisiting his
three categories of situations where there is, in his view, a divergence between private and social
benefits and costs. The first, recall, includes situations where productive investments might po-
tentially be made by people who do not own the instrument of production being maintained or
enhanced, such as tenant farmers. The second involves situations where one person, when render-
ing some compensated service to another, incidentally also renders services or disservices to third
parties. The third comprises situations where there are increasing or decreasing returns at the
industry level. Though with antecedents in Mill and Sidgwick, Pigou's second grouping is the one
most original to and uniquely associated with him. Additionally, it is the one closest to today's
concept of "externalities," and which had gone dormant in the literature from the 1930s to late '50s.

        But if we are trying to understand the historical context of pollution pricing circa 1965, I
suggest it is the first and third groupings--not the second--that are most relevant. Being less
unique to Pigou, these issues are then more likely have been associated with other, non-Pigouvian
traditions.

Economies of Scale and Scope

        Let's consider first the notion of external economies (or diseconomies) from one firm to
another within the industry, or from one industry to another, with expansion by one firm changing
the supply price of other firms (Pigou's third grouping). These kinds of effects were historically


                                                -23-
important for environmental economics because its intellectual roots lie as much in the study of
natural resources as public goods and externalities. And, at least in the US, studying natural re-
sources meant studying their development. Development of resources was, arguably, engrained in
the American worldview well into the mid 20th Century. In his Frontier Thesis (1893), Frederick
Jackson Turner had famously argued that America's civic and social development were dependent
on its resource development: As Americans moved west, taming the frontier made them ever more
self-reliant, while as settlements grew in its wake they became more civilized as well. Here is a
story of external economies writ large: The development of resources spilled over to all civilizing
and democratizing forces. Whatever the merits of Turner's thesis, it was quite influential. Conse-
quently, the closing of the frontier in the late 19th century prompted renewed efforts to develop
existing resources.

       In the American west, developing water resources was a paramount concern. West of the
100th meridian, farming requires irrigation, but even early irrigation ditches required cooperative
construction and management, as a ditch scaled to serve only a single farm would lose all its water
to evaporation (Teele 1904, 1926, Coman 1911). Thus, economies of scale at the industry level
were present. As recently argued by Leonard and Libecap (2019), the evolution of water rights in
the American West from riparian rights to prior appropriation was one organic response to this
problem. Later, larger-scale development of ever larger regions, further from water sources, seem-
ingly justified federal support for massive water projects.

       This push for development might appear to conflict with the growing conservation move-
ment led by Gifford Pinchot (1865-1946) and others, but the conservation movement, perhaps
ironically, emphasized developing resources as much as conserving them. 28 From Pinchot's per-
spective, development and conservation were two prongs in the progressive attack on waste. As
he wrote in The Fight for Conservation (1910):

       The first principle of conservation is development, the use of the natural resources
       now existing on this continent for the benefit of the people who live here now.
       There may be just as much waste in neglecting the development and use of certain
       natural resources as there is in their destruction. ....

           Conservation stands emphatically for the development and use of water-power

28
  See Hays (1959). Banzhaf (2019) discusses the importance of this aspect of the conservation movement
in the history of environmental economic thought.

                                                 -24-
       now, without delay. It stands for the immediate construction of navigable water-
       ways under a broad and comprehensive plan as assistants to the railroads. More
       coal and more iron are required to move a ton of freight by rail than by water, three
       to one. In every case and in every direction the conservation movement has devel-
       opment for its first principle, and at the very beginning of its work. The develop-
       ment of our natural resources and the fullest use of them for the present generation
       is the first duty of this generation. ....

           In the second place conservation stands for the prevention of waste. There has
       come gradually in this country an understanding that waste is not a good thing and
       that the attack on waste is an industrial necessity. I recall very well indeed how, in
       the early days of forest fires, they were considered simply and solely as acts of God,
       against which any opposition was hopeless and any attempt to control them not
       merely hopeless but childish. It was assumed that they came in the natural order of
       things, as inevitably as the seasons or the rising and setting of the sun. Today we
       understand that forest fires are wholly within the control of men. So we are coming
       in like manner to understand that the prevention of waste in all other directions is a
       simple matter of good business. The first duty of the human race is to control the
       earth it lives upon. (1910 pp. 43-5)

Thus, Pigou was only half right when he stated that "the whole movement for 'conservation' in the
United States is based on" the conviction that "the State should protect the interests of the future
in some degree against the effects of our irrational discounting and of our preference for ourselves
over our descendants" (1932 p. 29). The other half of the story is that the state should develop
resources immediately so they are not "wasted" by remaining unused.

       Such thinking was quite influential. At a famous Governors' conference on conservation
organized by Pinchot, President Theodore Roosevelt remarked in his opening address that:

       Every step of the progress of mankind is marked by the discovery and use of natural
       resources previously unused. Without such progressive knowledge and utilization
       of natural resources population could not grow, nor industries multiply, nor the
       hidden wealth of the earth be developed for the benefit of mankind.

Interestingly, here natural resources are conceived of not just as a material input, but inextricably
linked to technological progress--to "discovery" and "progressive knowledge." In other words,
what anachronistically we might call both productivity and resource deepening.

       Naturally, the academic literature was concerned with such issues as well. Pigou treated
them in his third grouping, but as noted previously they were refined and developed by Young
(1913, 1928), Knight (1924), Viner (1932), Ellis and Fellner (1943), and Meade (1952). For the
most part, this literature addressed issues of external (dis)economies in the context of trade and/or

                                                -25-
development. 29 Allyn Young, a student of Richard Ely, initially developed his critique of Pigou's
theory by distinguishing real costs from the price effects of changing land rent (Young 1913), an
argument taken up by Knight as well. Later, he analyzed economies of scale through the lens of
Adam Smith's statement that expanding the extent of the market could facilitate the division of
labour (Young 1928). But such forces depended on natural resources. Natural scarcities in the
supply of resources and indivisibilities in production created barriers to such scale economies, he
said, while the discovery of new natural resources and the growth of scientific knowledge rein-
forced them. "[O]ut of better knowledge of the materials and forces upon which men can lay their
hands there come both new ways of producing familiar commodities and new products" (p. 535).

         The spatial scale of such gains from specialization also were an important consideration.
As Ellis and Fellner (1943) emphasized,

         Certain industries must usually reach some stage of growth before a geographical
         region starts to develop significantly and also before human and material resources
         become more specialized. But it is rarely true in these cases that a contraction of
         the output of any one industry would lead to a loss of the economies in question.
         (p. 507)

In their thinking, these irreversible external economies prevented competitive markets from allo-
cating resources optimally and justified inducements.

         In the middle of the century, these concerns about resource development began to occupy
the interest of the economists who would shape environmental economics in the coming decades.
Consider just the titles of three key works in benefit-cost analysis published in 1958 alone:

     ·    Multiple Purpose River Development, by John V. Krutilla and Otto Eckstein;
     ·    Water Resources Development: The Economics of Project Evaluation, by Otto Eckstein;
          and
     ·    Efficiency in Government through Systems Analysis with Emphasis on Water Resource
          Development, by Roland McKean.

As mentioned previously, Kneese published "Normative Problems in the Evaluation of Water-


29
  Currie (1997), Boianovsky and Hoover (2009) and Alacevich (2020) discuss Young's place in neoclassi-
cal models of growth and development. McDonald (2013) discusses Knight's debate with Pigou. Medema
(2020a) discusses how Meade's distinction between "unpaid factors of production," including his famous
discussion of bees and orchards, and "atmosphere" effects were worked out in the context of trade and
development.

                                                 -26-
Resources Development Projects" (1960) around the same time. Thus, before they were calling
attention to the deleterious effects of development on environmental amenities, Kneese and Kru-
tilla were focused more on the beneficial spillovers of development, mentioning environmental
externalities only in passing. Instead, they identified the crucial issue creating departures from
competitive conditions as large external economies from indivisibilities and jointness in produc-
tion technologies and from interdependence of the production functions of independent producers
(Krutilla and Eckstein 1958 pp. 42-77). Jointness meant that most water projects were multi-
purpose, so could be thought of as direct inputs into several industries simultaneously, with no one
industry (let alone firm) having the full incentive to invest in them. Interdependences implied
further indirect effects from one firm to another. For example, both Krutilla and Eckstein (1958
pp. 56-7) and Kneese (1960 pp. 311-12) mention the possibility that irrigating some farms from
surface water would recharge the aquifers used by other farmers. Similarly, upstream storage
presents external economies to downstream hydroelectric power. At a larger scale, development
of sparsely populated areas can enhance productivity by increasing the extent of the market and so
extending the division of labor.30

        Even when their focus turned from natural resource scarcity to scarcity of environmental
amenities, this pattern of thought continued to guide economists' thinking. For example, as dis-
cussed above, Kneese often thought in terms of the joint effects of firms and industries on pollution
levels within a collectively shared water resource, which in turn affects downstream industries like
recreation (Kneese 1964, Kneese and Bower 1968), an extension of inter-industry external econo-
mies that fit Coase's ideas as well as Pigou's. Earlier, questions about how to measure the monetary
value of such outdoor recreation--arguably the first exercises in pricing the environment--first
arose from thinking about ancillary benefits of building reservoirs in order to justify more devel-
opment projects (Banzhaf 2010, 2018). Finally, Davidson et al. (1966) introduced the possibility
of external economies from learning-by-doing in outdoor recreation, as investments in environ-
mental amenities induced participation that would then beget more participation, increasing the
value of the initial investment. Thus, in these ways, early work in environmental economics often



30
   As discussed in Porter (1995) and Banzhaf (2009), quantifying such secondary benefits was hotly con-
tested in applied benefit cost analysis. The Federal Inter-Agency River Basin Committee's so-called "green
book" (1950) downplayed their importance.

                                                  -27-
was framed in terms of increasing returns to scale.

Property Rights and Land Tenancy

       Equally important are the issues that might be placed into Pigou's first grouping, land ten-
ancy. Here especially, American economists had their own traditions to draw on. To see this, one
need look no further than Pigou's own text, where at points he relies on Henry Taylor's discussion
of certain contractual arrangements that can help overcome land tenancy problems (Taylor 1919).
Taylor, another student of Richard Ely's, was one of the central figures in the creation of American
agricultural economics (see Banzhaf 2006).

       This grouping is as close as Pigou came in the Economics of Welfare to discussing property
rights arrangements for the use of natural resources. Whereas in the other two groupings he
thought in terms of the effects of particular actions, here Pigou thought in terms of investment in
or depreciation of a natural resource (land) being used by multiple agents (the tenant now, but
eventually the owner when it reverts back to him or another tenant who takes up the lease). Thus,
though Pigou primarily discussed the incentives of a tenant farmer, the logic applies to other situ-
ations where individual have an incentive to deplete a resource held in common.

       That common property resources are germane to environmental problems is almost too
obvious to spell out, but four historical touchstones underscore their importance as an ongoing
theme in North American conservation and environmental thought. All four also highlight the
recurring use of analogical reasoning from agricultural land tenancy to commonly held natural
resources and back.

       Perhaps most famously, in 1968, near the peak of the environmental movement, Garrett
Hardin's "Tragedy of the Commons" invited readers to "picture a pasture open to all. It is to be
expected that each herdsman will try to keep as many cattle as possible on the commons" (p. 1244).
The result is ruin for each herdsman, as overgrazing destroys the grass. In the same way, Hardin
said, the earth and its ecosystem are a common resource supporting all humanity, a commons being
depleted. Whatever the merits of Hardin's arguments, it struck a popular chord, with discussions
of common property ballooning in the environmental literature soon after.

       Second, over a decade earlier, Scott Gordon (1954) and Anthony Scott (1955) also had




                                                -28-
drawn attention to common property problems. Both recognized the wisdom in the popular aph-
orism that "everybody's property is nobody's property," but demonstrated formally how under open
access competition would deplete the value of resources. Though their focus was on overfishing,
they too made the connection to common tenure in land. Gordon in particular offered a discursive
discussion of hunting and trapping as well as agriculture, and the endogenous formation of alter-
native forms of property rights when resources become scarcer (pp. 134-5).

          Third, at the turn of the 20th Century, Richard Ely, the godfather of American agricultural
economics, relied extensively on analogies between capital, agricultural land, and natural re-
sources. 31 The possibility of investing in a soil's fertility or depleting it, he said, makes land similar
to man-made capital. Likewise, both resemble natural resources. Indeed, in the first edition of
Outlines of Economics (1893), Ely suggested classifying the factors of production into three cate-
gories: nature (rather than land), labor, and capital. Nature includes all natural forces, but in
economics it is often called land, he said, because that is a prominent aspect that is priced and
exchanged. Land, viewed this way, includes "standing space" (i.e. pure extension), soil fertility,
and subsurface minerals (1893 pp. 99-100). Over the course of revising various editions of his
books, Ely steadily expanded on these themes. By 1940, Ely and Wehrwein organized their de-
finitive text Land Economics first around chapters related to land as nature and standing space
respectively, then, after a discussion of property rights, around various uses of land, such as agri-
culture, forestry, "the environment and recreational land," water resources, mineral resources, and
cities.

          In Ely's writing and others' in the period, the analogies between land and other resources
ran both ways. Just as we can understand many natural resource problems by analogy to agricul-
tural economics, so too can we understand some questions in agricultural economics by reasoning
analogically to depletable natural resources. In particular, the soil is a resource, with an optimal
path of depletion (and/or renewal). This theme is well represented in the work of Lewis Gray, a
student of Ely and Taylor at Wisconsin, who made important contributions to the economics of
exhaustible resources (e.g. Gray 1913). 32 Gray's treatment of natural resources moved back and

31
  See Bateman and Kapstein (1999) and Kaufman (2017) for background on Ely and his role in the history
of economic thought.
32
 For biographic background on Gray and appraisals of his work and its relationship to Hotelling's later
more famous contributions, see Kirkendall (1963), Crabbé (1983), and Missemer et al. (2019).

                                                   -29-
forth between the example of farmland and the example of coal. Whereas the latter is necessarily
depleted through utilization, the former is physically depletable but potentially renewable through
cover crops and manuring. Whether farmland is actually exhausted depends in part on custom and
habit, which can prolong wasteful practices long after they are in a farmer's self-interest, but also
on economic conditions including the rate of interest and the cost of replenishment.

        Picking up on these themes, Ely and Wehrwein wrote that

        Indestructible' agricultural land is a myth, and the reason why it has been depleted
        and destroyed is that it must have paid the farmer to do so. It is useless to argue
        that it should pay to maintain or build up soil fertility unless the operator has a long-
        time interest in the soil. Soil has an exhaustion value similar to a forest or a mine.
        The American farmer has often found it more profitable to exhaust the virgin fer-
        tility of one farm and move to a new farm than to try to maintain or restore the
        fertility on his old one. The farmer who claimed he was a good farmer because he
        had worn out four farms already was not far from the truth if judged by narrow
        "economic" standards. (1940 p. 216; see also pp. 390-91)

Like Gray, Ely and Wehrwein didn't necessarily approve of such outcomes. But they pointed the
blame at the incentives created by existing property rights arrangements, including, among other
things, the homestead law and the tenure system, by which those tenants who were "climbers"
depleted land in an effort to raise cash to buy their own farm, then later turned their farm over to
tenants to retire to the city, or California (pp. 216-7).33

        Finally, illustrating the popular character of such analogies, President Theodore Roosevelt
at the 1908 Governors' conference drew a parallel between the nation's stewardship of natural
resources and a farmer's stewardship of the land. The problem of excessive depletion of resources,
he said, could be understood by analogy to a farmer's stewardship of the soil. "Every one knows
that a really good farmer leaves his farm more valuable at the end of his life than it was when he
first took hold of it. So with the waterways. So with the forests." But stewardship of the land is
grounded in the incentives of property rights. "We should exercise foresight now," he said,


33
  Similar problems, of course, arise in forestry. Ely and Wehrwein approach this topic by first considering
"the forest as a mine," before turning to questions of conservation and reforestation (1940 Ch. 9). As de-
veloped over the course of the 20th Century, the parallels between forestry and capital became even stronger
than those between farmland and capital. For example, as noted by Bowes and Krutilla (1985), optimal
rotations for a forest that yields environmental "services" while it grows and timber value when harvested
look, mathematically, exactly like the optimal life cycle for a machine that yields a flow of output and has
scrappage value. (See also Gaffney 1957 and Hirshleifer 1970.)

                                                   -30-
       as the ordinarily prudent man exercises foresight in conserving and wisely using
       the property which contains the assurance of well-being for himself and his chil-
       dren. We want to see a man own his farm rather than rent it, because we want to
       see it an object to him to transfer it in better order to his children. We want to see
       him exercise forethought for the next generation. We need to exercise it in some
       fashion ourselves as a nation for the next generation.

In this way, care of resources can be understood by analogy to questions of land tenure.

       Situated in the middle of these policy discussions, and as heirs of this tradition in agricul-
tural and resource economics, it would be natural for American economists in the 1960s to think
along similar lines. Kneese, recall, also employed his own analogy between agriculture and the
natural environment, segueing from a discussion of the farm with Plots A and B to the basin-wide
water firm. Certainly, like Pigou, he considered situations where an exchange between two parties
affects a third party. But, reasoning with categories of natural resources which have alternative
uses, Kneese considered how such affects are mediated through misaligned incentives to allow a
resource to depreciate: "Failure of municipal and industrial waste dischargers to consider that
subsequent water uses may be made more expensive or foreclosed entirely by the discharge is
perhaps the basic element of the pollution problem" (1964 p. 42, emphasis in original). In other
words, polluters depreciate a resource that has alternative uses downstream, such as fishing.
Downstream users of the water, here, subsequent in time and space to the upstream user, play the
role of subsequent users of farmland after the tenant.

       By the close of the decade, Kneese was explicitly trying to situate his work in the context
of common property resources. He claimed that, while it is natural for economists to begin think-
ing about environmental problems through the lens of "externalities," the new approach stemming
from Economics of Regional Water Quality Management could better be described as "the man-
agement of common property resources approach" (1971b p. 153, emphasis in original). Kneese
characterized the externalities approach as inherently limited to two-party situations, whereas the
common property approach focuses on the degradation of a resource used by many. Concomi-
tantly, whereas externalities have the appearance of being rare exceptions to the competitive ideal,
the logic of materials balancing compels us to recognize that depositing wastes in the environment
is a pervasive aspect of production (1971b, Ayres and Kneese 1969). Accordingly, drawing on
Gordon (1954), he argued that, now that the natural environment is itself a scarce resource, "we
are confronted with a vast asymmetry in the ability of our property institutions to form the basis

                                                -31-
for efficient resources allocation" (1971b p. 155).

       Explaining his proposals for effluent charges to the US Congress, Kneese (1969) framed it
in similar terms. "I think we must devise ways of reflecting the costs of using resources that are
the common property of everyone, like our watercourses," he said. "Because our property institu-
tions cannot adequately be applied to resources like watercourses, and for that matter the air and
space, they are in fact unpriced and treated as free goods, even though they are in fact resources of
great and increasing value in the contemporary world. ...[T]his unfortunate situation cannot be
remedied unless we move toward the implementation of publicly administered prices for waste
discharge to watercourses and for the use of other common property resources" (p. 347).

       Like Kneese, Crocker and Dales also reasoned from these mis-aligned incentives of com-
mon property, with Gordon (1954) being one of the few references provided by either (Crocker
1967, 1968, Dales 1968a,b). Dales emphasized that, because air and water are fluids that fail to
respect boundaries, it seems inevitable that they will be held in common. Crocker made a similar
point, adding that whereas with land and most other resources, man can modify its characteristics
to mitigate consequences of misaligned incentives (e.g. by regrading a slope to prevent a tenant
from eroding the soil), but with air we are subject to its whims (1966 p. 63).

       Crocker additionally stressed the distinction between "air" and "air space," the former re-
ferring to the gasses that move about in space and time, and the latter the space through which they
move. This distinction is interesting because it echoes the one Richard Ely made between "land"
and "standing space." As discussed above, by the latter Ely meant pure Cartesian extension to be
occupied by people and economic activity, whereas in the former he included all the quality-dif-
ferentiated resources of the land (Ely 1893 pp. 99-100), Ely and Morehouse 1924 Ch. 2). Extend-
ing this logic, Ely said that, like land, water too can be distinguished between the space it occupies
and the resource itself (Ely and Morehouse 1924 Ch. 9, Ely and Wehrwein 1940 Ch. 11). Because
underground water flows throughout a basin, a single user can deplete the reservoir, denying others
use, particularly problematic in the arid west. Thus, California for example developed the doctrine
of "correlative right," which limits users to a reasonable share (see also Comin 1911, Ciriacy-
Wantrup 1956).

       Earlier in his graduate career, Crocker had been assisting his advisor on just this issue
(Gaffney 1961 p. 30), and he recalls it being an important inspiration for his work on rights to the

                                                 -32-
air (Crocker 2011). Highlighting this connection, Crocker wrote that the current treatment of prop-
erty rights to air obviously resembles "the problems caused by the old absolute-ownership doctrine
of groundwater" (1967 p. 36). This old doctrine of absolute ownership, Crocker explained, "de-
fines the groundwater user's rights in terms of reservoir space, but fails to define his rights relative
to the rights of other groundwater users in the water that percolates through that space." Even if
users had a de jure right, they would have no economical means by which to defend them (1967
p. 36). For air as with groundwater, "the result is that the owner of the space uses the resource
within the space until such time as for him and him alone the present value of its marginal value
product is zero" (1966 pp. 82-3).

        Crocker and Dales both suggested that, although historically it was appropriate to treat air
or water as a "free good," the demands on their use were now too high to do so. Crocker summed
up the problem with the commons by mashing together quotes from Ellis and Fellner (1943), Gor-
don (1954) and Bator (1968), stating that the "'divorce of scarcity from effective ownership' brings
about a situation in which 'the conservative dictum that everybody's property is nobody's property'
appears to be fulfilled" (1968 pp. 247-8).

6. Conclusion

This paper has argued that the early literature on pollution pricing was rooted in questions about
common property resources and the increasing returns from developing natural resources. Both
topics were treated by broad literatures by the 1960s, including distinctly American traditions not
particularly associated with Pigou. On this reading, if the Pigouvian framework was later grafted
onto the rootstock of an already flourishing school of environmental economics, those roots were
already well grounded in an American tradition of applied agricultural economics and natural re-
source economics.

        This history has broader implications for our understanding of externalities and public
goods. In the 1950s and '60s, the definition of public goods was crystallizing around the idea that
they simultaneously involve non-excludability and either jointness in production or nonrivalry in
consumption (Desmarais-Tremblay 2017). Throughout that process, Samuelson, Musgrave, and
others debated the relative importance of free riding and jointness, and how to overlay the theory
of externalities. At the same time, Buchanan, Tiebout and others offered alternative perspectives



                                                 -33-
with the potential for voluntary mechanisms to overcome these problems. 34 Arguably, these are
the same issues that simultaneously were playing out in the history of applied environmental and
natural resource economics. Challenges in the management of natural resources had long been
understood to be related to jointness in appropriation (e.g. irrigation and dams) and the incentives
under common property arrangements. Even as concerns about the quantity of material resources
gave way in the 1960s to greater emphasis on the quality of environmental amenities, these tradi-
tional perspectives remained. The water and air are common property resources which support
environmental services that are nonrivalrous among those who enjoy them, but which jointly are
rivalrous against alternative uses of the resources for the deposition of wastes. Economists like
Kneese, Crocker, and Dales proposed market-like systems to close off access to such common
property resources. Once operating, these systems could operate in a decentralized way, but es-
tablishing them still required managing prices, quotas, the terms of trade, and the extent of the
market.




34
  On both these issues, see e.g. Berta (2017), Desmarais-Tremblay (2017), Fontaine (2014), Johnson
(2015), Marciano (2013), and Singleton (2015).

                                                -34-
References

Alacevich, Michele. 2020. "Paul Rosenstein-Rodan and the Birth of Development Economics."
       CHOPE Working Paper 2020-04.

Arrow, Kenneth J. 1969. "The Organization of Economic Activity: Issues Pertinent to the Choice
       of Market versus Non-Market Allocation." In The Analysis and Evaluation of Public Ex-
       penditures: The PPB System, pp. 47-64. US Congress, Joint Economic Committee. Wash-
       ington, DC: US Government Printing Office.

Aslanbeigui, Nahid, and Guy Oakes. 2015. Arthur Cecil Pigou. London: Palgrave Macmillan.

Ayres, Robert U., and Allen V. Kneese. 1969. "Production, Consumption, and Externalities."
       American Economic Review 59(3): 282-97.

Backhouse, Roger E., and Steve G. Medema. 2009a. "Defining Economics: The Long Road to
      Acceptance of the Robbins Definition." Economica 76: 805-20.

Backhouse, Roger E., and Steven G. Medema. 2009b. "Retrospectives: On the Definition of
      Economics." Journal of Economic Perspectives 23(1): 221-33.

Banzhaf, H. Spencer. 2006. "The Other Economics Department: Demand and Value Theory in
      Early Agricultural Economics." In Agreement on Demand: The History of 20th Century
      Demand Theory, ed. by P. Mirowski and W. Hands. Durham, NC: Duke University Press,
      pp. 9-31.

Banzhaf, H. Spencer. 2009. "Objective or Multi-Objective? Two Historically Competing Visions
      for Benefit-Cost Analysis." Land Economics 85(1): 3-23.

Banzhaf, H. Spencer. 2010a. "Consumer Surplus with Apology: A Historical Perspective on
      Nonmarket Valuation and Recreation Demand." Annual Review of Resource Economics
      2(1): 183-207.

Banzhaf, H. Spencer. 2010b. "The Free Market Environmentalist Case for Cap and Trade."
      Working Paper, Property and Environmental Research Center.

Banzhaf, H. Spencer. 2017. "Constructing Markets: Environmental Economics and the Contin-
      gent Valuation Controversy." In The Age of the Applied Economist: The Transformation
      of Economics Since the 1970s, ed. by Roger E. Backhouse and Beatrice Cherrier. Durham,
      NC: Duke University Press, pp. 213-39.

Banzhaf, H. Spencer. 2019. "The Environmental Turn in Natural Resource Economics: John
      Krutilla and 'Conservation Reconsidered.'" Journal of the History of Economic Thought
      41(1): 27-46.

Banzhaf, H. Spencer. 2020. "The Conservative Roots of Carbon Pricing." National Affairs, forth-
      coming.


                                             -35-
Banzhaf, H. Spencer, Timothy Fitzgerald, and Kurt Schnier. 2013. "Nonregulatory Approaches
      to the Environment: Coasean and Pigouvian Perspectives." Review of Environmental Eco-
      nomics and Policy 7(2): 238-58.

Bateman, Bradley W., and Ethan B. Kapstein. 1999. "Retrospectives: Between God and the
      Market: The Religious Roots of the American Economic Association. Journal of Eco-
      nomic Perspectives 13(4): 249-58.

Bator, Francis M. 1957. "The Simple Analytics of Welfare Maximization." American Economic
       Review 47(1): 22-59.

Bator, Francis M. 1958. "The Anatomy of Market Failure." Quarterly Journal of Economics
       71(3): 351-79.

Baumol, William J. 1952. Welfare Economics and the Theory of the State. London: Longmans,
     Green, and Co.

Baumol, William J., and Wallace E. Oates. 1975. The Theory of Environmental Policy. Eng-
     lewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.

Berta, Nathalie. 2017. "On the Definition of Externality as a Missing Market." European Journal
        of the History of Economic Thought 24(2): 287-318.

Berta, Nathalie. 2019. "The History of Incentives in Environmental Economics." In Incentives
       and Environmental Policies: From Theory to Empirical Novelties, ed. by Benjamin Ou-
       vrard and Anne Stenger, pp. 31-54. London: ISTE.

Berta, Nathalie. 2020a. "Efficiency without Optimality: A Pragmatic Compromise for Environ-
       mental Policies in the Late 1960s." Journal of the History of Economic Thought, forth-
       coming.

Berta, Nathalie. 2020b. "A Note on the Early History of Emission Trading and Cap-and-Trade in
       the Late 1960s." Cahiers d'économie politique, forthcoming.

Berta, Nathalie, and Elodie Bertrand. 2014. "Market Internalization of Externalities: What is
       Failing?" Journal of the History of Economic Thought 36(3): 331-57.

Bertrand, Elodie. 2015. "From Firm to Economic Policy: The Problem of Coase's Cost." History
       of Political Economy 47(3): 481-510.

Boianovsky, Mauro, and Kevin D. Hoover. 2009. "The Neoclassical Growth Model and Twenti-
      eth-Century Economics." In Robert Solow and the Development of Growth Economics,
      ed. by Mauro Boianovsky and Kevin D. Hoover. Durham: Duke University Press, pp. 1-
      23.

Bowes, Michael D., and John V. Krutilla. 1985. "Multiple Use Management of Public For-
      estlands." In Handbook of Natural Resource and Energy Economics, vol. 2, ed. by Allen
      V. Kneese and James L. Sweeney. Amsterdam: North Holland.

                                             -36-
Buchanan, James M., and Wm. Craig Stubblebine. 1962. "Externality." Economica 29: 371-84.

Ciriacy-Wantrup, S.V. 1956. "Concepts used as Economic Criteria for a System of Water Rights."
       Land Economics 32(4): 295-312.

Coase, R.H. 1937. "The Nature of the Firm." Economica 4: 386-405.

Coase, R.H. 1959. "The Federal Communications Commission." Journal of Law and Economics
       2:1-40.

Coase, R.H. 1960. "The Problem of Social Cost." Journal of Law and Economics 3: 1-44.

Cohen, Jon S., and Martin L. Weitzman. 1975. "A Marxian Model of Enclosures." Journal of
      Development Economics 1(4): 287-336.

Collard, David. 1996. "Pigou and Future Generations: A Cambridge Tradition." Cambridge
       Journal of Economics 20(5): 585-97.

Coman, Katharine. 1911. "Some Unsettled Problems of Irrigation." American Economic Review
      1(1): 1-19.

Crabbé, Philippe J. 1983. "The Contribution of L.C. Gray to the Economic Theory of Exhaustible
       Natural Resources and its Roots in the History of Economic Thought." Journal of Envi-
       ronmental Economics and Management 10: 195-220.

Crocker, Thomas D. 1966. "The Structuring of Atmospheric Pollution Control Systems." In The
      Economics of Air Pollution, ed. by Harold Wolozin, pp. 61-86. New York: W.W. Norton
      & Co.

Crocker, Thomas D. 1967. Some Economics of Air Pollution Control. Dissertation, University
      of Missouri.

Crocker, Thomas D. 1968. "Some Economics of Air Pollution Control." Natural Resources
      Journal 8(2): 236-58.

Crocker, Thomas D. 1972. "On Air Pollution Control Instruments," Loyola of Los Angeles Law
      Review 5: 280-97.

Crocker, Thomas D. 2011. "Trading Access to and Use of the Natural Environment: The Multiple
      Origins of 'Cap and Trade.'" Working paper, University of Wyoming.

Currie, Lauchlin. 1997. "Implications of an Endogenous Theory of Growth in Allyn Young's
        Macroeconomic Concept of Increasing Returns," ed. by Roger Sandilands. History of Po-
        litical Economy 29(3): 413-43.

Dales, J.H. 1968a. Pollution, Property, and Prices. University of Toronto Press.

Dales, J.H. 1968b. "Land, Water, and Ownership." Canadian Journal of Economics 1(4): 791-
       804.
                                             -37-
Davidson, Paul, F. Gerard Adams, and Joseph Seneca. 1966. "The Social Value of Water Recre-
      ational Facilities Resulting from an Improvement in Water Quality: The Delaware Estu-
      ary." In Water Research, ed. by Allen V. Kneese. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins Press
      for Resources for the Future.

Davis, Robert K. 1968. The Range of Choice in Water Management: A Study of Dissolved Oxygen
       in the Potomac Estuary. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins Press for Resources for the Future.

Davis, Otto A., and Andrew Whinston. 1962. "Externalities, Welfare, and the Theory of Games."
       Journal of Political Economy 70(3): 241-62.

Desmarais-Tremblay, Maxime. 2017. "Musgrave, Samuelson, and the Crystallization of the
      Standard Rationale for Public Goods." History of Political Economy 49(1): 59-92.

Eckstein Otto. 1958. Water-Resource Development: The Economics of Project Evaluation. Cam-
       bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Ellis, Howard S., and William Fellner. 1943. "External Economies and Diseconomies." American
        Economic Review 33(3): 493-511.

Ely, Richard T. 1893. Outlines of Economics. New York: Meadville Penna.

Ely, Richard T. 1911. Outlines of Economics, 2nd ed. With Thomas S. Adams, Max O. Lorenz,
       and Allyn A. Young. New York: Macmillan.

Ely, Richard T., and Edward W. Morehouse. 1924. Elements of Land Economics. New York:
       Macmillan.

Ely, Richard T., and George S. Wehrwein. 1940. Land Economics. New York: Macmillan.

Fontaine, Philippe. 2014. "Free Riding." Journal of the History of Economic Thought 36(3): 359-
       76.

Fort, D.M., W.A. Niskanen, A.H. Pascal, W.F. Sharpe. 1959. "Proposal for a 'Smog Tax.'" RAND
        Corporation paper P-1621-RC.

Freeman, A. Myrick III, and Robert H. Haveman. 1972. "Residuals Changes for Pollution Con-
      trol: A Policy Evaluation." Science 177: 322-9.

Gaffney, Mason. 1957. "Concepts of Financial Maturity of Timber and Other Assets." Agricul-
      tural Economics Information Series paper no. 62, Raleigh, NC.

Gaffney, Mason. 1961. "Diseconomies Inherent in Western Water Laws: A California Case
      Study." In Water and Range Resources and Economic Development of the West, Proceed-
      ings of the Western Agricultural Resource Council. www.masongaffney.org/publica-
      tions/H3-DiseconomiesInherentinWesternWaterLaws21.CV.CV.pdf




                                             -38-
Gordon, H. Scott. 1954. "The Economic Theory of a Common-Property Resource: The Fishery."
      Journal of Political Economy 62(2): 124-42.

Gray, L.C. 1913. "The Economic Possibilities of Conservation." Quarterly Journal of Economics
       27(3): 497-519.

Hardin, Garrett. 1968. "The Tragedy of the Commons." Science 162: 1243-48.

Hays, Samuel P. 1959. Conservation and the Gospel of Efficiency: The Progressive Conservation
       Movement, 1890-1920. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Hays, Samuel P. 1982. "From Conservation to Environment: Environmental Politics in the
       United States since World War Two." Environmental Review 6: 14-41.

Hays, Samuel P. 1987. Beauty, Health, and Permanence: Environmental Politics in the United
       States, 1955-1985. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Hirshleifer, Jack. 1970. Investment, Interest and Capital. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Hirshleifer, Jack, James Charles De Haven, and Jerome W. Milliman. 1960. Water Supply: Eco-
       nomics, Technology, and Policy. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

Inter-Agency Committee on Water Resources, Subcommittee on Evaluation Standards. 1960. Re-
       port of the Panel of Recreational Values on a Proposed Interim Schedule of Values for
       Recreational Aspects of Fish and Wildlife.

Johnson, Edwin L. 1967. "A Study in the Economics of Water Quality Management." Water
      Resources Research 3(2): 291-305.

Johnson, Marianne. 2015. "Public Goods, Market Failure, and Voluntary Exchange." In Market
      Failure in Context, ed. by Alain Marciano and Steven G. Medema. Durham, NC: Duke
      University Press, pp. 174-98.

Kaufman, Bruce E. 2017. "The Origins and Theoretical Foundation of Original Institutional Eco-
      nomics Reconsidered." Journal of the History of Economic Thought 39(3): 293-322.

Kirkendall, Richard S. 1963. "L.C. Gray and the Supply of Agricultural Land." Agricultural
      History 37(4): 206-14.

Kneese, Allen V. 1956. An Industry Study Approach to the Problem of Exclusive Dealing. Dis-
      sertation, Indiana University.

Kneese, Allen V. 1960. "Normative Problems in the Evaluation of Water-Resources Development
      Projects." Southwestern Social Sciences Quarterly 40(4): 301-13.

Kneese, Allen V. 1962. Water Pollution--Economic Aspects and Research Needs. Washington,
      DC: Resources for the Future.



                                             -39-
Kneese, Allen V. 1964. The Economics of Regional Water Quality Management. Baltimore:
      Johns Hopkins Press for Resources for the Future.

Kneese, Allen V. 1969. "Statement of Allen V. Kneese, Director, The Quality of the Environment
      Program for Resources for the Future, Inc." In Economic Analysis and the Efficiency of
      Government: Hearings before the Subcommittee on Efficiency of Government of the Joint
      Economic Committee, 91st Cong., pp. 342-9.

Kneese, Allen V. 1971a. "Background for the Economic Analysis of Environmental Pollution."
      Swedish Journal of Economics 73(1): 1-24.

Kneese, Allen V. 1971b. "Environmental Pollution: Economics and Policy." American Eco-
      nomic Review 61(2): 153-66.

Kneese, Allen V. 1988. "Three Decades of Water Resources Research: A Personal Perspective."
      In Environmental Resources and Applied Welfare Economics: Essays in Honor of John V.
      Krutilla, ed. by V. Kerry Smith. Washington, DC: Resources for the Future.

Kneese, Allen V., Robert U. Ayres, and Ralph C. d'Arge. 1970. Economics and the Environment:
      A Materials Balance Approach. Johnsons Hopkins University Press for Resources for the
      Future.

Kneese, Allen V., and Blair T. Bower. 1968. Managing Water Quality: Economics, Technology,
      Institutions. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press for Resources for the Future.

Kneese, Allen V., and Karl-Göran Mäler. 1973. "Bribes and Charges in Pollution Control: An
      Aspect of the Coase Controversy." Natural Resources Journal 13: 705-15.

Kneese, Allen V., and Kenneth C. Nobe. 1962. "The Role of Economic Evaluation in Planning
      for Water Resource Development." Natural Resources Journal 2: 445-82.

Kneese, Allen V., and Charles L. Schultze. 1975. Pollution, Prices, and Public Policy. Wash-
      ington, DC: The Brookings Institution.

Knight, F.H. 1924. "Some Fallacies in the Interpretation of Social Cost." Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 38(4): 582-606.

Krutilla, John V. 1967. "Conservation Reconsidered." American Economic Review 57(4): 777-
        86.

Krutilla, John V. 1981. "Reflections of an Applied Welfare Economist." Journal of Environmen-
        tal Economics and Management 8: 1-10.

Krutilla, John V., and Otto Eckstein. 1958. Multiple Purpose River Development: Studies in
        Applied Economic Analysis. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press for Resources for
        the Future.

Kula, E. 1998. History of Environmental Economic Thought. London: Routledge.

                                             -40-
Kumekawa, Ian. 2017. The First Serious Optimist: A.C. Pigou and the Birth of Welfare Econom-
     ics. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Lagueux, Maurice. 2010. "The Residual Character of Externalities." European Journal of the
      History of Economic Thought 17(4): 957-73.

Lane, Richard. 2014. The Nature of Growth: The Postwar History of the Economy, Energy, and
       the Environment. Dissertation, University of Sussex.

Leonard, Bryan, and Gary D. Libecap. 2019. "Collective Action by Contract: Prior Appropriation
      and the Development of Irrigation in the Western United States." Journal of Law and
      Economics 62(1): 67-115.

Maass, Arthur, Maynard M. Hufschmidt, Robert Dorfman, Harold A. Thomas, Jr., Stephen A.
       Marglin, and Gordon Maskew Fair. 1962. Design of Water-Resource Systems: New Tech-
       niques for Relating Economic Objectives, Engineering Analysis, and Governmental Plan-
       ning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Marciano, Alain. 2013. "Why Market Failures Are Not a Problem: James Buchanan on Market
      Imperfections, Voluntary Cooperation, and Externalities." History of Political Economy
      45(2): 223-54.

McDonald, John F. 2013. "Pigou, Knight, Diminishing Returns, and Optimal Pigouvian Conges-
     tion Tolls." Journal of the History of Economics Thought 35(3): 353-72.

McKean Roland N. 1958. Efficiency in Government through Systems Analysis: With Emphasis
     on Water Resources Development. New York: John Wiley & Sons.

Meade, J.E. 1952. "External Economies and Diseconomies in a Competitive Situation." Eco-
      nomic Journal 62: 54-67.

Medema, Steven G. 2009. The Hesitant Hand: Taming Self-Interest in the History of Economic
     Ideas. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Medema, Steven G. 2014a. "The Curious Treatment of the Coase Theorem in the Environmental
     Economics Literature, 1960-1979." Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 8(1):
     39-57.

Medema, Steven G. 2014b. "1966 and all that: Codification, Consolidation, Creep, and Contro-
     versy in the Early History of the Coase Theorem." Journal of the History of Economic
     Thought 36(3): 271-303.

Medema, Steven G. 2019. "The Coase Theorem at Sixty." Working paper, Duke University.

Medema, Steven G. 2020a. "'Exceptional and Unimportant'? Externalities, Competitive Equilib-
     rium, and the Myth of a Pigovian Tradition." History of Political Economy 52(1): 135-70.

Medema, Steven G. 2020b. Personal correspondence. May 20, 2020.

                                             -41-
Mills, Edwin S. 1966. "Economic Incentives in Air Pollution Control." In The Economics of Air
        Pollution, ed. by Harold Wolozin, pp. 40-50. New York: W.W. Norton & Co.

Missemer, Antoine, Marion Gaspard, and Roberto Ferreira da Cunha. 2019. "Depreciation and
      Exhaustible Resources: Exploring Harold Hotelling's Twin Projects." Mimeo.

Montgomery, W. David. 1972. "Markets in Licenses and Efficient Pollution Control Programs."
      Journal of Economic Theory 5: 395-418.

Nishibayashi, Shogo. 2019. "A.V. Kneese's Water Quality Management Research (1960s), within
       the History of Environmental Economics. Journal of the History of Economic Thought
       41(3): 411-31.

Ostrom, Vincent, and Elinor Ostrom. 1965. "A Behavioral Approach to the Study of Intergov-
      ernmental Relations." Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science
      359: 137-46.

Papandreou, Andreas A. 1994. Externality and Institutions. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Pearce, David. 2002. "An Intellectual History of Environmental Economics." Annual Review of
       Energy and the Environment 27: 57-81.

Pigou, A.C. 1932 [1962]. The Economics of Welfare, 4th ed. London: MacMillan & Co.

Porter, Theodore M. 1995. Trust in Numbers: The Pursuit of Objectivity in Science and Public
        Life. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Roosevelt, Theodore. 1908. "Conservation as a National Duty." Speech, May 13th.
      https://voicesofdemocracy.umd.edu/theodore-roosevelt-conservation-as-a-national-duty-
      speech-text/

Sandmo, Angmar. 2015. "The Early History of Environmental Economics." Review of Environ-
      mental Economics and Policy 9(1): 43-63.

Scitovsky, Tibor. 1954. "Two Concepts of External Economies." Journal of Political Economy
       62: 143-51.

Scott, Anthony. 1955. "The Fishery: The Objectives of Sole Ownership." Journal of Political
        Economy 63(2): 116-24.

Singleton, John D. 2015. "Sorting Charles Tiebout." In Market Failure in Context, ed. by Alain
       Marciano and Steven G. Medema. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, pp. 199-226.

Solow, Robert M. 1971. "The Economist's Approach to Pollution and Its Control." Science 173:
       498-503.

Stavins, Robert. 2011. "The Problem of the Commons: Still Unsettled after 100 Years." Ameri-
       can Economic Review 101: 81-108.

                                             -42-
Steiguer, J. Edward de. 2006. The Origins of Modern Environmental Thought. Tucson: Uni-
       versity of Arizona Press.

Stigler, George. 1946. Production and Distribution Theories. New York: Macmillan.

Taylor, Henry C. 1919. Agricultural Economics. New York: The Macmillan Co.

Teele, R.P. 1904. "The Organization of Irrigation Companies." Journal of Political Economy 12:
       161-78.

Teele, R. P. 1926. "The Financing of Non-Governmental Irrigation Enterprises." Journal of Land
       and Public Utility Economics 2(4): 427-40.

Tietenberg, T.H. 2006. Emissions Trading: Principles and Practice, 2nd ed. Washington, DC:
       Resources for the Future.

Tietenberg, Tom. 2010. "Cap-and-Trade: The Evolution of an Economic Idea." Agricultural
       and Resource Economics Review 39(3): 359-67.

Viner, Jacob. 1932. "Cost Curves and Supply Curves." Zeitschrift Für National-ökonomie 3(1):
        23-46.

Weisbrod, Burton A. 1961. Economics of Public Health: Measuring the Economic Impacts of
      Diseases. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

Weitzman, Martin L. 1974a. "Prices vs. Quantities." Review of Economic Studies 41(4): 477-91.

Weitzman, Martin L. 1974b. "Free Access vs. Private Ownership as Alternative Systems for Man-
      aging Common Property." Journal of Economic Theory 8(2): 225-34.

Young, Allyn A. 1913. "Review of Pigou's Wealth and Welfare." Quarterly Journal of Econom-
      ics 27(4): 672-86.

Young, Allyn A. 1928. "Increasing Returns and Economic Progress." Economic Journal 38: 527-
      42.




                                             -43-
