                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   DISCRIMINATION AND RACIAL DISPARITIES IN LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES:
                         EVIDENCE FROM WWII

                                         Anna Aizer
                                         Ryan Boone
                                    Adriana Lleras-Muney
                                       Jonathan Vogel

                                     Working Paper 27689
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27689


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2020




We are very grateful to seminar participants from the California Center for Population Research
at UCLA, Bonn University, Norwegian school of economics, Vanderbilt University, Emory
University,Williams College and Pittsburgh University. We are also very grateful to Claudia
Goldin for sharing her education data, and to Nicole Gorton who provided outstanding research
assistance. This project was supported by the California Center for Population Research at
UCLA, which receives core support (P2C- HD041022) from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD). This project was
supported by the California Center for Population Research at UCLA, which receives core
support (P2C- HD041022) from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health
and Human Development (NICHD) and the Brown PSTC which receives core support (P2C
HD041020) also from the NICHD. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Anna Aizer, Ryan Boone, Adriana Lleras-Muney, and Jonathan Vogel. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Discrimination and Racial Disparities in Labor Market Outcomes: Evidence from WWII
Anna Aizer, Ryan Boone, Adriana Lleras-Muney, and Jonathan Vogel
NBER Working Paper No. 27689
August 2020
JEL No. J24,J3,J7,N12,N4

                                         ABSTRACT

The 1940s witnessed substantial reductions in the Black-white earnings gap. We study the role
that domestic WWII defense production played in reducing this gap. Exploiting variation across
labor markets in the allocation of war contracts to private firms, we find that war production
contracts resulted in significant increases in the earnings of Black workers and declines in the
racial wage gap, with no effect on white workers. This was achieved via occupational upgrading
among Black men to skilled occupations. The gains largely persisted through at least 1970. Using
a structural model, we show that declines in discrimination (and not migration or changes in
productivity) account for all of the occupational upgrading and half of the estimated wage gains
associated with the war production effort. Additionally, the war production effort explains one
quarter (one seventh) of the overall improvements in racial gaps in occupation allocations
(wages) witnessed over this decade. Finally, war spending led to an increase in the high school
graduation rate of Black children, suggesting important intergenerational spillovers associated
with declines in labor market discrimination.

Anna Aizer                                     Adriana Lleras-Muney
Brown University                               Department of Economics
Department of Economics                        9373 Bunche Hall
64 Waterman Street                             UCLA
Providence, RI 02912                           Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER                                       and NBER
anna_aizer@brown.edu                           allerasmuney@gmail.com

Ryan Boone                                     Jonathan Vogel
Economics Department                           Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles          University of California at Los Angeles
ryanfboone@gmail.com                           8283 Bunche Hall
                                               Mail Code 147703
                                               Los Angeles, CA 90095
                                               and NBER
                                               jonathan.e.vogel@gmail.com
1     Introduction
Racial disparities in labor market outcomes are persistent and pervasive. Today the un-
employment rate of Black men is 3.5 percentage points higher than that of white men and
among those who are employed, Black men earn 27% lower wages. A long theoretical
and empirical literature exploring the sources of the labor market disparities generally
concludes that both pre-market differences and labor market discrimination play impor-
tant roles (Lang and Lehmann, 2012; Lang and Spitzer, 2020). These racial gaps in wages
have contracted little since 1980; however, there were two previous periods of rapid con-
vergence: the 1940s and the 1960s (see Figure 1).1
    This paper focuses on the period of the 1940s and examines the role of the large ex-
pansion in government contracts to private firms as part of the war production effort in
explaining the rapid closing of the wage gap during this period.2 The federally funded
domestic war production effort, totaling $3.1 trillion, combined significant increases in
labor demand among private firms with requirements of anti-discriminatory policies in
hiring. In the short term these efforts resulted in increased hiring of minorities.
    We provide novel evidence on the role of WWII domestic production in explaining
the contraction of racial gaps in the post-war era. Using 1920-1970 Census data, we ex-
ploit variation across labor markets in war contract spending to identify the effect of the
war production effort, essentially comparing changes in outcomes in areas that received
more war contracts with changes in outcomes in areas that received fewer war contracts,
conditional on initial manufacturing levels.
    We find that in areas with greater war contract expenditures, the wages of Black work-
ers rose more than in areas with fewer war contracts; this finding is unaffected by con-
trolling for the local area draft rate. The share of Black workers employed in skilled oc-
cupations (and the race-based skilled occupation gap) also improved more in areas with
greater defense spending. By contrast, we find no (negative or positive) effects of war
contract expenditures on the average outcomes of white men. Nor do we find any effects
of WWII expenditures on the labor market outcomes of Black or white women by 1950,
consistent with previous work showing that women's gains in the labor market during
WWII as a result of mobilization were temporary.
    Moreover we show that the gains for Black male workers persisted until at least 1970,

    1 Fora detailed analysis of long-run trends in Black-white wage gaps see Bayer and Charles (2018).
    2 Forthe 1960s, researchers have attributed the closing of the gap to economic expansion, increasing
educational attainment among Black individuals (Smith and Welch, 1989; Card and Krueger, 1992), affir-
mative action and the rise of anti-discrimination policies (e.g., Donohue and Heckman, 1991; Miller, 2017),
and the rise in the minimum wage (Derenoncourt and Montialoux, 2019).

                                                    1
though with some fading over time. These effects are not driven by endogenous alloca-
tion of war contracts: places awarded more war contracts did not show improvements
in Black worker outcomes prior to 1940. While WWII expenditures did increase migra-
tion of Black workers, our results are not explained by changes in migration levels or by
changes in the composition of workers.
    To understand the mechanisms behind these reduced-form findings, we develop and
estimate a quantitative model. We use the model to investigate the role of various mecha-
nisms -- migration, changes in productivity, and declines in discrimination -- in explain-
ing our difference-in-difference results, as well as the overall improvements in Black labor
market outcomes observed over this period. The model builds on Hsieh et al. (2019). In
the model, discrimination is a wedge between the wage an employer pays a Black worker
and the actual value of the marginal product of that worker (the wedge is potentially
caused by incorrect statistical discrimination, overt racism, etc.). This wedge is allowed
to vary freely across regions, occupations, and industries. By appropriately extending
Hsieh et al. (2019) to include regions, defined as metropolitan areas, in addition to indus-
tries, migration, and trade, we are able to leverage exogenous variation in expenditures
across regions to identify the impact of war production on discrimination, measured by
this wedge.
    We do not identify changes in discrimination as a residual. The identification assump-
tion in the model that allows us to isolate the role played by reductions in discrimination
is that the innate productivity of Black workers (relative to whites) in a particular job (e.g.
skilled occupations within the defense industry) did not increase by more in metropoli-
tan areas receiving more war contracts. This assumption would be violated if unobserved
characteristics of Black workers improved relative to white workers in metropolitan ar-
eas receiving more spending. We provide empirical evidence that neither migration nor
changes in observable or unobserved worker characteristics drive our results. For exam-
ple, we observe no Black occupational upgrading in non-defense industries in these same
metropolitan areas. We also observe the same pattern of reallocation when we limit the
sample to non-migrants. Both of these observations suggest that changes in unobserv-
ables are not driving our results.
    According to our estimated model, reductions in discrimination (rather than migra-
tion or changes in the composition of industries or occupations) account for all of the oc-
cupational upgrading and half of the wage gains observed in our difference-in-differences
estimates. Turning to aggregate trends in racial gaps over this period, we find that wartime
expenditures caused a quarter of the observed change in the Black-white skilled occupa-
tion gap and a seventh of the change in the Black-white wage gap. We show that reduc-


                                              2
tions in discrimination cause most of these aggregate changes and did so by improving
outcomes for Black workers without deteriorating average outcomes for white workers.
Our work is the first attempt that we know of that links well-identified evidence of de-
clines in labor market discrimination with changes in aggregate racial gaps, as suggested
by Lang and Spitzer (2020).
    Neither the empirical work nor the model can identify the precise reason the war pro-
duction effort produced persistent reductions in labor market discrimination. Our find-
ings are consistent with declines in employer or employee-based discrimination, which
could result from explicitly anti-discriminatory policies associated with government spend-
ing: Executive Orders (Collins, 2001) and the Human Resource training that came with
WWII funds that may have "professionalized" hiring practices (Bianchi and Giorcelli,
2020). Our findings are also consistent with reductions in discrimination that were not
driven by explicitly anti-discriminatory policies but resulted from greater exposure of
employers and employees to Black workers (Schindler and Westcott, 2017) and learning
(Whatley, 1990). Available evidence leads us to conclude that the second channel may
be more important. For example, we find similar effects when looking only within the
South, where the Executive Order enforcement was ineffective (Collins, 2001). We also
show that the effect of war expenditures was particularly strong where war-time labor
shortages were more severe, suggesting that exposure is an important mechanism. We
discuss this in greater detail in a later section of the paper.
    Finally, we examine whether the war production effort generated spillovers to the next
generation. We find that high school graduation rates increased more over this period for
Black children, particularly for boys, in areas with greater war contract expenditures.
Previous work on racial gaps in education has typically focused on changes in school ac-
cess during this period. The quality and quantity of schooling increased substantially for
Black children in the South (Card and Krueger, 1992; Collins and Margo, 2003; Aaron-
son and Mazumder, 2011; Carruthers and Wanamaker, 2017). Turner and Bound (2003)
show that the GI Bill (created for WWII veterans) also improved Black educational levels.
We document another reason why the education level of Black children increased in the
post-war years: improved labor market outcomes of their parents.3 We show that war ex-
penditures did not affect the returns to education, nor did they change school expenditure
levels or residential segregation in affected cities. Thus the most plausible mechanism for
the increases in education we document is the increase in family incomes associated with

   3 Although Margo (1993) hypothesized that improving labor market outcomes for Black workers dur-
ing the war ultimately improved the education of Black children, to our knowledge, we are the first to
document that war expenditures raised Black high school graduation rates.

                                                  3
declines in labor market discrimination.
    These findings suggest important intergenerational effects of labor market conditions.
While much of the existing literature and policy debate on racial gaps in schooling focuses
on disparities in educational inputs for Black and white children, our findings suggest
that efforts to reduce the racial gap in schooling should also consider interventions that
address existing discrimination in the labor market faced by Black families, or that raise
their incomes. This would be consistent with the large body of literature that shows that
the single most important determinant of educational outcomes is parental socioeconomic
status (Duncan and Magnuson, 2012).
    Our work complements previous analyses suggesting WWII improved the standing
of Black workers. Collins (2001) shows that Executive Orders limiting discrimination re-
sulted in greater employment of Black workers in defense industries. Ferrara (2020) finds
that places with higher casualty rates saw increases in the share of Black men in semi-
skilled occupations. Maloney (1994) and Margo (1995) suggest that the wage compres-
sion due to wartime wage and price controls benefited Black workers who were over-
represented in low wage occupations. Margo (1995) and Collins (2000) conduct wage
decomposition exercises and show that skill upgrading significantly contributed to the
narrowing of the racial wage gap between 1940 and 1950. Our analysis builds upon this
important work and extends it by focusing on a specific mechanism, linking it to a partic-
ular policy, and documenting its persistent effects on the labor market outcomes of adults
and the human capital accumulation of their children.


2     Background

2.1    Labor market conditions for Black men in 1940
In 1940, despite only slightly lower overall rates of employment, prime-age Black men
earned half the yearly income as their white counterparts. Indeed, many pre-war surveys
found that Black and white men in the same jobs in the same firms typically earned close
to the same wage (Billips, 1936; Frazier and Perlman, 1939). Thus the main source of the
difference in earnings was the disproportionate share of Black workers in unskilled occu-
pations. Among Black workers, 78.6% percent were employed in unskilled occupations
or as farmers, compared to only 37.5% of white men.4
    4 Unskilled occupations are defined as all occupations falling under "Laborers", "Farm Laborers", or
"Service workers" occupational categories in the 1950 Census Bureau classifications. All occupations which
are not unskilled or farmers are labeled as skilled for our purposes. Because our focus is on metro areas,
whether we include farmers as skilled occupations does not meaningfully change our results. See Appendix

                                                    4
    Segregation can partially reconcile the large aggregate wage gap with the small wage
gaps within an occupation within a firm. Black men were concentrated in lower wage in-
dustries and, within these industries, they were concentrated in lower wage firms (Wright,
1986). More importantly, Black men were systematically excluded from better job oppor-
tunities within firms and industries. For example, Ford employed the most Black workers
among the major automakers in pre-war Detroit, but they were concentrated in uncom-
fortable and dangerous foundry positions (Foote et al., 2003). Dewey (1952) posited there
were two rules of segregation at the time: (1) Black workers almost never were placed in
jobs that required giving orders to white workers and (2) Black and white workers did
not ordinarily work side by side. Indeed, a 1932 survey of 9,000 Black coal mine work-
ers found only 11 in positions with any authority (Fishback, 1984).5 Black men were also
barred from joining many unions or forced into segregated "Jim Crow" locals which pre-
vented them from obtaining jobs in many skilled blue collar professions. AFL-affiliated
craft unions, such as the Machinists' union, were especially known for these policies.6
Limits on promotion even affected hiring into entry-level positions: firms had less incen-
tive to hire Black workers since they could not be promoted even if they showed talent
and Black men had less incentive to provide effort since they could not be promoted
(Sundstrom, 1994).
    The economic status of Black workers had been improving in the decades prior to the
war, in great part due to their migration out of the South and into northern manufac-
turing locations. While the "Great Migration" increased wages (Collins and Wanamaker,
2014), Black workers still faced significant occupational segregation outside of the South.7
That northern born Black workers had to compete with southern migrants lowered wages
(Boustan, 2009) and intergenerational mobility (Derenoncourt, 2019). For a full review of
the Great Migration see Collins (2020); we discuss migration further in Appendix D.3.
    Locational or educational differences cannot fully explain occupational segregation.
In Appendix Section C.2, we conduct an exercise where we compare the actual distribu-
tion of Black workers across occupations to the expected distribution if workers were
randomly allocated to jobs conditional on education and location. Following Margo
(1995), we adjust reported years of education downward for Black men born in the South
to account for school quality differences. Black workers were significantly underrepre-
sented in occupations such as engineers, salesmen, managers, skilled blue-collar work-

Table A1 for occupational shares by category.
   5 Fishback (1984) relates the anecdote that a coal company had to open a separate all-Black mine so they

could promote high-achieving Black men without putting them in charge of whites.
   6 See Appendix Table A2 for example unions with discriminatory membership policies.
   7 See Appendix Figure A.1 for indices of occupational segregation by metro area.



                                                    5
ers, and foremen.8 Conversely, we would expect about 45,000 Black janitors and porters
in metropolitan areas conditional on education and location. Instead we observe 145,000.9
    There is also direct evidence that overt discrimination worsened employment out-
comes for Black workers. At the onset of WWII, 51% of war manufacturers reported they
did not and would not employ Black workers. In 1944, strikes over the promotion of
eight Black workers to streetcar motormen shut down public transportation in Philadel-
phia, a key wartime manufacturing hub. The shutdown continued for five days and only
ended after the government sent 8,000 armed soldiers to break the strike. Philadelphia
was not alone. In 1943 there were at least 242 racial incidents in 47 cities due to racial
frictions caused by housing shortages, employment conflicts, or outright racism (Sitkoff,
1971). Detroit alone lost three million hours of work in the first six months of 1943 due
to strikes over the hiring and promotion of Black workers (Wynn, 1976).10 All evidence
suggests that widespread discrimination and occupational segregation characterized the
labor market for Black men on the eve of WWII.


2.2    The effects of WWII
WWII transformed the American labor market in three main respects. First, the dramatic
increase in federal expenditures greatly increased labor demand. The U.S. spent roughly
$3.1 trillion dollars to ramp up war-related production, roughly 40 percent of GDP each
year in 1943, 1944 and 1945, creating the largest increase in expenditure in U.S. history
(Appendix Figure A.3). This was substantially larger than "New Deal" expenditures
meant to alleviate the Great Depression (Fishback and Kachanovskaya, 2015). Military
equipment contracts accounted for 85% of this spending; new production facilities ac-
counted for the rest. The Stabilization Act of 1942 limited changes to prices, wages, and
salary levels during the war to prevent inflation.
    Second, military enlistments dramatically decreased labor supply. About 15.8 mil-
lion working-age men--equivalent to 40% of the male labor force in 1940--served in the

   8 Appendix    Table A3 shows the most over and underrepresented occupations. We use five education
groups and multiply years of education by 0.85 for Black men born in the South with less than 15 years of
education to account for school quality differences. Appendix Figure A.2 shows average wages and edu-
cation by occupation; most occupations with excess Black men are in occupations with the lowest average
wage and education levels.
    9 With only 1.27 million Black men employed in metro areas, the excess number of janitors and porters

alone is about 8% of all employed Black men. Conditioning on education could understate segregation since
even jobs with more Black men purely due to segregation will also tend to have lower average educational
levels since Black men have less education on average.
   10 These strikes and riots had similar counterparts during WWI. For example, there were 26 race-related

riots in the "Red Summer" of 1919, including a week long riot in Chicago.

                                                    6
military during WWII.11 Additionally, about half a million men died during the war, per-
manently reducing the labor force further. Previous work has shown that mobilization
resulted in an increase in female labor force participation (Goldin, 1991; Acemoglu et al.,
2004; Rose, 2018). Large increases in labor demand and decreases in labor supply led to
large labor shortages in many industries and cities.12
    Third, the government enacted several important anti-discrimination measures to en-
sure maximum labor force utilization. Executive Order 8802 (1941) required manufac-
turers to assert: "I do hereby reaffirm the policy of the United States that there shall be
no discrimination in the employment of workers in defense industries or government be-
cause of race, creed, color, or national origin." Executive Order 9346 (1941) established the
committee on fair employment practices (FEPC) to hear complaints. The FEPC had little
power to directly punish violating companies, but it could publicly shame employers and
provide advice on integration. Collins (2001) shows that the share of Black workers em-
ployed in defense industries increased in places with more FEPC intervention, suggesting
that the executive orders were effective. Some members of Congress disliked the FEPC,
resulting in its dissolution after WWII.13
    We focus on the effects of total war contract expenditures on the labor market out-
comes of Black and white workers. Previous work documents both the determinants of
war contract allocations across labor markets as well as the consequences of war con-
tract expenditures on aggregate measures of economic development. Rhode et al. (2018)
document that war contracts were allocated across the U.S. primarily based on existing
industrial capacity and not based on political considerations. Moreover, despite its scope
and scale, WWII spending did not significantly affect local per capita economic devel-
opment nationwide (Fishback and Cullen, 2013) or in the U.S. South (Jaworski, 2017),
though it did increase local populations. Brunet (2018) finds a small relative fiscal multi-
plier for WWII expenditures of 0.2. Garin (2019) finds persistent positive effects of large
new manufacturing plants when located in smaller communities. We examine the deter-
minants of the geographic allocation of these funds and their relationship to Black and
white economic outcomes before and during the war in the next section.




  11 Although   some 350,000 women served in the military, they accounted for a small fraction of the total.
  12 We   show later in Table 1 that higher war expenditures and draft rates are associated with labor short-
ages
  13 Additionally some firms receiving defense contracts also received some form of management train-
ing. Bianchi and Giorcelli (2020) find that human resource practice training had the largest effect on firm
performance after the war.

                                                      7
3      Data and Empirical approach

3.1     Data
WWII expenditures. The data on war-related expenditures by county are from the War
Production Board's Major War Supply Contracts and Major War Facilities Projects which
reports cumulative contract and facility expenditures.14 War contracts (excluding food
and food processing) worth over $50,000 are assigned to the county of the primary pro-
duction plant. The data covers all contracts awarded from June 1940 until September
1945.
    Figure 2 shows the spatial distribution of WWII expenditures. War contracts were less
likely to be distributed to the South and more likely to be distributed to the Northeast,
Midwest, and West coast. With a few exceptions (such as Los Alamos) these expendi-
tures typically went to urban rather than rural areas.15 In our baseline analysis we focus
on metropolitan areas, aggregating spending up across counties and calculating for each
metropolitan area cumulative spending per capita. In 1950 these 147 metro areas covered
55 percent of the U.S. population, and 50 percent of the Black population. More than 90
percent of the Black population living outside of the South lived in metro areas. In our
robustness checks we replicate our results using two alternative geographic aggregations:
states and commuting zones in Appendix Tables A6 and A7.
    The average war contract spending per capita in a given metropolitan area was about
$1,457 per person in 1940 dollars, with a standard deviation $1,371 across metro areas.
For comparison, GDP per capita in 1940 was only $779. Figure 3 shows a very skewed
distribution of expenditures. All metro areas received at least some war contracts but
there is significant variation in size: 50% received less than $1,000 per capita while 10%
receive $3,000 or more per capita (Panel A). There is substantial variation in expenditures
even after we condition on 1940 city-level characteristics (Panel B).
Draft rates. The other major change affecting the labor market of cities was the draft.
We construct metro-level draft shares using individual-level data from the WWII Army
Enlistment Records. Unfortunately these records only include information on about 9
million of the 16 million individuals who served.16 We supplement the data by digitiz-

    14 Thesedata are available from the 1947 County Data Book available through ICPSR 02896 (Haines and
ICPSR, 2010).
   15 Metro areas are based on Census definitions. They consist of groups of counties and the primary

qualification is that the county grouping contains a city of at least 50,000 people.
   16 The primary reason for missin data is the fact that the files only contains Army records and excludes

other branches, such as the Navy (The Air Force was still part of the Army during WWII). The secondary
reason for missing service members is due to poor quality scans or missing records.

                                                    8
ing select tables from Selective Service System (1956) which contain information on total
voluntary and draft enlistments by month and service branch.
    There are several complications with interpreting observed enlistment rates. First,
voluntary enlistments will be highly endogenous to local conditions. Second, draft regu-
lations provided various exemptions for individuals, such as deferments based on age or
marital status. Most importantly for our work, men who worked in industries deemed
essential for the war effort could obtain exemptions. Third, areas with net positive in-
migration after 1940 (e.g., due to war expenditures) will appear to have higher draft rates.
Fourth, individual records are missing in batches related to geographic areas.
    To address these endogeneity issues, we construct a predicted draft rate to isolate the
major exogenous source due to demographics. First, we create demographic cells based
on age, sex, marital status, race, and nativity status for men ages 15-64. Next, we calculate
the total number of men drafted for each demographic group at a national level using the
individual WWII Army Enlistment records. We assume men not included in our records
have the same demographic characteristics on average as people drafted into the Army
within a month conditional on race.17 For each demographic cell, we then divide by the
relevant 1940 national population to create a national draft rate, Draft rated . Finally, we
calculate the share of each demographic group in each metro r in 1940, rd , and multiply
it by the national draft rate for that group to get a predicted draft rate for each metro area:

                                    Pred Draftr =       rd Draft rated
                                                        d

   This measure is a function of pre-WWII demographics only, and does not directly
depend on economic activity in 1940. The mean predicted draft rate is 21.2% of men ages
15-64 and the standard deviation across metro areas is 1.6%. This measure only includes
draftees and does not include voluntary enlistments (about 39% of total enlistments).
In Appendix Section B.2 we describe in greater detail how we create this measure and
show that our predicted measure predicts the actual draft rate (correlation = 0.25).18 Both
the actual and predicted draft rates are negatively correlated with war expenditures per
capita.
Labor market and education data. Our primary outcomes of interest come from 1920-
1970 individual-level census data from IPUMs (Ruggles et al., 2020) aggregated to the

   17 In other words, white men drafted June 1943 by the Navy have similar demographic characteristics

as white men drafted in June 1943 by the Army. We condition on race because there is evidence that Black
men were significantly more likely to be sent to the Army than the Navy.
   18 Our results are robust to using the actual draft rate, predicted draft rate, or including voluntary enlist-

ments. Results available upon request. Results are also robust to using the casualty rate instead.

                                                       9
race-sex-metro-year level. The individual data contains information on school enrollment
and occupation for all census years. Employment is available starting in 1930. Education
and wage earnings are only reported starting in 1940. In the 1950 1% sample, some of
these outcomes were only asked of sample-line persons and are only available for a small
share of the population. To improve metro-level variables derived from the smaller 1950
census data, we digitized metro-level aggregates from the 1950 Census Volumes on occu-
pation and income distributions by race and gender.
   We define skilled occupations as individuals reporting an occupation falling under
"Profession, Technical;" "Managers, Officials, and Proprietors;" "Clerical and Kindred;"
"Sales workers;" "Craftsmen;" or "Operatives" categories.19 We refer to the share of em-
ployed persons in these occupations as the "share skilled" throughout the paper. Prime-
age employment is defined as the percentage of men ages 25-54 who are currently em-
ployed. The yearly wage is total wage earnings in the previous year for people who are
currently wage-earning employees and employed.20
Other data. We digitized reports on the extent of labor shortages during WWII from
the monthly Labor Market Reports compiled by the War Manpower Commission (1945).
These reports included whether cities were experiencing labor shortages each month. We
aggregate these to compute the percentage of months for each metro area during which
there were severe labor shortages from 1942 to 1944. Metro areas experienced severe labor
shortages during 20% of months on average. Data on employment in war related indus-
tries during WWII comes from ES-270 reports. We also use data on local education expen-
ditures at the city level collected in County and City Data Books and available through
the ICPSR. Public expenditures on education at the city level are available for years 1940
and 1947-48 for cities with population of at least 25,000.21 Finally, we use neighborhood
segregation measures at the city level from Cutler et al. (1999). More details on the data
sources are provided in the Appendix Section B.3.




  19 This  corresponds to occupational codes 000-093, 200-690 under the 1950 IPUMS occupational coding
scheme. Due to our focus on metro areas, our results are not sensitive to whether farm owners are defined
as skilled.
   20 In 1940 individuals were only asked about wage income, so self-employed or business income is ex-

cluded. The majority of individuals excluded by the wage-earning employee restriction are farmers.
   21 These data are available through ICPSR: County and City Data Book [United States] Consolidated

File: City Data, 1944-1977 (ICPSR 7735). Of the 147 metropolitan areas in our analysis sample, we have
education data for approximately 83 percent of the sample residing in those metropolitan areas. The data
include total expenditures for the city and do not distinguish between different schools within the city. We
cannot, therefore, identify spending in schools attended predominantly by a specific race.

                                                    10
3.2    Understanding the determinants of WWII expenditures
To investigate which areas received more war contracts based on 1940 characteristics, we
regress expenditures per capita in each of the 147 metro areas on 1940 characteristics and
predicted draft shares in those areas. To facilitate comparison, we standardize all vari-
ables to have mean zero and a standard deviation of one. The results in column 1 Table 1
show that, as expected, manufacturing is the main determinant of war expenditures. Both
the share employed in manufacturing and the (log of) manufacturing output per capita in
1940 are positive and statistically significant predictors of war production expenditures.
    Importantly other measures of economic activity, like the share unemployed or the
share employed in skilled occupations, do not predict expenditures. And neither does
the share of the population that is Black. However the predicted draft negatively and sig-
nificantly predicts expenditures.22 Overall our findings are consistent with those reported
previously in the literature.


3.3    Empirical Approach
We estimate the impact of war expenditures on the labor market outcomes of Black and
white workers separately. We assess whether outcomes changed differentially between
1940 and 1950 in areas that received greater WWII expenditure (per capita) relative to
those that received less, conditional on covariates. This strategy is a difference-in-difference
approach where the treatment varies in intensity. Importantly, we measure outcomes in
1940 and 1950, five years after war production ceased. In so doing, we estimate the lasting
impact of the war production effort on the employment and wages of workers. Specifi-
cally we estimate the following equation separately by race:

             Yrt =  1 WarExpr × Postt +  2 Dra f tr × Postt + Postt + r + Xrt  +  rt                  (1)

where the outcome of interest for a given metro area r in census year t is one of three
measures: the share of workers employed in skilled occupations, (log of) the average
wage, and the prime-age employment rate. Regressions are weighted by the population
of the relevant race. The standard errors are corrected for heteroskedasticity.23 The main
independent variable of interest, WarExpr × Postt , is the total cumulative war contract
spending per capita in metro area r (WarExpr ) interacted with a post war indicator that

  22 As   does the actual share. See Appendix Table A4.
  23 Our results are very similar if we cluster the standard errors at the metro level instead.
                                                                                          Because we only
have two time periods, one before and one after, adjusting for heteroskedasticity is appropriate according
to Bertrand et al. (2004).

                                                      11
equals one in 1950 ( Postt ). We also include metro fixed effects (r , which absorb the main
effect of war expenditures), the post-war indicator ( Postt ), and the time-varying metro
area characteristics in 1940 (Xrt ) described below.
    In some sense our approach is akin to a Bartik approach. WWII represents a large
exogenous shock that differentially affects metropolitan areas based on the composition
of their existing manufacturing base. We are essentially comparing places with similar
manufacturing employment shares that differ based on how easily their manufacturing
based can be converted into war production. The identification assumption is that con-
ditional on manufacturing (and other baseline) covariates, the areas that received greater
WWII expenditures would have been on the same trajectory as those receiving smaller
amounts. This assumption would be violated if the pre-existing trends differ (if WWII
expenditures went to places that were on different trajectories) or if areas that received
higher expenditures were affected by the war by other factors that are correlated with
expenditures.
    We check the plausibility of these assumptions in three ways. First, we show that war
expenditures are associated with employment changes during the war. Second, we check
the robustness of the results to adding as controls the variables that predict expenditures
interacted with post in Xrt . Most importantly, these include the share of manufacturing
and predicted draft rate interacted with Postt . We include the predicted draft rate since it
is an exogenous shock that is correlated with war expenditures and could plausibly affect
our outcomes of interest. We also control for a vector of other controls from the 1940 cen-
sus (share of men employed in agriculture, share Black, and average years of education)
interacted with Postt .24 Finally, we assess whether war expenditures predict changes in
outcomes prior to WWII. We also use the same identification strategy to investigate effects
of expenditures during the war which we turn to now.


4     Empirical results on wages, occupations, and employment




    24 We do not assume that a given reported education implies an equivalent productivity across races.
This would be problematic given that segregated schools provided Blacks with lower-quality education;
see e.g. Boustan (2009) and Carruthers and Wanamaker (2017). Rather, we run the regressions separately
by race, making no assumptions about equivalence in schooling across races. We also conduct robustness
checks using a variety of other baseline controls interacted with post indicators, such as initial share of men
in skilled occupations. See Figure 5.

                                                      12
4.1    Effects of expenditures on labor markets during WWII
To investigate the effects of expenditures on the labor market during the war, we must
rely on non-Census data on reported labor market shortages and war-related employ-
ment that were collected by the War Manpower Commission. Column 2 of Table 1 shows
that metro areas with higher war expenditures also had more months of severe labor
shortages. A standard deviation increase in expenditures is predicted to result in 0.457
standard deviations increase in months of severe labor shortages, conditional on the pre-
dicted draft, which is also independently associated with labor shortages. We find that
greater expenditures and associated labor shortages increased the employment of Black
and white workers in the defense industry during the war.25 These results show that ex-
penditures led to labor shortages and to greater defense industry employment during the
war, as expected. But importantly the employment of Black workers, as well as that of
female workers, rose substantially with expenditures.


4.2    Short-term effect of expenditures 1940-1950
The large increase in expenditures that took place during the war decreased substantially
and immediately upon the war's conclusion. In 1945 military expenditures amounted
to 39 percent of GDP, falling to 20 percent in 1946, and by 1947, they were less than 10
percent.26 Thus, the direct impact of the war on employment ended prior to 1950. We now
investigate whether the spending had persistent impacts on the labor market outcomes
of Black and white workers after the war.
    Preliminary graphical evidence of the effects of war expenditures on changes in labor
market outcomes over time for white and Black workers is presented in Figure 4. Changes
in the share of skilled employment (Panel A) and the log of average wages (Panel B) are
presented for Black men and white men separately. The blue diamonds indicate the 1940-
1950 changes. Metro areas that received higher expenditures saw a larger, positive and
statistically significant increase in the share of Black workers employed in skilled occupa-
tions. The same is not true of white workers; the share employed in skilled occupations
grew at the same rate in areas with more and less war expenditures. We also show the
changes prior to the war from 1930-1940 (in dark circles). War expenditures were not as-
sociated with increases in the share employed in skilled occupations, for either Black or


  25 SeeAppendix Table A5.
  26 There was another increase in expenditures associated with the Korean War, but expenditures at their
highest only rose to 15 percent of GDP in 1953 and the Korean War began after the 1950 Census. See
Appendix Figure A.3.

                                                   13
white workers prior to the war. This provides preliminary evidence for the validity of our
identifying assumptions.
    Panel B shows that expenditures were also associated with large and statistically sig-
nificant increases in wages among Black workers from 1940 to 1950. White workers also
appeared to benefit from expenditures, though the association for them is weaker and sta-
tistically insignificant. There is no Census wage question prior to 1940 to examine wage
pre-trends.
    These preliminary results are confirmed in Table 2, where we present the results from
estimating equation (1). Regression analysis allows us to control for census-region-specific
time trends and weight by the relevant population of interest. We find positive and sta-
tistically significant effects of expenditures on the share employed in skilled occupations
and on wages for Black workers. These results hold even when we control for baseline
characteristics, including the predicted draft rate (column 2). The effects on white work-
ers in the first column are statistically insignificant.27 Moreover we can reject (at the 5
percent level) the null hypothesis that the effects are the same for Black and white work-
ers. Thus, war expenditures reduced the racial gap in wages and in the share of skilled
occupational employment in metro areas with more expenditures. The last panel of the
table shows that expenditures were not associated with significant changes in prime-age
employment rates for either Black or white workers.
    The magnitudes of these changes are economically meaningful. The share of Black
workers in skilled occupations increased by 4.5 percentage points more in metro areas
at the 90th percentile of expenditures compared with metro areas at the 10th percentile,
representing a 13.6% percent increase relative to the mean in 1940. Similarly, the wage
gains for Black workers were 9 log points, or 9.4 percent higher wages relative to the
mean in 1940, which is higher than the estimated effects of an additional year of school at
the time.28
    We conduct a series of robustness checks. Figure 5 presents the coefficient on WarExpr ×
Postt for a number of alternative specifications, separately for white and Black men. The
coefficients are not very sensitive to the inclusion of various controls including census-
division trends, basic controls, population, draft, and baseline outcomes. The choice of

   27 One interpretation is occupational segregation did not decrease and white men upgraded within the

skilled category. We show in Appendix Table A8 that war expenditures decreased occupational segregation
indexes - therefore occupational distributions did become more similar even at more granular levels. This
result is consistent with limited wage increases for white men. Appendix Table A9 shows Black increases
are concentrated in "Operatives" and "Craftsmen" occupational categories.
   28 OLS estimates of the returns to schooling at the time from for all men range from 5 percent (Goldin

and Katz, 2000) to 8 percent (Clay et al., 2012). Returns to schooling were typically lower for Black men in
this time period.

                                                    14
weights does not affect the estimated coefficients, though the standard errors are larger
if we do not use any weights. The results are not driven by the North or the South; they
hold within region. As was the case in the figures, expenditures did not predict changes
in outcomes from 1920 to 1930 or 1930 to 1940. And they did not affect women (the co-
efficients are positive but not precisely estimated). The results also hold within industry,
with significantly larger effects within the defense industry. The conclusions with respect
to the impact of war expenditures on the occupation and wages of Black and white work-
ers are unchanged in these alternative specifications.
    Our results cannot be solely explained by selective migration even though there was
substantial white and Black migration during this period related to WWII expenditures29 --
see Appendix Section D.3. Columns 2 and 4 of Table 3 show that the results are very sim-
ilar when we exclude potential interstate migrants.30 Thus the gains in wages and in the
share in skilled occupations do not appear to be the result of the migration of higher skill
Black workers to areas with higher war expenditures. We also show in Appendix Figure
A.4 that war expenditures are not associated with changes in the share of prime-age men
with high school degrees between 1940 and 1950.31


4.3    Long-term effects of Expenditures 1920-1970
We now investigate the effect of expenditures over the longer term. The effect of expen-
ditures on wages and the share in skilled occupations are positive and statistically signif-
icant if we estimate long differences from 1940 to 1970 instead of 1940 to 1950 differences
(Figure 5). Thus the effects of war expenditures persisted long after the war.
    To see this more clearly we estimate the following regression, after stacking the data
for all census years 1920 to 1970:

                       Yrt =              j WarExpr × It= j + r + t + Xrt  +  rt                           (2)
                               j =1940


where Yrt is either the log of average wages or the share in skilled occupations, WarExpr
are total war expenditure per capita for metro r and they are now interacted with a
dummy for each decade other than 1940, which serves as the reference category. To ac-

   29 Thisresult is consistent with Boustan (2009) and Derenoncourt (2019).
   30 We define a potential interstate migrant as any individual living in a different state than their state
of birth and who is not living with a child born in their current residence state before April 1, 1942. The
regression is at the individual level, clustered at metro-year level, with additional controls for age, marital
status, and whether born in the South.
   31 Prime-age men is defined as men ages 25-54 so most would not have been affected by the increase in

high school graduation associated with war expenditures that we show later.

                                                      15
count for changing metro definitions over time we use metro boundaries based on com-
muting zones in oder to maintain a uniform definition of labor market over time.32 All
other controls are defined as before and interacted with Census year indicators.
    The estimated coefficient for each decennial census year is presented in Figure 6. War
expenditures were negatively correlated with the share of employment in skilled occu-
pations among Black workers in 1920 and 1930 (though not statistically significantly so).
However, the effect of war expenditures on this outcome becomes positive and significant
in 1950 and 1960. It is still positive (though insignificant) in 1970 (Panel A). The effect on
wages (Panel B) is also positive and significant from 1950 through 1970 (recall that the
Census did not ask about wages before 1940). Expenditures have small and statistically
insignificant effects for white workers.
    In sum, the results suggest that war expenditures led to labor shortages during the
war and increased employment of Black workers during the war. Black workers appear
to have gained access to previously unavailable skilled occupations and their associated
higher wages, and these positions and their associated higher wages remained available
to Black workers for many decades after the war ended. These improvements for Black
workers were not associated with declines in outcomes for white workers.


4.4    Preliminary evidence on mechanisms
There are several potential mechanisms that might generate persistent effects. First, Black
men might have gained additional experience during the war. Second, the composition
of workers might have changed due to education increases and/or selective migration.
Third, expenditures could have shifted industry composition towards industries that al-
ready employed Black men in more highly skilled positions. Finally, the expenditures
could have directly reduced employment discrimination.
   We first investigate whether work experience could explain the results. To do so, we
focus on the outcomes of workers who were too young to have gained significant experi-
ence during the war. When looking at changes from 1940 to 1950, we focus on comparing
men ages 18-24 in 1940 to men ages 18-24 in 1950. When looking at changes from 1940-
1960, the age range is 18-34. In both cases the point estimates in Table 4 are very similar
to our main results, suggesting that our results cannot be explained only by additional
experience gained during the war. Rather, Black workers without war experience were
also able to access higher paying occupations after the war.

  32 Forexample, metro areas expanded due to "white flight" to suburban counties in the 1950s and 1960s.
See Boustan (2010) for evidence on the effect of the Great Migration on "white flight".

                                                  16
    Evidence also suggests that compositional changes, either due to migration, educa-
tion, or industry changes, cannot fully explain these results. We find similar results when
we exclude migrants, condition on education, or look only within industry - see Figure
5. Occupational upgrading also occured across education levels and ages (see Appendix
Figure A.5). Oaxaca-Blinder decompositions can also be informative about the extent to
which changes in the distribution of workers across regions, occupations and industries
affected the wage gap. These suggest that occupational upgrading--along with wage
compression across education groups and occupations--are the main sources of relative
wage increases for Black workers during this period.33
    Having ruled out that our findings can be explained solely by changes in the expe-
rience or composition of the worker or local industry, we turn to an examination of the
fourth explanation: declines in discrimination (either at the individual or institutional
level). To do this we develop a model to quantify the contribution of declines in dis-
crimination in generating our difference-in-difference empirical results while explicitly
accounting for these compositional changes. We can also use the model to quantify the
effect of war expenditures on aggregate patterns.
    We need the model to measure these effects because our current difference-in-differences
approach and Oaxaca decompositions above are not sufficient to separately quantify the
contribution of each potential mechanisms. Our difference-in-differences results do link
expenditures to outcomes, but they cannot separately identify the contribution of each po-
tential mechanism. Oaxaca decompositions are descriptive and do not link the changes
in the occupational distribution to the level of war expenditures. Moreover, difference-in-
differences estimates net out various "common effects" and thus cannot speak to aggre-
gate changes. Finally, in the presence of spillovers across space via trade and migration
(explicitly incorporated in our theory), the DD estimates cannot be used directly to in-
fer unbiased aggregate causal effects due to violations of the stable unit treatment value
assumption (SUTVA). As shown in Appendix D.3, there was significant migration in the
1940s that was related to war expenditures. Hence, our DD results should be interpreted
as identifying the differential effects on metro areas receiving more relative to less war
expenditure, but not the aggregate effect of war expenditure on labor market outcomes.
Therefore, for all of these reasons we need to develop a model for quantification.




  33 These   are presented in Appendix C.3. The results are consistent with those reported in Margo (1995).

                                                     17
5     Quantification
In this section, we use a general equilibrium model for three purposes. First, we quantify
the importance of a particular mechanism--a reduction in discrimination--in generating
our difference-in-difference empirical results above. Second, we quantify the total im-
pact of government wartime spending on aggregate labor market outcomes for Black and
white workers. Finally, we quantify the extent to which these aggregate effects of wartime
spending are driven by reductions in discrimination.


5.1    Model
In this section, we provide a model in which the allocation of labor groups across regions,
the allocation of labor groups within regions across industries and occupations, and the
average wages of labor groups across regions is endogenous.
    At time t there is a continuum of workers indexed by z  Zt , each of whom inelasti-
cally supplies one unit of labor.34 Workers are exogenously divided into a finite number
of labor groups, indexed by g. The set of workers in group g is given by Z gt  Zt , which
has mass Ngt . Workers choose in which region (indexed by r) to live and in which in-
dustry (indexed by i) and occupation (indexed by o) to work in order to maximize utility.
Labor is the only factor of production. All markets are perfectly competitive and all fac-
tors are freely mobile across occupations, industries, and regions. We index by Zrgt and
Zriogt the endogenous sets of workers in group g who choose to live in region r and who
choose to live in region r and work in industry-occupation io at time t.
Production. Final good output is produced locally and is not traded, so that its consump-
tion equals its production, both of which are denoted by Crt . This final good is produced
combining the services of industries according to a Cobb Douglas production function

                                                     Crit
                                                        iµ
                                            Crt =                                                   (3)
                                                     i


where Crit  0 is region r's consumption of industry i, µi  0, and i µi = 1.35 Con-
sumption of industry i in region r is itself an aggregation across consumption of industry

   34 Given our reduced-form evidence showing no clear impact of wartime spending on employment

shares, we abstract from endogenous labor supply. Incorporating endogenous labor supply will leave our
baseline results largely unchanged given well-identified estimates of the labor-supply elasticity.
   35 During the war, most output of war industries is purchased by the government. We use the model

to quantify the impact of government expenditures between 1940 and 1950, years in which government
national defense expenditure shares were relatively low at 2.7% and 7.6% of GDP in 1940 and 1950 respec-
tively. Expenditures had peaked at 43.3% of GDP in 1944.

                                                  18
i purchased from all regions and is given by

                                                                  / (  -1)
                                             1/ (-1)/
                              Crit =        µ jit Cjrit                                     (4)
                                        j


where Cjrit is consumption of industry i in region r purchased from region j, µ jit  0 is a
demand shifter for industry i output produced in region j, and   0 is the elasticity of
substitution across regions (which is common across industries and time).
   Output of industry i in region r is given by

                                                                  / (  -1)
                                             1/ ( -1)/
                              Yrit =        µriot Yriot                                     (5)
                                       o


where Yriot is the output of occupation o used in the production of industry i in region r at
time t, µriot  0 is a demand shifter for this occupation output, and   0 is the elasticity
of substitution across occupations (which is common across industries and time). Occu-
pation o output supplied in industry i is the sum of efficiency units, Lriogt , provided by all
groups employed therein
                                      Yriot =  Lriogt .                                     (6)
                                                  g

   A worker z  Zrgt supplies Triogt  ziot efficiency units of labor if employed in industry-
occupation pair io in region r at time t, so that

                                 Lriogt =             Triogt  ziot dz,                      (7)
                                             Zriogt


The parameter Triogt is the systematic component of productivity (combined with dis-
crimination, as described in Section 5.2), common across all z  Zroigt , whereas  ziot is the
idiosyncratic component of productivity. Each worker is associated with a vector of  ziot ,
one for each io pair, allowing workers within Zrgt to vary in their relative productivities
across io pairs. We assume that each  ziot is drawn independently from a Fréchet distri-
bution with cumulative distribution function G () = exp -- , where a higher value
of  > 1 implies lower within-worker dispersion of efficiency units across io pairs.
Worker locations. We take as given the supply of worker types at the aggregate level and
model their allocation across space. We let rgtN denote the share of workers in group g

living in r. We assume that the utility of a worker z living in region r is the product of
amenities and the expected real wage from living there. Preferences for amenities from
residing in region r are themselves given by the product of a systematic component, Urgt ,

                                                19
and an idiosyncratic preference shock, Uzr , which is distributed Fréchet with shape pa-
rameter  > 1. We assume that each worker first draws her preference shocks across
regions and chooses her region, and then draws her productivity shocks across industry-
occupation pairs and chooses her industry-occupation.
Market clearing and trade. Goods markets, Yrit =  j Cjrit , and labor markets, Nrgt =
io |Zriogt | and Ngt = r Nrgt , clear. We assume that occupation output and final goods
are not traded. We assume that industrial output is traded freely across regions and that
trade is balanced.
Mapping theory to data. We map industries in the model, i, to two aggregate industries
in the data: defense and non-defense. Defense industries in the data are those that re-
ceived substantial investment/purchases from the government during the wartime. They
are not exclusively defense industries in non-war times, but rather manufacturing, min-
ing, transportation, and government. They make up 42% and 49% percent of total metro
employment in 1940 and 1950. We map occupations in the model, o, to two aggregate
occupations in the data: skilled and unskilled. The skilled occupation in the model ag-
gregates across the same set of disaggregated occupations as the skilled occupations in
our empirical exercises. We map labor groups in the model, g, to four labor groups in the
data defined by the intersection of two education levels (at least some high school and
no high school)36 and two races (Black workers and those who are not Black, referred to
as "whites"). We map regions in the model, r, to the 147 metropolitan areas used in our
empirical exercises. We map time periods in the model, t, to the years 1940 and 1950.
Calibration. While we estimate the key novel aspects of our theory (the impact of govern-
ment spending), we calibrate its four structural elasticities:  , ,  , and . The parameter
 determines the elasticity of labor supply across io pairs within a region to changes in
wages per efficiency unit. We set  = 2, in line with estimates in Burstein et al. (2020),
Galle et al. (2018), and Hsieh et al. (2019).37 The parameter  determines the elasticity of
population across regions to changes in real wages. We set  = 1.5, in line with a large
literature estimating geographic labor mobility; see e.g. the review in Fajgelbaum et al.
(2019). The parameter  determines the trade elasticity across regions. We set  = 5, in line

   36 The majority of Black workers and many white workers did not have any high school education in

1940. We do not assume that a given reported education implies an equivalent productivity across races.
This would be problematic given that segregated schools provided Blacks with lower-quality education;
see e.g. Boustan (2009) and Carruthers and Wanamaker (2017).
   37 Burstein et al. (2020) and Galle et al. (2018) estimate the equivalent of our parameter  leveraging

exogenous variation in labor demand across occupations (Burstein et al., 2020) and industries (Galle et al.,
2018) using exposure to computerization and the China shock, respectively. Hsieh et al. (2019) estimate the
equivalent of our parameter  to match the dispersion of wages.

                                                    20
with a large literature both in international and intra-national trade; see e.g. the review
in Head and Mayer (2014). Finally, the parameter  determines the elasticity of substitu-
tion between the skilled and unskilled occupation within each industry. We set  = 1.7,
which allows us to match closely our difference-in-difference empirical results on wages
and occupation upgrading by race in regions receiving more relative to less government
spending when feeding in all estimated shocks; see Panel C in Table 6.38 Importantly, this
approach to calibrating  does not impose that the anti-discriminatory impact of spend-
ing is an important force in generating our difference-in-difference empirical results, since
in the calibration of  we feed in all estimated shocks.


5.2    Estimation (of anti-discriminatory impacts)
In this section we specify how government wartime spending may affect productivities,
discrimination, and amenities after the spending itself has ended and describe our struc-
tural estimation of the anti-discriminatory impacts of government spending.
    Government spending may potentially affect each region's productivity in each occu-
pation within defense in a common way for both Black and white workers. For instance,
a substantial share of government spending was allocated to investment in new and ex-
isting plants in the defense industry; such investment raises productivity not only during
the war, but afterwards. While these shocks are common for Black and white workers,
they can have differential effects across races because of the different initial compositions
of Black and white workers across regions and across industries and occupations within
regions. We refer to these impacts of government spending as compositional.39
    Government spending may also have differential effects across races on the amenity
values of regions (e.g., a region receiving more money may become relatively more at-
tractive to Black individuals, conditional on the wages of Black and white workers, per-
haps because discrimination has been reduced there) and on discrimination within each
industry-occupation pair across regions (e.g., a region receiving more money may experi-
ence a reduction in discrimination in defense and a disproportionate reduction within the
skilled occupation within defense). We refer to these impacts of government spending as
anti-discriminatory.40


  38 For  each value of  , we estimate all government spending shocks as a function of this choice. We
iterate over values of  until the model and data match well. See the Quantitative Appendix, Section E.3.2,
for details.
    39 We describe our estimation of the compositional impacts in the Quantitative Appendix.
    40 Here, we do not attempt to explain why government spending may have been anti-discriminatory; but

we discuss additional historical evidence on this issue in Section 7.

                                                   21
Parameterization. As in Hsieh et al. (2019), we model the impact of labor-market discrim-
ination on occupation allocations and wages as a "wedge" between wages and marginal
products. This wedge reduces the perceived benefit to firms of employing Black workers;
it is a reduced-form proxy consistent with a range of theoretical formulations of discrim-
ination. Extending Hsieh et al. (2019) in order to leverage the exogenous variation at the
heart of our difference-in-difference estimation in Sections 3 and 4, we allow this wedge
to be specific to occupation, industry, and region.
     Denote by Gr government wartime expenditure per capita in region r. Focusing on the
years 1940 and 1950, we express (without loss of generality) the structural productivity,
net of the discriminatory wedge, of group g in region r and industry-occupation io at time
t as41
                        T       T
            ln Triogt = riog + iogt + Gr It Ii  T    T       T        T           T
                                                1 +  2 Io +  3 I g +  4 Io I g +  riogt (8)

and the amenity value for group g of living in region r at time t as

                                         U
                               ln Urgt = rg + Gr It [ U   U          U
                                                      1 +  2 I g ] +  rgt                              (9)

The sum of riog  T ,  T , and  T
                       iogt     riogt in (8) represents the productivity level (net of discrimina-
tion) of group g in region r in industry-occupation io at time t in the absence of govern-
ment wartime spending; riog    T is a parameter that allows net productivity to be systemati-

cally higher in some riog's than others across time; and iogt     T is a parameter that allows for

the net productivity of group g in io to vary over time at the national level. The sum of rg      U

and U  rgt in (9) represent the amenity value of region r for group g at time t in the absence
of government wartime spending, where rg             U is a parameter that allows group-specific

amenities to be systematically higher in some regions than others.
     In (8) and (9), the variables It , Ii , Io , and Ig are, respectively, indicator functions that
equal one if the year is 1950 (It ), the industry is defense (Ii ), the occupation is skilled
(Io ), or the group (which is defined both by education and race) is Black (Ig ). In (8),  T       3
captures the (potentially) anti-discriminatory impact of Gr on Black workers relative to
white workers in the unskilled occupation within the defense industry. If  T          3 > 0, then Gr
reduces racial discrimination in the unskilled occupation within the defense industry.42
T        T
  3 +  4 captures the (potentially) anti-discriminatory impact of Gr on Black workers rela-


  41 A   high value of Triogt represents a combination of a high productivity and/or a low discriminatory
wedge of group g in region r at time t within industry-occupation io. In what follows, we often refer to
Triogt as a "net productivity" for brevity.
   42 The parameter  T determines the impact of G on the net productivity of whites in the unskilled oc-
                       1                              r
cupation in the defense industry and  T          T
                                            1 +  3 determines the impact of Gr on the productivity of Black
workers in the unskilled occupation in the defense industry.

                                                    22
tive to white workers in the skilled occupation within the defense industry. If  T      T
                                                                                  3 +  4 > 0,
then Gr reduces racial discrimination in the skilled occupation within the defense indus-
try; and if  T
             4 > 0, then Gr reduces racial discrimination by more in the skilled occupation
than in the unskilled occupation within the defense industry.43
    In equation (9), U 2 captures the (potentially) anti-discriminatory impact of Gr on Blacks
relative to whites in amenity values. If U      2 > 0, then Black amenity values rise relative
to white amenity values in regions receiving a higher value of Gr .44 While changes in
amenity values play little role in our quantitative analysis, in theory we want to allow for
the possibility that Blacks would value reductions in discrimination over and above the
wage implications of such reductions. In practice, this is what we find in our estimation.
    In summary,  T       T         U
                   3 ,  4 , and  2 parameterize the (potentially) anti-discriminatory effects
of government wartime spending per capita. We next turn to identifying these parame-
ters. We describe the identification of the compositional effects of government wartime
spending (the parameters  T          T      U
                               1 ,  2 , and  1 ) in the Quantitative Appendix.

Identification. In equilibrium, we obtain a simple relationship between government
wartime spending per capita, Gr , and the share of group g's labor in industry-occupation
                                         L
io within region r at time t, denoted by riogt ; see the Quantitative Appendix for all deriva-
tions. Together with our parametrization above, group g's allocation across io pairs within
region r at time t can be expressed as

              L
           ln riogt = rgt + riot + riog + iogt +  3 Gr It Ii Ig +  4 Gr It Ii Ig Io + riogt              (10)

where the  terms are fixed effects and the reduced-form parameters map to structural
parameters as follows:  3   T               T              T
                                3 ,  4   4 , and  riogt   riogt (recall that  is the param-
eter governing the distribution of worker productivity across industry-occupation pairs,
which in equilibrium determines the labor supply elasticity across io pairs within a re-
gion). To understand the logic behind identification, it is useful to re-express the fixed
effect regression in equation (10) in differences. Consider two labor groups (one Black,
g , and one white, g) and two regions (one receiving more wartime spending, r , than an-




   43 The sum  T      T
                 1 +  2 determines the impact of Gr on the productivity of whites in the skilled occupation in
the defense industry and  T       T    T    T
                             1 +  2 +  3 +  4 determines the impact of Gr on the net productivity of Blacks
in the skilled occupation in the defense industry.
    44 The parameter U determines the impact of G on the amenity value of living in region r for whites
                        1                            r
and U        U
        1 +  2 determines the impact of Gr on the amenity value of living in region r for Blacks.


                                                     23
other, r). Focusing on the defense industry, i, and the unskilled occupation, o, (10) implies

       L
       r          L
                  riog              L
                                    r            L
                                                 riogt
         iog t         t              iogt
  ln   L          L
                            - ln     L           L
                                                           =  3 ( Gr - Gr )+
       r iog t    riog t             r iogt      riogt
                  (r iog t - r iog t ) - (riog t - riog t ) - [(r iogt - r iogt ) - (riogt - riogt )]

Accordingly, if we observe greater Black-compared-to-white reallocation between 1940
and 1950 towards the unskilled occupation in the defense industry precisely in regions
receiving more wartime spending (a positive left-hand-side of the previous expression),
we will identify a positive  3 (under an identification assumption described below). Iden-
tification of  4 follows similar logic: within the skilled occupation, o , the right-hand-side
of the previous expression would include (  3 +  4 )( Gr - Gr ).
     Hence, differential changes between 1940 and 1950 in allocations of Black and white
workers across io pairs across regions receiving different amounts of government wartime
spending per capita identify  3 and  4 . In the model, the assumption allowing us to
identify  3 and  4 estimating (10) using OLS is that, conditional on region-group, region-
industry-occupation-time, and industry-occupation-labor-group-time fixed effects, changes
in productivities of Black workers relative to white workers in region-industry-occupation
triplets that would have occurred in the absence of government spending are uncorrelated with
government spending. We interpret these parameters as reductions in discrimination--as
opposed to changes in relative productivities--by assuming that government spending
does not raise the primitive productivities of Black workers relative to white workers in
industry-occupation pairs in regions receiving more government spending.
     One threat to identification that is not captured by the model would be if the unob-
served characteristics of Black workers improved relative to white workers in regions
receiving more spending. However, we observe no similar pattern of Black occupational
upgrading in non-defense industries, which suggests that migration did not affect the
relative abilities (conditional on education) of Black and white workers across regions.
Moreover, we show that the same pattern of reallocation of Black workers towards skilled
occupations occurs within non-migrants in Figure 5 and Table 3, which suggests that se-
lective migration is not driving our results. Third, Appendix Figure A.4 shows that the
average share of prime-age men who have a high school degree did not change between
1940 and 1950 as a result of government spending, which provides direct evidence that
an important dimension of unobservable characteristics (in the model) did not change.
     Similarly, in equilibrium we obtain a simple relationship between government wartime
spending per capita, Gr , and the share of group g living in region r at time t, denoted by


                                                24
  N . Together with our parametrization above, the allocation of group g to region r at
rgt
time t can be expressed as

                 1    N
                   ln rgt - ln Wagergt = rg + gt + rt + U             U
                                                        2 Gr It I g +  rgt                (11)
                 

where Wagergt is the average wage of workers in group g in region r at time t and  is the
elasticity of migration to real wages. The right-hand-side of (11) represents the amenity
value for group g of living in region r at time t (plus a constant across regions), which
must be high in region r at time t if the share of group g living in region r at time t is high
relative to the wage the group receives there, conditional on the labor supply elasticity
across regions, , which is the left-hand-side of (11). For instance, we would interpret an
increase in the share of more-educated Blacks living in region r between 1940 and 1950
(relative to what would be predicted by the change in their wages) as an increase in the
amenity value of this group living in region r over time.
    Similarly, differential changes between 1940 and 1950 in allocations of Black and white
workers across regions receiving different amounts of government wartime spending (rel-
ative to that predicted by the observed changes in wages) identify the anti-discriminatory
effects of government spending on amenities. The identification assumption--estimating
(11) using OLS--is that, conditional on region-labor group and labor group-time fixed ef-
fects, the differential changes in amenities of Blacks relative to whites in regions receiving
more relative to less government wartime spending per capita that would have occurred in
the absence of government spending (the change across time in U   rgt for Black workers minus
its value for white workers in a given region) are uncorrelated with government spend-
ing.
Estimation results. Table 5 presents results of estimating (10) in columns 1 and 2, where
column 1 uses employment and column 2 uses labor payments to measure labor alloca-
                         L
tions within a region, riogt . Column 1 serves as our baseline, although results are largely
unchanged across columns. In column 1, we find no evidence that greater government ex-
penditure per capita decreases discrimination in the unskilled occupation in the defense
industry: the coefficient  3 = 0.023 is not significantly different from zero. The point
estimate--together with  = 2--yields the value of the structural parameter of interest
T 3 =  3 /   0.012. This point estimate implies that a metropolitan area, r , at the 90th
percentile of government expenditure per capita (Gr  3.155) experiences an increase
of approximately 3.5 percent ( 100 × 0.012 × (3.155 - 0.198)) in the net productivity of
Black workers relative to white workers in the unskilled occupation within the defense
industry, relative to a metropolitan area, r, at the 10th percentile (Gr = 0.198) .

                                              25
   On the other hand, we find statistically significant evidence that greater government
expenditure per capita reduces racial discrimination within the skilled occupation in the
defense industry. This increase is economically large. The point estimate of coefficient
 4 --together with  = 2--yields  T  4 =  4 /   0.064. This point estimate implies that a
metropolitan area at the 90th percentile of government expenditure per capita experiences
an increase of approximately 22.4 percent ( 100 × 0.064 × (3.155 - 0.198) + 3.5) in the
net productivity of Blacks relative to whites within the skilled occupation in the defense
industry (compared to within the unskilled occupation), relative to a metropolitan area at
the 10th percentile.
   Column 7 presents the results of estimating (11), which is estimated under our baseline
assumption that  = 1.5. We find statistically significant evidence that greater wartime
expenditure raises the amenity value of a metropolitan area relatively more for Black
than white workers. The coefficient U  2  0.07 implies that a metropolitan area at the 90th
percentile of exposure experiences an increase in its amenity value for Blacks relative to
whites of approximately 21 percent ( 100 × 0.07 × (3.155 - 0.198)). Translating this into
a more readily understandable metric, this induces the same change in allocations across
these two metropolitan areas that would be induced by an increase in Black wages of 21
percent in the more exposed metropolitan area.
   In summary, we find that government spending during World War II had substantial
anti-discriminatory effects. Regions receiving greater government expenditure per capita
experience a substantial reduction in racial discrimination in the labor market, although
only narrowly in skilled occupations within defense industries. Similarly, regions receiv-
ing greater government expenditure per capita become more attractive places for Blacks
workers to live in (relative to white workers), conditional on the wages that Black and
white workers receive.45


5.3    Discrimination and our difference-in-difference results
To what extent can these reductions in discrimination explain our difference-in-difference
results? Our theoretical model allows us to disentangle the quantitative effects of the re-
duction in discrimination induced by government spending. To do so, we calibrate our
model to match the 1940 data; see the Quantitative Appendix for details on the initial
model calibration. We then feed into this model only the anti-discriminatory shocks iden-
tified in Section 5.2.

  45 Theadditional columns of Table 5 present estimation results for the compositional impacts of govern-
ment spending.

                                                   26
    Specifically, starting from the 1940 calibration; we raise the log net productivity of
Blacks in region r, with government wartime spending per capita of Gr , by  T     3 Gr in the
                                                               T     T
unskilled occupation within the defense industry and by (  3 +  4 ) Gr in the skilled occu-
pation in the defense industry. We also increase the amenity value of Black workers by
U 2 Gr ; and we hold all other parameters fixed.
                                                  46

    Then we solve for the new equilibrium of the model, which entails allowing all prices
and wages to respond endogenously, and allowing all agents to reallocate optimally
across metropolitan areas and within metropolitan areas across industry-occupation pairs.47
We then estimate regressions of the form in (1) in Section 3.3 using actual data and, sepa-
rately, using model-generated data. The comparison between the two set of results deter-
mines the extent to which changes in discrimination alone explain the original difference-
in-difference results.
    Table 6 displays our results. The outcomes of interest are the share in skilled occupa-
tions (the skilled occupation in the model) and the ln average wage of each race in each
metropolitan area. As in Table 2, we report the coefficient on war expenditure per capita
times a 1950 indicator variable, which in the notation of the model above is the coefficient
on Gr It . Panel A reports the results in the actual data using the more demanding specifi-
cations in Table 2. Panel B reports the counterfactual impact in model-generated data of
the anti-discriminatory effects of government spending.
    According to column 1 of Panels A and B, the anti-discriminatory effects of govern-
ment spending fully account for the greater increase in the share of Black workers allo-
cated to skilled occupations within regions receiving more wartime spending (comparing
0.018 in Panel B to 0.015 in Panel A). According to column 3, the anti-discriminatory ef-
fects of government spending account for about half (0.015 in Panel B and 0.031 in Panel
A) of the greater percent increase in the average wage of Black workers within regions
receiving more wartime spending.48
    We finally turn to differential outcomes across metropolitan areas for whites. Accord-
  46 Whereas we identified net productivity and amenity changes for Black workers relative to white work-

ers, when we only feed in the anti-discriminatory impacts of wartime spending we hold white productivity
and amenity values fixed.
   47 Details of the equations that determine the new equilibrium are provided in the Quantitative Ap-

pendix.
   48 As previously stated, our estimation and calibration do not impose that these anti-discriminatory

shocks alone explain any (let alone all) of the impact of government spending across metropolitan areas.
The result on wages follows from the full general equilibrium of the model, as observed wage changes are
not targeted in our calibration or estimation. The result on occupation upgrading follows from the fact that
in the data all occupation upgrading for Black workers in more exposed metros occurred within defense
industries and from the result in the model that changes in industry and occupation productivity do not
generate substantial occupation upgrading for either white or Black workers (a result that is not hardwired
into the calibration or estimation).

                                                    27
ing to column 2 of Panels A and B, both in the data and the model we see no economically
significant effects of government spending on the share of whites in skilled occupations
within a region receiving more wartime spending. According to column 4 of Panels A
and B, we see no economically or statistically significant change in white wages in more
relative to less exposed metropolitan areas.
    In summary, these results lead us to conclude that the anti-discriminatory effects of
wartime spending are the primary channel through which wartime spending shapes dif-
ferential Black outcomes across metropolitan areas in the 1940s. This mechanism is not
an important driver of differential white outcomes across metropolitan areas (and, as we
show below, in the aggregate). That is, reducing racial discrimination does not appear
to reduce white real wages. Given a reasonable labor demand system, an increase in the
productivity of one labor group need not reduce the real wage of another. Our results
suggest that, on average, white and Black workers were complements in production in
spite of being perfect substitutes within each job.49


5.4    Aggregate results
In this section we use the model to quantify the total impact of government wartime
spending on aggregate patterns showing Black workers catching up to white workers--
in terms of wages and the share of employment in skilled occupations--and the extent
to which these aggregate effects of wartime spending are driven by reductions in dis-
crimination. To do this we calibrate our model to match 1940 data and feed into our
model the relevant changes in net productivities and amenities. When quantifying the
aggregate effects of wartime spending, we feed into our model both compositional and
anti-discriminatory changes; when quantifying the extent to which these aggregate ef-
fects are driven by a reduction in discrimination caused by wartime spending, we instead
feed in only the components of these changes that are anti-discriminatory.
    Upon feeding in these shocks, we solve the model for the 1950 equilibrium, holding
all other parameters at their 1940 levels. Given the 1950 equilibrium, we then aggregate
results across all metropolitan areas to construct the aggregate effects of wartime spend-
ing (and, separately, the aggregate effects of the anti-discriminatory impacts of wartime
spending) on the allocations to skilled occupations and the wages of Black and white
workers.
    Table 7 reports our results. The first column of Table 7 reports the change in the share
  49 These results are well known in the context of Ricardian models of international trade--see e.g. Dorn-
busch et al. (1977) and Wilson (1980)--which are mathematically equivalent to Roy models of the labor
market.

                                                    28
of Blacks relative to whites in skilled occupations and the percent (ln) change in the wage
of Blacks relative to whites in the actual data between 1940 and 1950 aggregated across the
147 metropolitan areas. The second column reports the changes in these outcomes caused
by wartime expenditure according to the model. Wartime spending causes a 2.1 percent-
age point decline in the difference between the share of whites and Blacks employed in
skilled jobs between 1940 and 1950, which is about a quarter (reported in column 3) of
the total decline of 8.1 percentage points in the data. Wartime spending causes a 2.9%
decline in the relative wage of whites to Blacks between 1940 and 1950, which is about
a seventh (reported in column 3) of the total decline of 21.7% in the data. The third col-
umn reports the changes in these outcomes caused by the anti-discriminatory impacts
of wartime expenditure. Almost all of the aggregate effects of wartime spending on the
Black-white wage and skilled-employment gaps are caused by the anti-discriminatory
effects of wartime spending.


6     Intergenerational effects on human capital

6.1   Effects of war expenditures on school attendance, high school com-
      pletion
One might expect that persistent improvements in the labor market for Black workers,
due in part to decreases in discrimination, might also affect the human capital of the
next generation for a number of reasons. First, the incomes of Black families in affected
metropolitan areas rose. Second, more Black workers accessed skilled occupations, which
possibly increased the returns to schooling. Third, higher wages could increase the oppor-
tunity cost of schooling. Fourth, given that discrimination declined there might have been
broader changes in attitudes towards Black families in the cities that received more war
funds, resulting in declines in residential segregation which would affect access to school-
ing. Finally, greater incomes could have led to greater investments in public schooling in
Black neighborhoods.
   To investigate whether WWII expenditures affected the educational attainment of the
next generation, we first estimate the effects of war expenditures on school enrollment
among 16-18 year olds across metropolitan areas between 1940 and 1950. We estimate
our main DD equation (1), but with school attendance as the outcome of interest and at
the individual level (with errors clustered at the metro-year level). We focus on 16-18 year
old children because almost all children in metropolitan areas, including Black children,
report being enrolled in school at age 15 in 1940.

                                            29
   We find that the school attendance of Black boys increased more in areas with greater
war contract expenditures (Table 7), as evidenced by the positive and statistically signifi-
cant coefficient on WarExpm × Postt for Black boys. The results are positive for Black girls
though about half the size and not statistically significant. The results also hold if we ex-
clude the South (Panel B) which we do because of existing evidence showing significant
improvements in the quality of schools serving Black children (Card and Krueger, 1992)
during this period. There is no effect on white boys or girls in any specification.50
   However, this analysis suffers two limitations. The first is that they pertain to only the
few cohorts included and the second is that we are limited by the small sample in 1950
since only sample-line persons were asked about schooling. Thus, we present results from
an alternative approach that uses completed schooling reported in the 1960 census, where
we have a 5% sample in which all individuals were asked about years of education. We
then estimate the following equation,

Yirgc =               j WarExpr × Ic= j × Ig= Black +              j WarExpr × Ic= j + rg + tg + Xirgc  +  irgc
           j =1938                                      j =1938
                                                                                         (12)
where Yirgc is a dummy equal to one if individual i of race g and graduation cohort c living
in metropolitan area r graduated from high school.51 WWII expenditures are interacted
with a dummy for Black race and with cohort dummies. A cohort is defined as a three
year group, based on expected high school graduation year. Individuals graduating high
school during 1938-1940 serve as the excluded baseline category. We restrict the sample to
non-Southern metropolitan areas and drop individuals who have moved between states
in the previous five years. We estimate this regression separately by gender and plot the
estimated coefficients in Figure 7. Note that the coefficients for WarExpr × Ic= j × Ig= Black
identifies the impact of war expenditures on Black children relative to white children.
There seems to be a clear increase in the share of Black boys graduating high school and
a similar increase for Black girls, albeit noisier.52
    We conclude that war expenditures are associated with increases in the high school

   50 In Appendix Table A13 we repeat this exercise for 1940 to 1960 and also find positive impacts on the
school attendence of Black boys. As a falsification exercise, we repeat the analysis for 1930 to 1940 and find
no effects (as expected) in Appendix Table A14.
    51 The main concern with these estimates is migration. There are two concerns: first, individuals who

migrated to a metropolitan area after completing school might be counted as more (or less) treated than
they actually were, which would attenuate estimates. Secondly, war expenditures could have differentially
attracted more educated migrants for younger cohorts. We include a dummy for whether an individual
was born in the South and interact with race dummies as well as a full set of cohort indicators.
    52 Appendix Figure A.7 uses the 1940 Census to look at pre-trends across cohorts prior to WWII and finds

little evidence of pre-trends for Black boys though again finds noisier results for Black girls.

                                                        30
graduate rates of Black children relative to white children. The magnitude of the coeffi-
cients suggests the effects are not trivial with the mean coefficient on the interaction term
for boys (girls) being 2.1% (1.6%). The high school graduation rate for Black boys (girls)
in metropolitan areas at the 90th percentile of expenditures is 6.3 (4.8) percentage points
higher than in metropolitan areas at the 10th percentile of expenditures.
    Importantly, the results show that war expenditures were not associated with greater
high school graduation rates for the Black or white cohorts that graduated before 1940,
as expected. The effects we find are only for cohorts graduating after 1941. In contrast to
the estimated effects for Black boys, higher war expenditures are associated with lower
high school graduation rates during WWII for white boys.53 The estimates for white boys
remain negative but become statistically insignificant after 1947. The results for Black and
white girls (shown in Panel B) are similar.


6.2     Mechanisms for increases in schooling
We now investigate why WWII expenditures led to increases in schooling among Black
children. First, we investigate whether war expenditures affected the returns to school.
We estimate standard Mincerian wage equations where we interact whether an individ-
ual completed at least some high school with WarExpm × Postt .54 Table 9 shows this triple
difference is statistically insignificant. Interestingly, we find similar results for the effect
on returns to education in our model data. It appears war expenditures did not increase
returns to schooling. This is consistent with the fact that returns to school declined during
the "Great Compression" period (Goldin and Katz, 1992) and not because of changing se-
lection into schooling (Bishop, 1989). But this means that higher returns to school cannot
explain increased investment in school.
    Next, we look at school expenditures. The fact that white children are not positively
affected suggested there were no major changes in education policy or expenditures in
cities with greater expenditures. We verify this by estimating equation (1), but replac-
ing the outcome with the log of education expenses per capita. The results in Table 10

   53 We verified that high school enrollment and graduation rates decreased nationally during WWII using

data provided by Claudia Goldin which comes from the Biennial Reports of the Commissioner of Educa-
tion.
   54 Specifically we estimate the following equation:


Yirt =  1 Eirt +  3 Eirt × Postt +  2 Expr × Postt +  4 Eirt × Expr +  5 Eirt × Expr × Postt + Postt + r + Xirt  +  irt

where Eirt is an indicator for whether the individual completed at least some high school. We use whether
the individual completed at least some high school so we can directly compare with model predictions.
Appendix Table A15 repeats this analysis using years of education and finds similar results.

                                                        31
show there were no significant increases in education expenditures in cities with more
war expenditures.55
    To investigate if there were changes in residential segregation, we look at whether
war expenditues affected two indices of segregation: the dissimilarity index and the iso-
lation index from Cutler et al. (1999).56 We observe no declines in residential segregation
associated with war expenditures using either one, as shown in Table 10.
    Overall, the most plausible mechanism appears to be the change in family income.
Previous work has shown that parental income remains the most important predictor
of children's educational achievement, even more so than parental education (Reardon,
2011). Recent analysis of the the strong association between racial segregation and racial
achievement gaps concludes that the gap is completely accounted for by racial differences
in school poverty (Reardon et al., 2019). This is true even after years of increasing public
expenditures on schools that serve lower income students (Lafotune et al., 2018).
    Given this, it should not be surprising that declines in workplace discrimination that
led to substantial increases in the earned income of Black families would result in in-
creases in the educational achievement of their children. A move from the 10th to the
90th percentile of war expenditures is associated with an absolute (not relative to whites)
increase in wages of 9.4% and an absolute (not relative to whites) increase in the share of
Black boys graduating high school of 3.6%.57 If we assume all of the increases in school-
ing are due to greater incomes then this implies an elasticity of 1.0 (for Black girls 0.5).
This is broadly consistent with analysis based on more contemporary data of an outsized
role of parental income in explaining educational outcomes of children.58




   55 Unfortunately  there is no data at the sub-city level that would allow us to investigate whether expen-
ditures or quality of school increase in Black neighborhoods relative to white.
   56 The index of dissimilarity is defined for metropolitan area r as Dissim = 1 N | Black irt - Whiteirt |
                                                                                rt    2 i =1 Blackrt   Whitert
                                                                               Black irt Black irt    Blackrt
                                                                            iN
                                                                             =1Blackrt Popirt - Poprt
where i is a residential area. The isolation index is defined as Isolrt =         Black            Black        .
                                                                             min( Pop rt ,1)- Pop rt
                                                                                       irt             rt
   57 The share of Black boys graduating high school for the 1942-1959 cohorts was 38.6%, excluding the

South. For Black girls it is 44.8%.
   58 Existing work based on more recent data has generated estimates of parental income elasticities with

respect to years of completed schooling of their children (not high school completion) that range from 3 to
80 percent (Taubman, 1989). Our estimates are on the higher end which may be due to (1) the extremely
low levels of schooling at this time among Black families, (2) the different definition of the outcome (high
school completion) or (3) because the effect of aggregate income shocks might differ from family-specific
income shocks (for example, by generating peer effects).

                                                      32
7      Why did discrimination decline?
In this paper we document that WWII expenditures account for substantial and persistent
improvements in the absolute and relative labor market outcomes of Black workers dur-
ing the 1940s and further show that these expenditures also led to increases in the human
capital formation of the next generation of Black workers. Our results point strongly to
the importance of declines in discrimination. This is consistent with the changing percep-
tions of Black men during this period. Data from a 1943 survey of Black soldiers reveals
increasing optimism regarding the probability they would be able to find a high quality
job and be treated better by white people compared to before the war.59
    Why did discrimination decline? The fact that the effect was limited in non-defense
industries and persisted after the war suggests two likely mechanisms. First, employ-
ers were incorrectly statistically discriminating against Black workers but they updated
their expectations after observing Black workers in skilled occupations during the war.
Because productivity is occupation- and industry-specific, expectations and behaviors
changed only in affected industries but not elsewhere. Second, it is also possible that
"institutional discrimination" declined in affected industries; see e.g. Small and Pager
(2020). It is likely the war affected the broad set of practices that firms adopted, which
would mostly result in changes in how they promoted workers into skilled occupations.
Of course these two explanations are not mutually exclusive. Note that continued gov-
ernment intervention cannot explain the persistent effects because most facilities were
re-converted to consumer goods production and the FEPC was disolved after WWII.
    Both mechanisms can cause persistent changes. Once incorrect beliefs are correctly
updated then they can be self-maintaining. Once investments are made in reducing "in-
stitutional discrimination" then these changes can also persist. For example, once a union
is fully integrated then it might be costly to revert. Another example of instititutional
practices that can result in disciminatory outcomes is the widespread use of referral-based
hiring (Small and Pager, 2020). Racially homogenous organizations relying on referral-
based hiring will continue hiring racially homogenous workers since social networks ex-
hibit homophily. If a shock changes the racial composition of the firm then this can alter
future hiring patterns.
    This labor market "hysteresis" due to changes in discrimination is consistent with
other research. Whatley (1990) finds that Cincinnati manufacturing firms during WWI

    59 Thesesurvey results are from a March 1943 survey of soldiers "Attitudes of Negro Soldiers" (1943).
And it is also consistent with declines in discriminatory opinions about the intelligence of Black people.
In nationally representative surveys, the share of whites who believe that Blacks are just as intelligent as
whites if given the same education increased from 42% in early 1942 to 53% in 1946.

                                                    33
exhibited state dependence - once they hire a Black worker they are more likely to hire
Black workers in the future. Saez et al. (2019) finds that subsidies for youth employment
increased youth employment even after ending the policy due to a permanent decline in
discriminatory job postings. Miller and Segal (2012) show that the effect of affirmative
action quotas on police hiring persists even after the quotas are no longer mandatory.
Miller (2017) shows similar evidence for private employers after they are no longer subject
to federal contracting affirmative action policies.
    Why would war expenditure have caused firms update incorrect beliefs and discrim-
inatory institutional practices? While the Executive Order barring discrimination likely
mattered, we do not think it was the main driver behind the positive effect of war expen-
ditures on skill upgrading and wages of Black workers.60 We say this for two reasons.
First, we find similar effects when looking only within the South where the Executive Or-
der enforcement was ineffective. Second, we present evidence that severe labor shortages
were likely responsible for forcing firms to invest in changing discriminatory practices.
Table 11 interacts war expenditures with whether a metropolitan area experienced more
months of severe labor shortages than the median metropolitan area during 1942-1944.
The interaction term is strongly positive while the war expenditure term becomes sta-
tistically insignificant. As one historian of this period concludes "The greatest force for
change was the general expansion of industry and the shortage of labor as more men and
women entered the armed forces. These manpower shortages gradually forced white em-
ployers and workers to forget their prejudices, if only temporarily, and accept Black em-
ployees. By the end of the war the quantity and quality of jobs open to Afro-Americans
had increased dramatically." (Wynn, 1976). This conclusion is also consistent with the
findings of Ferrara (2020), who documents that deaths of semi-skilled white workers dur-
ing WWII resulted in occupational upgrading for Black men in the South.
    Because discrimination declines were limited to specific industries and returns to school-
ing did not increase, the effects of WWII expenditures on the accumulation of human
capital of the next generation cannot be easily explained directly by declines in discrim-
ination. The data also show that places with more funds did not see general decreases
in residential segregation consistent with narrow rather than broad changes in attitudes
towards Blacks. Instead, our findings suggest that the increase in wages caused in part by
reductions in discrimination enabled parents to invest more in their children. Substantial
attention has been devoted to lowering racial gaps in education. Recent work has docu-
mented the strong correlation between state racial disparities in test scores and state racial

  60 Thisdoes not mean the government efforts were not important - for the direct effect of the FEPC on
Black employment see (Collins, 2001).

                                                  34
socioeconomic disparities (Reardon, 2015). Our results are consistent with these more re-
cent findings and suggest that improving the economic opportunities of Black families
would be an effective policy for reducing racial gaps in educational outcomes, and that
educational policies alone may not be sufficient.


References
Aaronson, Daniel and Bhashkar Mazumder, "The effect of Rosenwald schools on black
 achievement," Journal of Political Economy, 2011, 119 (5), 821­888.

Acemoglu, Daron, David Autor, and David Lyle, "Women, war and wages: The effect of
 female labor supply on the wage structure at mid-century," Journal of Political Economy,
 2004, 112 (3), 497­551.

Bayer, Patrick and Kerwin Kofi Charles, "Divergent Paths: A new perspective on earn-
  ings differences between black and white men since 1940," The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 2018, 133 (3), 1459­1501.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan, "How much should we
  trust differences-in-differences estimates?," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004, 119
  (1), 249­275.

Bianchi, Nicola and Michela Giorcelli, "Not all management training is created equal:
  Evidence from the Training Within Industry program," Working Paper 2020.

Billips, Robert S., "Hourly entrance rates of common laborers in 20 industries, July 1936,"
  Monthly Labor Review, 1936, 44 (4), 938­952.

Bishop, John, "Why the apathy in American high schools," Educational Researcher, 1989,
  18 (1), 6­10.

Boustan, Leah Platt, "Competition in the promised land: Black migration and racial wage
  convergence in the North, 1940-1970," Journal of Economic History, 2009, 69 (3), 755­782.

  , "Was postwar suburbanization `White Flight'? Evidence from the black migration,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2010, 125 (1), 417­443.

Brunet, Gillian, "Stimulus on the home front: The state-level effects of WWII spending,"
  Working Paper 2018.



                                             35
Burstein, Ariel, Gordon Hanson, Lin Tian, and Jonathan Vogel, "Tradability and the
  labor-market impact of immigration: Theory and evidence from the United States,"
  Econometrica, 2020, 88 (3), 1071­1112.

Card, David and Alan Krueger, "School quality and black-white relative earnings: A
  direct assessment," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1992, 107 (1), 151­200.

Carrington, William J. and Kenneth R. Troske, "On measuring segregation in samples
  with small units," Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 1997, 15 (4), 402­409.

Carruthers, Celeste K. and Marianne H. Wanamaker, "Separate and unequal in the labor
  market: Human capital and the Jim Crow wage gap," Journal of Labor Economics, 2017,
  35 (3), 655­692.

Clay, Karen, Jeff Lingwall, and Melvin Stephens, "Do schooling laws matter? Evidence
  from the introduction of compulsory attendance laws in the United States," Working
  Paper 18477 2012.

Collins, William, "African-American economic mobility in the 1940s: A portrait from the
 Palmer Survey," Journal of Economic History, 2000, 60 (3), 756­781.

  , "Race, Roosevelt, and wartime production: Fair employment in World War II labor
  markets," The American Economic Review, 2001, 91 (1), 272­286.

Collins, William J., "The Great Migration of black Americans from the US South: A guide
 and interpretation," Working Paper 27268 2020.

  and Marianne H. Wanamaker, "Selection and income gains in the Great Migration of
  African Americans," American Economic Journal: Applied, 2014, 6 (1), 220­252.

  and Robert A. Margo, "Historical perspectives on racial differences in schooling in the
  United States," Working Paper 9770 2003.

Commission, U.S. Government War Manpower, The Labor Market, Reports and Analysis
 Service, 1945.

Cutler, David M., Edward L. Glaeser, and Jacob L. Vigdor, "The rise and decline of the
 American ghetto," Journal of Political Economy, 1999, 107 (3), 455­506.

Derenoncourt, Ellora, "Can you move to opportunity? Evidence from the Great Migra-
 tion," Working Paper 2019.


                                           36
  and Claire Montialoux, "Minimum wages and racial inequality," Working Paper 2019.

Dewey, Donald, "Negro employment in Southern industry," Journal of Political Economy,
 1952, 60, 279­293.

Donohue, John J. and James Heckman, "Continuous versus episodic change: The impact
 of civil rights policy on the economic status of blacks," Journal of Economic Literature,
 1991, 29 (4), 1603­1643.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, Stanley Fischer, and Paul A. Samuelson, "Comparative Advan-
 tage, Trade, and Payments in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods," The
 American Economic Review, December 1977, 67 (5), 823­839.

Duncan, Greg J. and Katherine Magnuson, "Socioeconomic status and cognitive func-
 tioning: Moving from correlation to causation," Wiley Interdisciplinary Review: Cognitive
 Science, 2012, 3 (3), 377­386.

Duncan, Otis and Beverly Duncan, "A methodological analysis of segregation indexes,"
 American Sociological Review, 1955, 20 (2), 210­217.

Eckert, Fabian, Adres Gvirtz, and Michael Peters, "A consistent county-level crosswalk
  for US spatial data since 1790," Working Paper 2018.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo D., Eduardo Morales, Juan Carlos Suarez Serrato, and Owen Zidar,
  "State taxes and spatial misallocation," The Review of Economic Studies, 2019, 86 (1), 333­
  376.

Ferrara, Andreas, "World War II and black economic progress," Working Paper 2020.

Fishback, Price and Joseph A. Cullen, "Second World War spending and local economic
  activity in US counties, 1939-58," The Economic History Review, 2013, 66 (4), 975­992.

Fishback, Price V., "Segregation in job hierarchies: West Virginia Coal Mining, 1906-
  1932," Journal of Economic History, 1984, 44 (3), 755­774.

   and Valentina Kachanovskaya, "The multiplier for federal spending in the states dur-
  ing the Great Depression," The Journal of Economic History, 2015, 75 (1), 125­162.

Foote, Christopher, Warren Whatley, and Gavin Wright, "Arbitraging a discriminatory
  labor market: Black workers at the Ford Motor co., 1918-1947," Journal of Labor Eco-
  nomics, 2003, 21 (3), 493­532.


                                             37
Frazier, Edward K. and Jacob Perlman, "Entrance rates of common laborers, July 1939,"
  Monthly Labor Review, 1939, 46 (12), 1450­1465.

Galle, Simon, Andres Rodriguez-Clare, and Moises Yi, "Slicing the pie: Quantifying the
 aggregate and distributional effects of trade," Working Paper 2018.

Garin, Andy, "Public investment and the spread of `good-paying' manufacturing jobs:
 Evidence from World War II's big plants," Working Paper 2019.

Goldin, Claudia, "The role of World War II in the rise of women's employment," Ameri-
 can Economic Review, 1991, 81 (4), 741­756.

  and Lawrence Katz, "The Great Compression: The wage structure in the United States
  at mid-century," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1992, 107 (1), 1­34.

  and , "Education and income in the early 20th century: Evidence from the Prairies,"
  The Journal of Economic History, 2000, 60 (3), 782­818.

Haines, Michael R. and ICPSR, "Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data:
 The United States, 1790-2002," 2010.

Head, Keith and Thierry Mayer, "Gravity equations: Workhorse, toolkit, and cookbook,"
 in G. Gopinath, E. Helpman, and K. Rogoff, eds., Handbook of International Economics,
 Vol. 4, Elsevier, 2014, chapter 3, pp. 131­195.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai, Erik Hurst, Charles I. Jones, and Peter J. Klenow, "The allocation of
 talent and U.S. economic growth," Econometrica, 2019, 87 (5), 1439­1474.

Jaworski, Taylor, "World War II and the industrialization of the American South," The
  Journal of Economic History, 2017, 77 (4), 1048­1082.

Lafotune, Julien, Jesse Rothstein, and Diane W. Schanzenbach, "School finance reform
  and the distribution of student achievement," American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
  nomics, 2018, 10 (2), 1­26.

Lang, Kevin and Ariella Kahn-Lang Spitzer, "Race discrimination: An economic per-
  spective," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2020, 34 (2), 68­89.

   and Jee-Yeon K. Lehmann, "Racial discrimination in the labor market: Theory and
  empirics," Journal of Economic Literature, 2012, 50 (4), 959­1006.




                                          38
Maloney, Thomas, "Wage compression and wage inequality between black and white
 males in the United States, 1940-1960," The Jounral of Economic History, 1994, 54 (2),
 358­381.

Margo, Robert, "Explaining black-white wage convergence, 1940-1950," ILR Review, 1995,
 48 (3), 470­481.

Margo, Robert A., "Explaining black-white wage convergence 1940-1950: The role of the
 Great Compression," Working Paper 44 1993.

Miller, Amalia R. and Carmit Segal, "Does temporary affirmative action produce persis-
 tent effects? A study of black and female employment in law enforcement," The Review
 of Economics and Statistics, 2012, 94 (4), 1107­1125.

Miller, Conrad, "The persistent effect of temporary affirmative action," American Eco-
 nomic Journal: Applie Economics, 2017, 9 (3), 152­190.

Reardon, Sean F., "The widening academic achievement gap between the rich and the
  poor: New evidence and possible explanations," in Greg J. Duncan and Richard J. Mur-
  nane, eds., Whither opportunity? Rising Inequality, Schools and Children's Life Chances,
  Russell Sage Foundation, 2011, chapter 5, pp. 91­116.

  , "Education," in Charles Varner David Grusky and Marybeth Mattingly, eds., State of
  the States: The Poverty and Inequality Report, Stanford Center for Poverty and Inequality,
  2015, chapter 7, pp. 43­48.

  , Ericka S. Weathers, Erin M. Fahle, Heewon Jang, and Demetra Kalogrides, "Is sep-
  arate still unequal? New evidence on school secregation and racial academic achieve-
  ment gaps," Working Paper 19-06 2019.

Rhode, Paul W., James M. Snyder Jr., and Koleman Stumpf, "The arsenal of democracy:
 Production and politics during WWII," Journal of Public Economics, 2018, 166, 145­161.

Rose, Evan, "The rise and fall of female labor force participation during World War II in
 the United States," The Journal of Economic History, 2018, 78 (3), 1­39.

Ruggles, Steven, Sarah Flood, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, Erin Meyer, Jose Pacas,
 and Matthew Sobek, "IPUMS USA: Version 10.0 [dataset]," 2020.

Saez, Emmanuel, Benjamin Schoefer, and David Seim, "Hysteresis from employer sub-
  sidies," Working Paper 26391 2019.


                                            39
Schindler, David and Mark Westcott, "Shocking racial attitudes: Black GIs in Europe,"
  Working Paper 6723 2017.

Sitkoff, Harvard, "Racial militancy and interracial violence in the Second World War,"
  The Journal of American History, 1971, 58 (3), 661­681.

Small, Mario L. and Devah Pager, "Sociological perspectives on racial discrimination,"
 Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2020, 34 (2), 49­67.

Smith, James and Finis Welch, "Black economic progress after Myrdal," Journal of Eco-
 nomic Literature, 1989, 27 (2), 519­564.

Sundstrom, William A., "The color line: Racial norms and discrimination in urban labor
  markets, 1910-1950," The Journal of Economic History, 1994, 54 (2), 382­396.

System, U.S. Selective Service, Special Monographs of the Selective Service System, Wash-
  ington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1956.

Taubman, Paul, "Role of Parental Income in Educational Attainment," The American Eco-
  nomic Review, 1989, 79 (2), 57­61.

Turner, Sarah E. and John Bound, "Closing the gap or widening the divide: The effects of
  the G.I. Bill and World War II on the educational outcomes of black americans," Journal
  of Economic History, 2003, 63 (1), 145­177.

Whatley, Warren, "Getting a foot in the door: Learning, state dependence, and the racial
 integration of firms," The Journal of Economic History, 1990, 50 (1), 43­66.

Wilson, Charles A, "On the General Structure of Ricardian Models with a Continuum
 of Goods: Applications to Growth, Tariff Theory, and Technical Change," Econometrica,
 November 1980, 48 (7), 1675­1702.

Wright, Gavin, Old South New South: Revolutions in the Southern economy since the Civil
 War, Basic Books, 1986.

Wynn, Neil A., The Afro American and the Second World War, Holmes and Meier Publishers,
 1976.




                                           40
      Figure 1: Long-term trends in Black-White gaps
               Panel A: Share in skilled occupations




                  Panel B: Average (log of) wages




                   Panel C: Share graduating HS




Note: Share skilled is the share of employed men who are not farm-
ers, laborers, or service workers. Wages are total wage earnings (2017
dollars) in the previous year for men ages 25-54 who are currently em-
ployees. Share graduating high school is based on share completing
at least twelve years of school by age 35. Data from Census and ACS
samples for 1920-2017 accessed from IPUMS (Ruggles et al. 2020).

                                 41
            Figure 2: WWII expenditures per capita ($1000s, 1940)
                                  Panel A: By metro




                                  Panel B: By county




Note: Includes 147 metropolitan areas areas which are county groupings based on 1950
Census definitions. The primary qualification is containing a city with population above
50,000. 55% of the population live in metropolitan areas in 1950. War expenditures per
capita are total war expenditures divided by the 1940 population. Total war expenditures
comes from the 1947 County Data Book. The mean war expenditure across metropolitan
areas is $1,457 with standard deviation of $1,371 (1940 dollars).




                                          42
Figure 3: Distribution of WWII expenditures per capita by
metropolitan area ($1000s, 1940)
                       Panel A: Raw distribution




                          Panel B: Residualized




 Note: Includes 147 metropolitan areas which are county groupings based
on 1950 Census definitions. War expenditures per capita are total war ex-
penditures divided by the 1940 population. Controls include region fixed
effects, share of employed men in manufacturing, in agriculture, share
Black, and predicted draft rate based on demographics. Total war expendi-
tures comes from the 1947 County Data Book. The mean war expenditure
across metropolitan areas is $1,457 with standard deviation of $1,371 (1940
dollars).




                                    43
                       Figure 4: Raw changes in outcomes by metro area
                                 Panel A: Share in skilled occupations




                                   Panel B: ln(Average yearly wage)




Note: Each point represents a metropolitan area. We restrict focus to metropolitan areas with a relevant
population in all years of at least 2500 (equivalent to at least 25 observations in the 1% Census sample)
which leaves 147 metropolitan areas for white men and 76 metropolitan areas for Black men. Regressions
do not include any controls or weights. Results are qualitatively similar if population weights are used
on the full sample. Share skilled is the share of employed men who are not farmers, laborers, or service
workers. Average yearly wage is the average wage earnings (1940 dollars) in the previous year for men
who are currently employees. There is no wage data in the 1930 Census. Data is from 1930 Census (5%),
1940 Census (100%) and 1950 Census (1%) samples. Significance levels based on robust standard errors.
*p<.1; **p<.05; ***p<.01
                                                   44
           Figure 5: Robustness of effects of war expenditures on main outcomes
                                   Panel A: Share in skilled occupations




                                     Panel B: ln(Average yearly wage)




Note: See equation 1 for the basic specification. Intervals are 95% confidence intervals. All controls are in-
teracted with an indicator for post. "+Base controls" is our standard specification with controls for region,
average years of education, share in manufacturing, share in agriculture, share Black, and predicted draft
rate. "+Population" adds controls for the (log of) total population and Black popuation in 1940. "+Baseline
outcomes" adds controls for 1940 share employed, share skilled, and (log of) average yearly wage. "Excl.
potential migrants" means excluding individuals in 1950 who were not born in their current state of resi-
dence and is not living with a child eight years or older born in the current state of residence. There are 147
metropolitan areas and data comes from the 1920-1960 Census samples.


                                                      45
      Figure 6: Long-term impacts of war expenditures (1920-1970)
                        Panel A: Share in skilled occupations




                           Panel B: ln(Average yearly wage)




Note: See equation 2 for the basic specification; regressions are run separately for
Black and white men but the coefficients are plotted on the same graph. Controls in-
clude aggregate Census division, share employed in manufacturing, share employed
in agriculture, share Black, years of education in the first available year; each is inter-
acted with a full set of year indicators; omitting the base year (1940). Commuting zone
boundaries for metropolitan areas are used instead of 1940 and 1950 metropolitan area
definitions due to changing metropolitan area boundaries over time. This results in
some metropolitan areas being combined or dropped leaving 135 commuting zones.
Data comes from the 1920-1970 Census samples.


                                            46
 Figure 7: Effects of war expenditures on high school graduation rates
                                    Panel A: Boys




                                    Panel B: Girls




Note: See equation 12 for the estimating equation. Intervals are 95% confidence in-
tervals. Cohorts grouped by expected graduation year and excludes the South and
individuals not living in metropolitan areas or who have moved to a state other than
their birth state in the previous five years. Graduating high school is defined as hav-
ing completed 12 years of schooling in 1960. Fixed effects include metro-race FE and
cohort-race FE. Other controls interacted with race include indicators for whether
born in the South interacted with race and cohort indicators. Results are similar if
controls for veteran status are included. Data comes from the 1960 Census (5% sam-
ple).



                                          47
          Table 1: Predictors of per capita war expenditure
                                        (1)                   (2)
                                     War exp       Months of labor shortages
                                    per capita             1942-44

War exp per capita                                          0.457***
                                                             (0.103)
Predicted draft rate                  -0.167**               0.175*
                                       (0.066)               (0.090)
ln(Avg yearly wage)                      0.046                -0.145
                                       (0.141)               (0.134)
% Agriculture                            0.016                -0.215
                                       (0.149)               (0.140)
% Government                            0.096               0.247***
                                       (0.156)               (0.079)
% Manufacturing                       0.388**                  0.130
                                       (0.152)               (0.112)
ln(Mfg. value added per capita)        0.153*                  0.087
                                       (0.083)               (0.099)
% Skilled                               0.139                 -0.017
                                       (0.183)               (0.156)
% Unemployed                            -0.029              -0.148*
                                       (0.102)               (0.082)
% Black                                 0.033                  0.164
                                       (0.073)               (0.115)
ln(Population)                          -0.029                 0.047
                                       (0.077)               (0.091)
Northeast                               0.018                  0.011
                                       (0.103)               (0.106)
Midwest                                 0.029                  0.073
                                       (0.154)               (0.113)
West                                    0.110               0.372***
                                       (0.100)               (0.105)

Observations                           147                    132
R-squared                              0.33                   0.45
Note: An observation is a metro area and all variables are as of 1940 and have
been standardized to have µ = 0 and 2 = 1. Percentages are shares of em-
ployed men except for % unemployed which is the share of men in the labor
force. Omitted aggregate Census division category is the South. War expen-
diture per capita in 1940 dollars. Months of labor shortages are percentage of
months 1942-1944 with acute labor shortages according to Labor Market Re-
ports. Only 132 of the 147 metro areas are identified in these reports. Robust
standard errors in parentheses. *p<.1; **p<.05; ***p<.01




                                     48
            Table 2: Effect of war expenditures (1940-1950)
                                (1)        (2)                (3)        (4)
                                   Black Men                     White Men
                               Basic     Controls            Basic     Controls

Panel A: Share skilled
War exp per capita * Post     0.012**        0.015***        -0.000       0.001
                              (0.005)         (0.006)       (0.002)      (0.002)
Mean Y - 1940                   0.33           0.33           0.77         0.77
Mean Y - 1950                   0.48           0.48           0.83         0.83

Panel B: ln(Average yearly wage)
War exp per capita * Post   0.035**          0.031**         0.006        0.007
                            (0.015)          (0.015)        (0.004)      (0.004)
Mean Y - 1940                 6.55             6.55           7.26         7.26
Mean Y - 1950                 7.06             7.06           7.56         7.56

Panel C: Prime-age employment rate
War exp per capita * Post  -0.005             -0.006        -0.004**     -0.003*
                          (0.005)            (0.006)         (0.002)     (0.002)
Mean Y - 1940               0.80               0.80           0.88         0.88
Mean Y - 1950               0.84               0.84           0.92         0.92


Metro areas                     147           147            147          147
Mean war exp per capita         1.46          1.46           1.46         1.46
Metro FE                         X             X              X            X
Division-Year FE                 X             X              X            X
Baseline controls                 -            X               -           X
Draft control                     -            X               -           X
Note: Sample is 147 metro areas. See equation 1 for the basic specification. War
expenditure is $1000s per capita. Share skilled is the share of employed men who
are not farmers, laborers, or service workers. Wages are total wage earnings in
the previous year for men who are currently employees. Prime-age employment
is the share of men ages 25-54 who are employed. Baseline controls are 1940 vari-
ables interacted with a post indicator: average years of education, share employed
in manufacturing, share employed in agriculture, and share Black. Draft control is
predicted draft rate based on 1940 demographics. Primary data sources are 1940
(100%; 5% sub-sample for whites) and 1950 (1%) Census samples. Metro area def-
initions are based on 1940 and 1950 Census Bureau definitions. All values are in
1940 dollars. Regressions are weighted by relevant population. Robust standard
errors in parentheses. *p<.1; **p<.05; ***p<.01




                                        49
Table 3: Effect of war expenditures excluding potential interstate migrants (1940-
1950)
                                   (1)               (2)                 (3)             (4)
                                          Black Men                             White Men
                                               Excl. potential                     Excl. potential
                                   All           migrants                All          migrants

 Panel A: Skilled occupation
 War exp per capita * Post    0.018***            0.015**              0.000            -0.001
                               (0.004)            (0.006)             (0.001)          (0.002)
 Mean Y - 1940                   0.33               0.33                0.77             0.77
 Mean Y - 1950                   0.48               0.48                0.83             0.84
 N - 1940                    1,266,428           1,266,428            877,946          877,946
 N - 1950                      24,224             12,481              242,535          175,814

 Panel B: ln(Yearly wage)
 War exp per capita * Post       0.033***          0.028*              0.002            0.004
                                  (0.012)         (0.015)             (0.004)          (0.004)
 Mean Y - 1940                      6.37            6.37                7.00            7.00
 Mean Y - 1950                      7.49            7.41                7.90            7.90
 N - 1940                       1,100,233        1,100,233            727,633          727,633
 N - 1950                          5,471           2,414              54,388           36,810

 Panel C: Prime-age employment
 War exp per capita * Post   -0.004                -0.004             -0.002*          -0.003**
                            (0.004)               (0.005)             (0.001)           (0.001)
 Mean Y - 1940                0.80                  0.80                0.88             0.88
 Mean Y - 1950                0.84                  0.86                0.92             0.93
 N - 1940                  1,164,169             1,164,169            702,950          702,950
 N - 1950                    20,505                9,921              183,423          132,149


 Mean war exp per capita           1.46               1.46              1.46             1.46
 Metro FE                           X                  X                 X                X
 Division-Year FE                   X                  X                 X                X
 Baseline controls                  X                  X                 X                X
 Individual controls                X                  X                 X                X
 Note: Regression at the individual level and only includes men living in one of 147 metro ar-
 eas. See equation 1 for the basic specification. War expenditure is $1000s per capita. Excluding
 potential interstate migrants means excluding individuals in 1950 who were not born in their
 current state of residence and is not living with a child eight years or older born in the current
 state of residence. For employed men, a skilled occupation is defined as all occupations except
 farmers, laborers, or service workers. Wages are total wage earnings (1940 dollars) in the pre-
 vious year for men who are currently employees. Prime-age employment is whether men ages
 25-54 are employed. Baseline controls are 1940 variables interacted with a post indicator: aver-
 age years of education, share employed in manufacturing, share employed in agriculture, and
 share Black. Individual controls include a cubic in age, whether born in the South, and whether
 married. Primary data sources are 1940 (100%; 5% sub-sample for whites) and 1950 (1%) Census
 samples. All values are in 1940 dollars. Regressions weighted by sampling weights. Standard
 errors clustered at the metro-year level. *p<.1; **p<.05; ***p<.01




                                                 50
              Table 4: Effect of war expenditures on occupational upgrading for younger cohorts
                                       (1)           (2)             (3)                (6)          (6)              (6)
                                                  Black Men                                        White men
                                    1940-50       1940-50         1940-60            1940-50       1940-50        1940-60
                                      All        Ages 18-24      Ages 18-34            All        Ages 18-24     Ages 18-34

     War exp per capita * Post      0.020***       0.023**         0.017***            0.000        -0.000         -0.005**
                                     (0.004)       (0.010)          (0.005)           (0.001)       (0.003)         (0.002)

     Mean Y - 1940                     0.33         0.30             0.32              0.77          0.71           0.77
     Mean Y - 1950                     0.48         0.46             0.52              0.83          0.80           0.82
     N - 1940                       1,266,428      174,103         527,464            877,946       119,936        348,407
     N - 1950                         24,224        3,682           42,859            242,535       31,094         148,504




51
     Mean war exp per capita          1.46           1.46            1.46              1.46          1.46            1.46
     Metro FE                          X              X               X                 X             X               X
     Division-Year FE                  X              X               X                 X             X               X
     Baseline controls                 X              X               X                 X             X               X
     Draft control                     X              X               X                 X             X               X
     Indiv controls                    X              X               X
     Note: Regression at the individual level and only includes men living in one of 147 metro areas. See equation 1 for the
     basic specification. For employed men, a skilled occupation is defined as all occupations except farmers, laborers, or
     service workers. Baseline controls are 1940 variables interacted with a post indicator: average years of education, share
     employed in manufacturing, share employed in agriculture, and share Black. Individual controls include a cubic in age,
     whether born in the South, and whether married. Draft control is predicted draft rate based on 1940 demographics.
     Primary data sources are 1940 (100%; 5% sub-sample for whites), 1950 (1%), and 1960 (5%; 40% sub-sample for whites)
     Census samples. Regressions weighted by sampling weights. Standard errors clustered at the metro-year level. *p<.1;
     **p<.05; ***p<.01
                               Table 5: Estimation of model shocks
                  (1)          (2)          (3)       (4)       (5)     (6)         (7)       (8)       (9)
                Labor allocation - io             Adjusted labor income              Labor allocation - r
                    L,empl       L,wage                                              1      N - ln Wage
                ln riogt     ln riogt      riot       riot      rit       rit            ln rgt         rgt


1                                                              -0.017    -0.006
                                                              (0.018)   (0.117)
2                                          0.052      0.033               0.042
                                          (0.120)   (0.123)             (0.123)
3                 0.023        0.029                 -0.104              -0.054
                 (0.038)      (0.037)               (0.090)             (0.095)
4               0.127***      0.123**               0.223**             0.207**
                 (0.045)      (0.051)               (0.089)             (0.089)
U
1                                                                                              -0.011    -0.010
                                                                                              (0.008)   (0.008)
U
2                                                                                 0.070***              0.054**
                                                                                   (0.025)              (0.024)

Observations      3,630        3,514      3,728      3,728    3,728     3,728      1,070       1,070    1,070
R-squared         0.991        0.991      0.999      0.999    0.994     0.994      0.998       0.996    0.996
riog                X            X          X          X        X         X          -           -        -
iogt                X            X          X          X        X         X          -           -        -
riot                X            X          -          -        -         -          -           -        -
rgt                 X            X          -          -        -         -          -           -        -
rit                 -            -          X          X        -         -          -           -        -
rg                  -            -          -          -        -         -          X           X        X
gt                  -            -          -          -        -         -          X           X        X
rt                  -            -          -          -        -         -          X           -        -
Draft control       -            -          -          -        -         -          -           X        X
Note: Baseline parameter values are bolded. An observation is an r, i, o, t, g cell and only includes in-
dividuals living in metro areas. Columns 1 and 2 estimate (10) using employment (1) and income (2) to
measure allocations across io within r. Columns 3 and 4 estimate (48) and (47); the column heading riot
refers to the dependent variable being an adjusted measure of labor income at the riot level. Columns 5
and 6 estimate (51) and (50); the column heading rit refers to the dependent variable being an adjusted
measure of labor income at the rit level. Column 7 estimates (11), column 8 estimates (45), and column 9
estimates (44). Predicted draft rate is based on 1940 demographics. Primary data sources are 1940 (100%)
and 1950 (1%) Census samples. Regressions weighted by cell population. Standard errors clustered at the
metro-year level. *p<.1; **p<.05; ***p<.01 *p<.1; **p<.05; ***p<.01




                                                     52
 Table 6: Evaluating actual estimated changes versus model data
                                  (1)          (2)              (3)        (4)
                                   Share skilled             ln(Avg yearly wage)
                                 Black       White            Black       White

Panel A: Actual data
War Exp PC * Post              0.015***         0.001         0.031**       0.007
                               (0.006)         (0.002)        (0.015)      (0.004)

Panel B: Model-generated data - Anti-discriminatory shocks only
War Exp PC * Post          0.018***    0.001**        0.015***              -0.003
                           (0.002)      (0.001)        (0.005)             (0.003)

Panel C: Model-generated data - All war spending shocks
War Exp PC * Post         0.016***       -0.000      0.029***             0.010***
                           (0.002)      (0.001)       (0.005)             (0.003)


Metro areas                      147            147            147          147
Mean war exp per capita          1.46           1.46           1.46         1.46
Metro FE                          X              X              X            X
Division-Year FE                  X              X              X            X
Baseline controls                 X              X              X            X
Draft control                     X              X              X            X
Note: Sample is 147 metro areas. Panels A, B, and C replicate Table 2 specifica-
tions with all controls. Panel A uses actual data and Panels B and C use data gen-
erated by the model. We feed in only the anti-discriminatory shocks in Panel B
and all war-spending related shocks in Panel C. Panel B is used to determine the
importance of anti-discriminatory mechanisms for our DiD empirical estimates
while Panel C is used to calibrate the value of  . Share skilled is the share of em-
ployed men who are not farmers, laborers, or service workers. Wages are total
wage earnings in the previous year for men who are currently employees. Base-
line controls are 1940 variables interacted with a post indicator: average years
of education, share employed in manufacturing, share employed in agriculture,
and share Black. Draft control is predicted draft rate based on 1940 demograph-
ics. Primary data sources are 1940 (100%) and 1950 (1%) Census samples. Metro
area definitions based on 1940 and 1950 Census Bureau definitions. Regressions
are weighted by relevant population. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
*p<.1; **p<.05; ***p<.01




                                          53
Table 7: Ability of war expenditure shocks to explain aggre-
gate changes in race gaps
                           (1)           (2)              (3)
                          Actual      Model - War spending shocks
                          Total      All shocks   Anti-discrim. only

 Change in black-white gap in share skilled:
 1940-50                -0.081       -0.021               -0.020
 % explained                         25.4%                24.0%

 Change in black-white gap in ln(avg. yearly wage):
 1940-50                -0.217       -0.029               -0.032
 % explained                         13.4%                15.0%

 Note: Sample are men living in one of 147 metro areas. Column 1 is the
 actual change in the gap between Black and white men. Column 2 gives
 the change in the gap due to all war expenditure shocks. Column 3 gives
 the change in the gap due to anti-discriminatory shocks. % explained
 is the percent of the actual change that can be explained by the given
 shocks. Share skilled is the share of employed men who are not farm-
 ers, laborers, or service workers. Wages are total wage earnings (1940
 dollars) in the previous year for men who are currently employees. Pri-
 mary data sources are 1940 (100%) and 1950 (1%) Census samples.




                                   54
       Table 8: Effect of war expenditures on school attendance (1940-1950)
                                   (1)             (2)                   (3)             (4)
                                      Black Children                        White Children
                                Boys, 16-18    Girls, 16-18           Boys, 16-18    Girls, 16-18

Panel A: All metros
War exp per capita * Post          0.037**          0.019                 0.002           0.002
                                   (0.017)         (0.017)               (0.004)         (0.004)
N - Pre                            127,085         144,710               81,738          81,738
N - Post                             488             521                  4,256           4,256

Panel B: Excluding South
War exp per capita * Post          0.055**           0.022*               0.002           0.002
                                   (0.021)           (0.013)             (0.005)         (0.005)
N - Pre                            56,707            62,974              69,176          69,176
N - Post                             254               272                3,446           3,446


Mean Y - Pre                        0.50              0.50                0.65             0.61
Mean Y - Post                       0.54              0.58                0.69             0.64
Mean war exp per capita             1.46              1.46                1.46             1.46
Metro-Age FE                         X                 X                   X                X
Division-Year-Age FE                 X                 X                   X                X
Draft control                        X                 X                   X                X
Note: Regression at the individual level and only includes children living in one of 147 metro ar-
eas. See equation 1 for the basic specification. School attendance is an indicator whether the child
attended any school in the past month (1940) or two months (1950). Draft control is predicted
draft rate based on 1940 demographics. Primary data sources are 1940 (100%; 5% sub-sample for
whites) and 1950 (1%) Census samples. Regressions weighted by sample line weights. Standard
errors clustered at the metro-year level. *p<.1; **p<.05; ***p<.01




                                                55
                      Table 9: Effect of war expenditures on returns to education - Actual vs. model predicted (1940-1950)
                                                             (1)         (2)                     (3)           (4)                  (5)            (6)
                                                                  Actual                       Model - Anti-discrim.                   Model - All
                                                          Black men   White men              Black men     White men            Black men     White men

     War exp per capita * Education  9 years * Post          -0.003          0.012              0.003          0.002               0.003          0.002
                                                            (0.020)        (0.007)             (0.011)        (0.010)             (0.011)        (0.010)
     War exp per capita * Post                              0.029*          -0.005            0.019***        -0.002             0.033***        0.012*
                                                            (0.016)        (0.006)             (0.006)        (0.006)             (0.006)        (0.006)
     Education  9 years * Post                              -0.062*       -0.166***            -0.002         -0.008              -0.001         -0.006
                                                            (0.036)        (0.020)             (0.028)        (0.022)             (0.028)        (0.022)
     War exp per capita * Education  9 years               -0.016**       -0.022***           -0.035***      -0.025***           -0.035***      -0.026***
                                                            (0.006)        (0.005)             (0.009)        (0.007)             (0.009)        (0.007)
     Education  9 years                                    0.220***       0.434***            0.199***       0.322***            0.199***       0.322***
                                                            (0.014)        (0.010)             (0.021)        (0.016)             (0.021)        (0.016)




56
     Observation Level                                   Individual      Individual             rgt            rgt                 rgt             rgt
     N - Pre                                              1,081,781        715,189              244            294                 244             294
     N - Post                                               5,471          54,388               244            294                 244             294
     Mean war exp per capita                                 1.46           1.46                1.46           1.46                1.46            1.46
     Metro FE                                                 X               X                  X              X                   X               X
     Division-Year FE                                         X               X                  X              X                   X               X
     Baseline controls                                        X               X                  X              X                   X               X
     Draft control                                            X               X                  X              X                   X               X
     Individual controls                                      X               X                   -              -                   -               -
     Note: Regression at the individual level for columns (1) and (2) but at metro-education group level for columsn (3)-(6). Only includes men living in one
     of 147 metro areas. Wages are total wage earnings (1940 dollars) in the previous year for men who are currently employees. Individual controls include a
     cubic in age, whether born in the South, and whether married. Primary data sources are 1940 (100%; 5% sub-sample for whites) and 1950 (1%) Census sam-
     ples. Regressions weighted by sample line weights ((1) and (2)) or employed population ((3)-(6)). Standard errors clustered at the metro-year level. *p<.1;
     **p<.05; ***p<.01
Table 10: Effect of war expenditures on school expenditures and resi-
dential segregation (1940-1950)
                                        (1)                     (2)            (3)
                                    Education               Residential segregation
                                  Exp. per capita          Dissimilarity    Isolation

 Panel A: All metros
 War exp per capita * Post             0.009                   -0.003           0.004
                                      (0.011)                 (0.009)          (0.028)
 N                                      242                      86               86

 Panel B: Excluding South
 War exp per capita * Post             0.012                   -0.008           -0.021
                                      (0.012)                 (0.008)          (0.029)
 N                                      172                      60               60


 Mean war exp per capita                1.46                    1.46            1.46
 Metro FE                                X                       X               X
 Division-Year FE                        X                       X               X
 Baseline controls                       X                       X               X
 Draft control                           X                       X               X
 Note: Full sample is 147 metro areas; educational expenditures is available for only
 121 metro areas. See equation 1 for the basic specification. Residential segregation
 indices are from Cutler et al. (1999) and are only available for 43 of our metro areas.
 Baseline controls are 1940 variables interacted with a post indicator: average years
 of education, share employed in manufacturing, share employed in agriculture, and
 share Black. Draft control is predicted draft rate based on 1940 demographics. Re-
 gressions weighted by Black population; results are similar if unweighted estimates
 are used. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *p<.1; **p<.05; ***p<.01




                                           57
               Table 11: Role of labor shortages on effect of war expenditures (1940-1950)
                                                    (1)         (2)         (3)             (4)       (5)         (6)
                                                            Black men                               White men

War exp per capita * Post                         0.015**                 -0.002           0.001                0.005**
                                                  (0.006)                 (0.010)         (0.002)               (0.002)
Labor shortage % * Post                                      0.061***                                 -0.005
                                                              (0.012)                                (0.006)
War exp per capita * Labor shortage % * Post                              0.020**                               -0.005**
                                                                          (0.010)                                (0.002)

Observations                                       258           258       258             264        264         264
Mean war exp per capita                            1.55          1.55      1.55            1.55       1.55        1.55
% of months with labor shortage                    0.21          0.21      0.21            0.21       0.21        0.21
Metro FE                                            X             X         X               X          X           X
Division-Year FE                                    X             X         X               X          X           X
Baseline controls                                   X             X         X               X          X           X
Draft control                                       X             X         X               X          X           X
Note: Sample is 132 metro areas with data on labor shortages. Months of labor shortages are percentage of months 1942-
1944 with acute labor shortages according to Labor Market Reports. War expenditure is $1000s per capita. Share skilled is
the share of employed men who are not farmers, laborers, or service workers. Baseline controls are 1940 variables inter-
acted with a post indicator: average years of education, share employed in manufacturing, share employed in agriculture,
and share Black. Draft control is predicted draft rate based on 1940 demographics. Primary data sources are 1940 (100%;
5% sub-sample for whites) and 1950 (1%) Census samples. Metro area definitions based on 1940 and 1950 Census Bureau
definitions. All values are in 1940 dollars. Regressions are weighted by relevant population. Robust standard errors in
parentheses. *p<.1; **p<.05; ***p<.01




                                                            58
A    Appendix Tables and Figures


    Figure A.1: Black vs. white men occupational dissimilarity index by metro area
    (1940)
                                 Panel A: Unadjusted




                     Panel B: Adjusted for randomness and education




    Note: For 147 metro areas, as defined by the Census Bureau in 1940 and 1950. Panel A presents
    unadjusted occupational dissimilarity indices while Panel B adjusts for education (5 groups) and
    randomness. For more details on the creation59 of these measures, please see Appendix Section
    C.2.
Figure A.2: Average yearly wage and years of education by occupation for white
men (1940)




 Note: Each point is an occupation from the 1950 Census occupational coding scheme with at
least 10,000 employed white men. Average yearly wage is average total wage earnings within
the occupational group (1940 dollars) in the previous year for men who are currently employees.




                                              60
               Figure A.3: Defense expenditures as a share of GDP




Note: Data is from U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis series "Shares of gross domestic prod-
uct: Government consumption expenditures and gross investment: Federal: National defense
[A824RE1A156NBEA]", retrieved from FRED.




                                           61
Figure A.4: Effect of war expenditures on share of prime-age men who completed high
school




Note: See equation 1 for the basic specification. Intervals are 95% confidence intervals. All controls are in-
teracted with an indicator for post. "+Base controls" is our standard specification with controls for region,
average years of education, share in manufacturing, share in agriculture, share Black, and predicted draft
rate. "+Population" adds controls for the (log of) total population and Black popuation in 1940. "+Baseline
outcomes" adds controls for 1940 share employed, share skilled, and (log of) average yearly wage. "Excl.
potential migrants" means excluding individuals in 1950 who were not born in their current state of resi-
dence and is not living with a child eight years or older born in the current state of residence. There are 147
metro areas and data comes from the 1940-1960 Census samples.




                                                      62
    Figure A.5: Black occupational upgrading by age and education
                                 Panel A: By age




                              Panel B: By education




Note: Sample is employed men living in metro areas. Data comes from the 1930 (5%),
1940 Census (100%), and 1950 (1%) samples.




                                       63
Figure A.6: Relationship between war expenditure per capita and (log of) popu-
lation




Note: Each point represents a metro area. We restrict focus to metropolitan areas with a relevant
population in all years of at least 2500 which leaves 147 metropolitan areas for white men and 76
metropolitan areas for Black men. Regressions do not include any controls or weights. Results
are qualitatively similar if population weights are used on the full sample. Data is from County
Data Books. Significance levels based on robust standard errors. *p<.1; **p<.05; ***p<.01




                                               64
 Figure A.7: Pre-trends in high school graduation rates (1940 Census)
                                   Panel A: Boys




                                   Panel B: Girls




Note: See equation 12 for the estimating equation. Intervals are 95% confidence inter-
vals. Cohorts grouped by expected graduation year and excludes the South. Gradu-
ating high school is defined as having completed 12 years of schooling in 1960. Fixed
effects include metro-race FE and cohort-race FE. Other controls interacted with race
include include whether born in the South interacted with cohort indicators. Results
are similar if controls for veteran status are included. Data comes from the 1940 Cen-
sus (100% sample; 5% sub-sample for whites).




                                         65
Table A1: Occupational distribution for Black and
white men in 1940 and 1950
                              Black men       White men
                            1940     1950    1940    1950
 Professional                1.9      1.9     5.8     7.4
 Farmers                    19.6     13.0    13.5    10.2
 Managers                    1.4      2.0     9.9    11.1
 Clerical                    1.1      2.7     6.9     6.5
 Sales                       0.6      1.0     6.2     6.5
 Craftsmen & Foremen         4.3      7.6    15.6    19.2
 Military                    0.2      2.6     0.7     2.4
 Operatives                 12.0     20.8    17.9    19.7
 Domestic Service            2.9      0.8     0.3     0.1
 Service Workers            11.7     13.1     5.8     5.8
 Farm Laborer               18.5     10.8     7.0     4.4
 Laborers                   25.8     23.6    10.6     6.8
 Note: Occupational distribution is for employed men in 1940
 and is not limited to men in metro areas. Data is from the
 1940 Census (100%).




                             66
Table A2: Example unions policies towards Black workers during the Great Depression
     Union

Example unions explicitly or effectively barring Blacks
   Blacksmiths, Drop Forgers and Helpers', Brotherhood of
   Boilermakers, Iron Shipbuilders and Helpers of America, International Brotherhood of
   Carmen of America, Brotherhood of Railway
   Clerks, Freight Handlers, Express and Station Employees, Brotherhood of Railway and Steamship
   Conductors, Brotherwhood of Dining Car
   Conductors Order of Sleeping Car
   Conductors of America, Order of Railway
   Electrical Workers, International Brotherhood of
   Engineers, Grand International Brotherhood of Locomotive
   Fireman and Enginemen, Brotherhood of Locomotive
   Flint Glass Workers
   Granite Cutters, International Association of
   Journeyman Tailors
   Machinists, International Association of
   Mail Association. Railway
   Maintence of Way Employees, Brotherhood of
   Masters, Mates and Pilots, National Organization
   National Rural Letter Carriers' Association
   Neptune Association
   Plasterers Union
   Plumbers and Steam Fitters, United Association of Journeyman
   Railroad Workers, American Federation of
   Sheet Metal Workers
   Switchmen's Union of North America
   Telegraphers, Order of Railroad
   Telegraphers, Union of America, Commercial
   Train Dispatchers Association, American
   Wire Weavers' Protective Association, American
   Yarmasters of America, Railroad
   Yardmasters of North America, Railroad

Example unions with segregated Locals
   Carpenters and Joiners Unions
   Painters, Decorators and Paperhangers
   Hotal and Restaurant Workers
Note: Union policies are taken from "The Negro Year Book: An annual Encyclopedia of the Negro, 1937-
1938" by Monroe Work and Jessie Guzman. The list is not complete.




                                                67
Table A3: Most over and under represented occupations for Black men, conditional on education and location
(living in metro, 1940)
                  Top 15 over-represented                                          Top 15 under-represented
                                                    Actual                                                              Actual
                       Occupation                  Expected                             Occupation                     Expected
  1               Janitors and Porters              3.35       1                        Tool Makers                     0.05
  2                    Clergymen                    2.93       2                         Motormen                       0.06
  3           Private Household Workers             2.77       3                  Mechanical Engineers                  0.06
 4                 Elevator Operators               2.64       4                      Civil Engineers                   0.09
  5                    Musicians                    2.22       5                    Electrical Engineers                0.09
  6   Service Workers, Except Private Household     2.14       6                Other Technical Engineers               0.10
  7                      Cooks                      2.07       7                       Bookkeepers                      0.10
  8               Recreation Workers                1.97       8                   Salesmen, Wholesale                  0.10
  9                     Teachers                    1.91       9                Salesmen, Manufacturing                 0.10
 10             Laborer - Construction              1.86      10    Tinsmiths, Coppersmiths, and Sheet Metal Workers    0.11
 11                Laundry Workers                  1.86      11                  Locomotive Engineers                  0.11
 12             Waiters and Bartenders              1.82      12                    Printing Craftsmen                  0.12
 13                   Mail Carriers                  1.8      13                Foremen, Durable Goods                  0.15
 14                  Laborer - Other                1.79      14              Foremen, Non-Durable Goods                0.15
 15            Laborer - Primary Metal              1.77      15                Designers and Draftsmen                 0.15
 Note: For employed men living in metro areas in 1940. Expected employment is based on random assignment within educa-
 tional group (5 groups) and location. For more details, see Appendix Section C.2. Occupation groupings are based on aggrega-
 tions used in 1950 Census publications. Data is from the 1940 Census (100%).




                                                               68
       Table A4: Relationship between actual and predicted draft rate)
                                        (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)
                                     Predicted       Draft       War exp        War exp
                                     draft rate      rate       per capita     per capita

Predicted draft rate                               0.270***      -0.167**
                                                   (0.103)        (0.066)
Draft rate                                                                      -0.146*
                                                                                (0.081)
ln(Avg yearly wage)                      -0.030      0.012        0.046          0.051
                                        (0.147)     (0.125)      (0.141)        (0.141)
% Agriculture                           0.419**      0.053        0.016          -0.030
                                        (0.174)     (0.185)      (0.149)        (0.149)
% Government                            0.182**      -0.147       0.096          0.052
                                        (0.075)     (0.111)      (0.156)        (0.141)
% Manufacturing                         0.255**      0.103       0.388**        0.371**
                                        (0.115)     (0.140)      (0.152)        (0.157)
ln(Mfg. value added per capita)         -0.174*      -0.098      0.153*         0.161**
                                        (0.089)     (0.080)      (0.083)        (0.076)
% Skilled                                -0.015      0.099        0.139          0.155
                                        (0.187)     (0.171)      (0.183)        (0.182)
% Unemployed                            0.260**      0.152        -0.029         -0.040
                                        (0.110)     (0.108)      (0.102)        (0.108)
% Black                                   0.062      0.114        0.033          0.042
                                        (0.155)     (0.150)      (0.073)        (0.072)
ln(Population)                            0.002     0.143*        -0.029         -0.009
                                        (0.077)     (0.085)      (0.077)        (0.080)
Northeast                                -0.102     0.268*        0.018          0.070
                                        (0.143)     (0.144)      (0.103)        (0.100)
Midwest                               -0.529***      0.166        0.029          0.121
                                        (0.129)     (0.168)      (0.154)        (0.150)
West                                   -0.231**      -0.121       0.110          0.122
                                        (0.110)     (0.117)      (0.100)        (0.100)

R2                                      0.44         0.36          0.33           0.33
N                                       147          147           147            147
Note: An observation is a metro area and all variables have been standardized to have
µ = 0 and 2 = 1 and are based on 1940 values. Percentages are shares of employed men
excpet % unemployed is share of men in the labor force. Omitted regional category is the
South. War expenditure per capita in 1940 dollars. For a discussion of the draft measures
see Appendix Section B.2. Only 132 of the 147 metro areas are identified in these reports.
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *p<.1; **p<.05; ***p<.01




                                           69
Table A5: Effect of war expenditures on defense industry employ-
ment (1940-1944)
                                 Black       White        Men        Women

 War exp per capita (1940)      0.041***    0.071***     0.065***    0.084***
                                (0.014)     (0.011)      (0.011)     (0.014)
 Mean change                       .06        -.05         -.09         .07
 Mean War Exp PC (1000s)          1.46        1.46         1.46        1.46
 Division FE                        X           X            X           X
 Baseline controls                  X           X            X           X
 Draft control                      X           X            X           X
 Metro areas                      147         147          147         147
 Note: Sample is 147 metro areas. The outcome is the change in the share em-
 ployed in defense industries. See Appendix Section D.1 for more details. War
 expenditure is $1000s per capita. Baseline controls are 1940 variables inter-
 acted with a post indicator: average years of education, share employed in
 manufacturing, share employed in agriculture, and share Black. Draft control
 is predicted draft rate based on 1940 demographics. Primary data sources are
 1940 (100%; 5% sub-sample for whites) Census sample and ES-270 reports.
 Metro area definitions based on 1940 and 1950 Census Bureau definitions. All
 values are in 1940 dollars. Regressions are weighted by relevant population.
 Robust standard errors in parentheses. *p<.1; **p<.05; ***p<.01




                                      70
    Table A6: Effect of war expenditures - State level (1940-1950)
                                 (1)         (2)              (3)        (4)
                                    Black Men                    White Men
                                Basic      Controls          Basic     Controls

Panel A: Share skilled
War exp per capita * Post     0.040***         0.021          -0.000      0.004
                              (0.007)         (0.013)        (0.005)     (0.007)
Mean Y - 1940                   0.22            0.22           0.62       0.62
Mean Y - 1950                   0.37           0.37            0.73       0.73

Panel B: ln(Average yearly wage)
War exp per capita * Post    0.063*           0.068*          -0.013      -0.010
                            (0.032)           (0.036)        (0.010)     (0.016)
Mean Y - 1940                 6.34             6.34            7.13        7.13
Mean Y - 1950                 6.88             6.88            7.47        7.47

Panel C: Prime-age employment rate
War exp per capita * Post  -0.003              0.001          -0.003     -0.006*
                          (0.009)             (0.018)        (0.002)     (0.004)
Mean Y - 1940               0.85               0.85            0.88        0.88
Mean Y - 1950               0.87               0.87            0.92        0.92


States                           49             49             49          49
Mean war exp per capita         0.80           0.80           0.80        0.80
Metro FE                         X              X              X           X
Division-Year FE                 X              X              X           X
Baseline controls                 -             X               -          X
Draft control                     -             X               -          X
Note: Sample is 48 states plus Washington D.C.. See equation 1 for the basic spec-
ification. War expenditure is $1000s per capita. Share skilled is the share of em-
ployed men who are not farmers, laborers, or service workers. Wages are total
wage earnings in the previous year for men who are currently employees. Prime-
age employment is the share of men ages 25-54 who are employed. Baseline con-
trols are 1940 variables interacted with a post indicator: average years of educa-
tion, share employed in manufacturing, share employed in agriculture, and share
Black. Draft control is predicted draft rate based on 1940 demographics. Primary
data sources are 1940 (100%; 5% sub-sample for whites) and 1950 (1%) Census
samples. Metro area definitions based on 1940 and 1950 Census Bureau defini-
tions. All values are in 1940 dollars. Regressions are weighted by relevant popu-
lation. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *p<.1; **p<.05; ***p<.01




                                         71
Table A7: Effect of war expenditures - Commuting zone level (1940-
1950)
                                  (1)         (2)                (3)         (4)
                                     Black Men                      White Men
                                 Basic      Controls            Basic      Controls

 Panel A: Share skilled
 War exp per capita * Post      0.023***        0.022***       -0.006**      0.006*
                                (0.004)         (0.005)         (0.003)      (0.003)
 Mean Y - 1940                    0.22            0.22           0.63         0.63
 Mean Y - 1950                    0.38            0.38           0.73         0.73

 Panel B: ln(Average yearly wage)
 War exp per capita * Post   0.034***           0.031**       -0.025***       0.002
                             (0.013)            (0.015)        (0.006)       (0.005)
 Mean Y - 1940                 6.32               6.32           7.10         7.10
 Mean Y - 1950                 6.86               6.86           7.45         7.45

 Panel C: Prime-age employment rate
 War exp per capita * Post  0.001                -0.006        -0.003**     -0.005***
                           (0.005)              (0.005)         (0.002)      (0.002)
 Mean Y - 1940              0.84                  0.84           0.88          0.88
 Mean Y - 1950              0.87                  0.87           0.92          0.92


 Commuting Zones                  586            586             586          586
 Mean war exp per capita          0.45           0.45            0.45         0.45
 Metro FE                          X              X               X            X
 Division-Year FE                  X              X               X            X
 Baseline controls                  -             X                -           X
 Draft control                      -             X                -           X
 Note: Sample is 586 commuting zones after excluding commuting zones with no
 war expenditures. See equation 1 for the basic specification. War expenditure is
 $1000s per capita. Share skilled is the share of employed men who are not farm-
 ers, laborers, or service workers. Wages are total wage earnings in the previous
 year for men who are currently employees. Prime-age employment is the share of
 men ages 25-54 who are employed. Baseline controls are 1940 variables interacted
 with a post indicator: average years of education, share employed in manufactur-
 ing, share employed in agriculture, and share Black. Draft control is predicted draft
 rate based on 1940 demographics. Primary data sources are 1940 (100%; 5% sub-
 sample for whites) and 1950 (1%) Census samples. Metro area definitions based on
 1940 and 1950 Census Bureau definitions. All values are in 1940 dollars. Regres-
 sions are weighted by relevant population. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
 *p<.1; **p<.05; ***p<.01




                                           72
Table A8: Effect of war expenditures on occupational segregation (1940-1950)
                                  (1)            (2)               (3)             (4)
                                Occ dissimilarity index         ln(Occ dissimilarity index)
                                 Basic       Adjusted             Basic        Adjusted

 Panel A: All metros
 War exp per capita * Post      -0.009**      -0.011**           -0.016**        -0.022**
                                 (0.004)       (0.004)            (0.007)         (0.009)
 N                                 270           270                270             270

 Panel B: Excluding South
 War exp per capita * Post      -0.010***     -0.013***         -0.019***        -0.026**
                                 (0.004)       (0.005)           (0.007)          (0.010)
 N                                 172           172               172              172


 Mean war exp per capita          1.46            1.46             1.46            1.46
 Metro FE                          X               X                X               X
 Division-Year FE                  X               X                X               X
 Baseline controls                 X               X                X               X
 Draft control                     X               X                X               X
Note: Full sample is 147 metro areas; educational expenditures is available for only 121
metro areas. See equation 1 for the basic specification. Residential segregation indices are
from Cutler et al. (1999) and are only available for 43 of our metro areas. Baseline controls
are 1940 variables interacted with a post indicator: average years of education, share em-
ployed in manufacturing, share employed in agriculture, and share Black. Draft control is
predicted draft rate based on 1940 demographics. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
*p<.1; **p<.05; ***p<.01




                                             73
                                                             Table A9: Effect of war expenditures on Black occupational composition
                                        (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)             (7)              (8)                    (9)              (10)           (11)
                                   Professional     Farmers       Managers      Clerical     Sales     Craftsmen       Operatives     Domestic service      Service worker      Farm labor      Laborer

     War exp per capita * Post         -0.001         -0.001        0.000        0.001       -0.000       0.003         0.018***             -0.003              -0.006           -0.004*        -0.009
                                      (0.001)        (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.001)      (0.004)        (0.006)             (0.002)             (0.004)           (0.002)       (0.007)

     Mean Y - 1940                      0.03          0.02          0.02          0.02        0.01         0.07           0.18               0.04                 0.22             0.04           0.34
     Mean Y - 1950                      0.02          0.01          0.03          0.05        0.01         0.10           0.26               0.01                 0.20             0.02           0.27
     Observations                       286           286           286           286         286          286            286                286                  286              286            286




74
     Mean war exp per capita            1.46          1.46          1.46          1.46        1.46         1.46           1.46               1.46                 1.46             1.46           1.46
     Metro FE                            X             X             X             X           X            X              X                  X                    X                X              X
     Division-Year FE                    X             X             X             X           X            X              X                  X                    X                X              X
     Baseline controls                   X             X             X             X           X            X              X                  X                    X                X              X
     Draft control                       X             X             X             X           X            X              X                  X                    X                X              X
     Note: Sample is 147 metro areas. See equation 1 for the basic specification. War expenditure is $1000s per capita. Occupational shares are shares of employed men. Baseline controls are 1940
     variables interacted with a post indicator: average years of education, share employed in manufacturing, share employed in agriculture, and share Black. Draft control is predicted draft rate based
     on 1940 demographics. Primary data sources are 1940 (100%; 5% sub-sample for whites) and 1950 (1%) Census samples. Metro area definitions based on 1940 and 1950 Census Bureau definitions.
     All values are in 1940 dollars. Regressions are weighted by relevant population. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *p<.1; **p<.05; ***p<.01
   Table A10: Oaxaca-Blinder ln(yearly wage) decomposition
                ln(Wage) gap                        1940-50
                1940   1950        Pure change    Price change    Total change
Overall          0.63  0.38                                           -0.25
Explained        0.37  0.22            -0.03          -0.11           -0.14
Education        0.14  0.08            -0.01          -0.06           -0.06
Occupation       0.21  0.13            -0.03          -0.04           -0.07
Industry         0.05  0.02            -0.01          -0.02           -0.03
Region           0.02  0.01            -0.01          0.00            -0.01
Age             -0.04 -0.01            0.02           0.01             0.03
Unexplained      0.26  0.16                                           -0.10
Note: Sample includes Black and native born white men who are wage earn-
ers. See Appendix Section C.3 for more detail. Education includes years of
education interacted with division of birth and dummies for high school and
college completion. Occupation includes dummies for ten aggregate occupa-
tional groupings. Industry includes dummies for twelve aggregated industry
groupings. Region includes dummies for nine Census divisions. Age includes
a cubic polynomial in age. "Explained" gaps evaluated at coefficients for white
men. "Pure" change captures compositional changes while "price' captures
changing coefficients. Data comes from 1940 (100%; 5% sub-sample for white
men) and 1950 (1%) Census samples.




                                      75
                       Table A11: Effect of war expenditures on migration
                                 (1)         (2)            (3)           (4)        (5)           (6)
                                         Black Men                                White Men
                              1930-40     1940-50         1950-60       1930-40    1940-50      1950-60

War exp per capita * Post       0.007      0.051**         0.001         0.004      0.023***     -0.000
                               (0.013)     (0.022)        (0.015)       (0.008)      (0.007)     (0.017)

Observations                    286         286            274            294         294         282
Mean war exp per capita         1.46        1.46           1.46           1.46        1.46        1.46
Metro FE                         X           X              X              X           X           X
Division-Year FE                 X           X              X              X           X           X
Baseline controls                X           X              X              X           X           X
Draft control                    X           X              X              X           X           X
Note: Sample is 147 metro areas. The outcome is the change in the population of men. War expenditure is
$1000s per capita. Baseline controls are 1940 variables interacted with a post indicator: average years of ed-
ucation, share employed in manufacturing, share employed in agriculture, and share Black. Draft control is
predicted draft rate based on 1940 demographics. Primary data sources are 1930-1960 Census data. Metro
area definitions based on 1940 and 1950 Census Bureau definitions. All values are in 1940 dollars. Regres-
sions are weighted by relevant population. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *p<.1; **p<.05; ***p<.01




                                                     76
Table A12: Ability of war expenditure shocks to explain aggregate mi-
gration
                                 (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)
                                        Black                        White
                                Basic           Full         Basic           Full

 Panel A: Actual data
 War Exp PC * Post             0.093***     0.051**          0.011      0.023***
                               (0.024)      (0.022)         (0.015)     (0.007)

 Panel B: Model-generated data - Anti-discriminatory shocks only
 War Exp PC * Post          0.129***     0.130***        -0.013           -0.001
                            (0.012)      (0.009)        (0.009)          (0.004)

 Panel C: Model-generated data - All war spending shocks
 War Exp PC * Post         0.134***     0.134***        -0.011            0.002
                            (0.013)      (0.009)       (0.009)           (0.004)


 Metro areas                     147            147          147             147
 Mean war exp per capita         1.46           1.46         1.46            1.46
 Metro FE                         X              X            X               X
 Division-Year FE                 X              X            X               X
 Baseline controls                X              X            X               X
 Draft control                    X              X            X               X
 Note: Sample is 147 metro areas. For the actual data, the outcome is the change in
 the population of men. For the model data, the outcome is the change in the num-
 ber of employed men. War expenditure is $1000s per capita. Baseline controls are
 1940 variables interacted with a post indicator: average years of education, share
 employed in manufacturing, share employed in agriculture, and share Black. Draft
 control is predicted draft rate based on 1940 demographics. Primary data sources
 are 1940 and 1950 Census data. Metro area definitions based on 1940 and 1950 Cen-
 sus Bureau definitions. All values are in 1940 dollars. Regressions are weighted by
 relevant population. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *p<.1; **p<.05; ***p<.01




                                          77
     Table A13: Effect of war expenditures on school attendance (1940-1960)
                                   (1)             (2)                   (3)             (4)
                                      Black Children                        White Children
                                Boys, 16-18    Girls, 16-18           Boys, 16-18    Girls, 16-18

Panel A: All metros
War exp per capita * Post           0.014*            0.004               0.003           0.003
                                   (0.008)           (0.007)             (0.006)         (0.006)
N - Pre                            127,085           144,710             81,738          81,738
N - Post                           10,783            11,852              36,491          36,491

Panel B: Excluding South
War exp per capita * Post          0.023**            0.005              -0.000           -0.000
                                   (0.010)           (0.008)             (0.006)         (0.006)
N - Pre                            56,707            62,974              69,176          69,176
N - Post                            6,064             6,868              29,142          29,142


Mean Y - Pre                        0.50              0.50                0.65             0.61
Mean Y - Post                       0.66              0.62                0.75             0.70
Mean war exp per capita             1.46              1.46                1.46             1.46
Metro-Age FE                         X                 X                   X                X
Division-Year-Age FE                 X                 X                   X                X
Draft control                        X                 X                   X                X
Note: Regression at the individual level and only includes children living in one of 147 metro ar-
eas. See equation 1 for the basic specification. School attendance is an indicator whether the child
attended any school in the past month (1940) or two months (1960). Draft control is predicted
draft rate based on 1940 demographics. Primary data sources are 1940 (100%; 5% sub-sample
for whites) and 1960 (5%; 40% sub-sample for whites) Census samples. Regressions weighted by
sample line weights. Standard errors clustered at the metro-year level. *p<.1; **p<.05; ***p<.01




                                                78
Table A14: Placebo effect of war expenditures on school attendance (1930-1940)
                                   (1)             (2)                   (3)             (4)
                                      Black Children                        White Children
                                Boys, 16-18    Girls, 16-18           Boys, 16-18    Girls, 16-18

Panel A: All metros
War exp per capita * Post           -0.005            0.000               -0.001          -0.001
                                   (0.008)           (0.006)             (0.004)         (0.004)
N - Pre                              4,983            6,119              73,194          73,194
N - Post                           127,085           144,710             81,738          81,738

Panel B: Excluding South
War exp per capita * Post           -0.016            0.004               -0.004          -0.004
                                   (0.011)           (0.006)             (0.004)         (0.004)
N - Pre                              2,034            2,414              63,215          63,215
N - Post                           56,707            62,974              69,176          69,176


Mean Y - Pre                        0.38              0.38                0.50             0.46
Mean Y - Post                       0.50              0.50                0.65             0.61
Mean war exp per capita             1.46              1.46                1.46             1.46
Metro-Age FE                         X                 X                   X                X
Division-Year-Age FE                 X                 X                   X                X
Draft control                        X                 X                   X                X
Note: Regression at the individual level and only includes children living in one of 147 metro ar-
eas. See equation 1 for the basic specification. School attendance is an indicator whether the child
attended any school in the past six months (1930) or month (1940). Draft control is predicted
draft rate based on 1940 demographics. Primary data sources are 1930 (5%) and 1940 (100%; 5%
sub-sample for whites) Census samples. Regressions weighted by sample line weights. Standard
errors clustered at the metro-year level. *p<.1; **p<.05; ***p<.01




                                                79
    Table A15: Effect of war expenditures on returns to education (1940-1950)
                                              (1)               (2)           (3)         (4)
                                                    Black men                    White men

War exp per capita * Post                   0.026**         0.049*           -0.001       -0.009
                                            (0.013)         (0.026)         (0.004)      (0.013)
Education                                  0.037***        0.039***        0.074***     0.078***
                                            (0.001)         (0.002)         (0.001)      (0.002)
Education * Post                           -0.015***       -0.010**        -0.031***    -0.033***
                                            (0.003)         (0.005)         (0.002)      (0.004)
War exp per capita * Education                               -0.001                     -0.002***
                                                            (0.001)                      (0.001)
War exp per capita * Education * Post                        -0.003                        0.001
                                                            (0.002)                      (0.001)

N - Pre                                    1,081,781      1,081,781        715,189       715,189
N - Post                                     5,471          5,471          54,388        54,388
Mean war exp per capita                       1.46           1.46           1.46          1.46
Metro FE                                       X              X               X             X
Division-Year FE                               X              X               X             X
Baseline controls                              X              X               X             X
Draft control                                  X              X               X             X
Individual controls                            X              X               X             X
Note: Regression at the individual level and only includes men living in one of 147 metro ar-
eas. Wages are total wage earnings (1940 dollars) in the previous year for men who are currently
employees. Education is based on highest year of education completed. Individual controls in-
clude a cubic in age, whether born in the South, and whether married; all individual controls are
interacted with year indicators. Baseline controls are 1940 variables interacted with a post indi-
cator: average years of education, share employed in manufacturing, share employed in agricul-
ture, and share Black. Draft control is predicted draft rate based on 1940 demographics. Primary
data sources are 1940 (100%; 5% sub-sample for whites) and 1950 (1%) Census samples. Regres-
sions weighted by sample line weights. Standard errors clustered at the metro-year level. *p<.1;
**p<.05; ***p<.01




                                               80
B     Data Appendix

B.1   Census data
Individual Census records. The primary source of Census data are individual Census
records from Ruggles et al. (2020). We use the 100% 1920, 5% 1930, 100% 1940, 1% 1950,
5% 1960, and 1% 1970 (metro) samples. Due to data and processing considerations, we
take a 2% random sample of whites and 20% sub-sample of Blacks from the 1920 Census.
Similarly, for the 1940 Census we use a 5% random sample of whites and for the 1960 we
use a 40% sub-sample for whites (resulting in a 2% sample). Individuals in institutional
group quarters are excluded.
    Metro areas: Metro areas are based on the IPUMS variable "metaread". These are
county based measures. Definitions vary slightly over time, but the basic qualification is
the county must contain a city of at least 50,000 people or integrated with another county
containing a qualifying city. Metro areas could expand or contract over time. Counties
are identified in the 1940 and earlier samples so a consistent county based definition is ap-
plied. Metro definitions were relatively unchanged between 1940 and 1950. There were
more significant changes in the 1960 and 1970 Censuses. Several metro areas that were
split between 1950 and 1960 are re-aggregated to maintain comparability. For long-term
analysis (1920-1970) consistent metro definitions are imposed by using 1990 commuting
zone boundaries. Earlier geographic boundaries (counties for 1940 and earlier, SEAs for
1950, PUMAs for 1960, and 1970 county groups for 1970) are crosswalked to commuting
zones based on Eckert et al. (2018). Observations are weighted based on the geographic
overlap between their geographic region and the commuting zone of interest.
    Employment: Employment status is based on the IPUMS variable "empstat". This vari-
able is not available in 1920. The reference period varies slightly across Censuses. In 1930
an individual is counted as employed if they were working on the most recent regular
working day. In 1940 and later, an individual was counted as employed if they worked
at all during the reference week. Prime-age employment is used as an outcome measure
due to concerns about how the labor force and unemployment are measured across years.
Prime-age workers are defined as individuals ages 25-54. Prime-age male employment is
defined as the share of men in this age range who are employed.
    Occupation and industry: Occupation and industry are coded using the 1950 Census
coding system. Skilled occupations are defined as occupations falling in the following cat-
egories: "Professional, Technical;" "Managers, Officials, and Proprietors;" "Clerical and
Kindred;" "Sales workers;" "Craftsmen;" or "Operatives" categories. This corresponds to
occupational codes 000-093, 200-690 under the 1950 IPUMS occupational coding scheme.

                                             81
Semiskilled or skilled blue-collar occupations are a sub-category of skilled occupations
that fall under the "Craftsmen;" or "Operatives" categories. Occupational shares are con-
structed using currently employed individuals who are aged 14+.61
    Defense industry is defined as mining, manufacturing, transportation and govern-
ment industries, following Collins (2001). These industries were most likely to be in-
cluded in the War Manpower Commissions defense industry employment reports. These
industries correspond to 1950 IPUMS industry codes 203-239, 306-499, 506-568, 906-946.
Following Acemoglu et al. (2004), key defense industries are defined as durable goods
manufacturing industries and these correspond to IPUMS 1950 industry codes 326-388.
    Employee: A worker is defined as an employee based on the IPUMS variable "class-
wkrd". Employees are defined as individuals who are currenlty in the labor force and
have classwkrd codes 20-28, which corresponds to categories "Works on Salary", "Wage/salary,
private", and "Wage/salary, government".
    Wage income: Yearly wage income is created using the IPUMS variable "incwage". This
variable comes from the Census question asking for each person's total pre-tax wage and
salary income. This question was first introduced in 1940. Yearly wage income is specif-
ically payments for work done as an employee; it excludes self-employment income or
personal business income. This restriction is especially relevant for farmers. Unfortu-
nately, the 1940 Census did not ask for information on business or other sources of in-
come. The wage income sample is restricted to individuals who are (1) are employees at
the time of the Census, (2) are employed at the time of the Census, and (3) their primary
occupation is not farmer or unpaid family farm laborer. Only sample line respondents
were asked about wage income in the 1950 Census.
    An additional issue is how to deal with top-coded values or implausibly low earn-
ings totals. We follow Goldin and Katz (1992) by multiplying top-coded values by 1.4
and recoding as missing values that are less than 1/2 the minimum weekly wage. This
corresponds to weekly earnings below $6 in 1940, $8 in 1950, $20 in 1960 and $28 in 1970.
    Education: Years of education is created based on the IPUMS variable "educ". Indi-
viduals with five or more years of college are all coded as having seventeen years of
education. Individuals with twelve years of completed schooling are assumed to have
completed high school. This question was first asked in the 1940 Census. Only sample
line respondents were asked about highest completed grade in the 1950 Census.
    The IPUMS variable "school" is used to classify whether a child is currently attend-
ing school. The question changed slightly across Census years but was relatively consis-
tent from 1940 to 1950. The main changes across Censuses are (1) length of retrospective
  61 Results   are robust to using share of all individuals in the labor force instead.

                                                        82
reference period and (2) qualifying educational institutions. The retrospective reference
periods are: previous four months in 1920, previous six months in 1930, previous month
in 1940, and previous two months for 1950 and on. Qualifying educational institutions
are: any type of school in 1920, any school or night school in 1930, any school and night
school/extension programs if part of the regular school system in 1940 and 1950, any
school that advances a person towards high school or college degree in 1960. Across all
years the respondent only has to indicate whether the person has attended a qualifying
institution in the reference period, but they do not need to regularly attend. Only sample
line respondents were asked about school attendance in the 1950 Census.
Census aggregates. Census aggregates are taken from published Census volumes. County
population totals by age and race are taking from ICPSR 02896 (Haines and ICPSR, 2010).
Manufacturing output and value added from the Census of Manufactures are taken from
the same source. We also digitized new metro-level data from the 1950 Census. The only
individual level data available for 1950 is the 1% sample. This means we limited Black
observations for metro areas with small Black populations. From Volume II of the 1950
Census of Population we digitize the following: Table 77 which has total employment
for each metro by race-sex-occupation, Table 83 which has total employment for each
metro by race-sex-industry, and table 87 which has total counts for each metro by race-
sex-income bin, as well as the median income by race and sex. We use this data rather
than totals from individual counts whenever possible. For heterogeneity analysis (e.g.,
by age or education), we rely on the individual Census data.


B.2    Draft rate
Creating a predicted draft rate. We use a predicted draft rate rather than actual draft
or enlistment rate. A predicted draft rate is created for each metro area by using draft
records to identify national draft rates by group and then applying these draft rates to the
baseline demographics for each metro in 1940.
    The drawback of the predicted draft measure as a control is that it will not control for
all sources of variation in draft rates. For example, some areas might have had stricter
draft boards or a higher share of individuals who did not meet minimum military stan-
dards. However, we believe we are capturing the largest source of exogenous variation
in draft rates. If the predicted draft rate does not affect our estimates then it is less likely
these smaller sources of variation would meaningfully alter our results.62
    Our primary source of draft data are the WWII Army Enlistment Records provided by

  62 Our   results are also robust to using the actual draft rate. Results available upon request.

                                                       83
the National Archives and Records Administration. This data series contains the records
of about nine million men and women who enlisted in the U.S. Army. The records typ-
ically contain the serial number, name, place of residence, place and date of enlistment,
education, occupation, marital status, and race of the enlistee. There are several gaps in
the records. First, the data is only for the U.S. Army so it excludes other service branches,
such as the Navy (although the Air Force was still part of the Army during WWII). Sec-
ond, some records are known to be missing. Finally, some of the scanned records are
unusable due to poor scans.
    The secondary source of data are Selective Service System (1956). We digitized tables
reporting total inductions and enlistments by service branch, month, and race. This data
identifies how many inductions are not captured in the individual enlistment data for
each month. We re-weight the individual observations by the number of records missing
in their enlistment month. For example, if the individual records cover half of total in-
ductions in a given month then the observed inductions will be given double the weight.
Implicitly, this also assumes that individuals drafted into the Navy in any given month
have similar characteristics to individuals drafted into the Army in the same month, con-
ditional on race. The reason we re-weight the observations within a month is that draft
eligibility and probabilities changed throughout the war. For example, initially individu-
als younger than 21 were not eligible for the draft but later in the war the minimum age
eligibility was reduced to 18. We condition on race because there is evidence the Army
was much more willing to accept Black men than the Navy.63
    Only records of enlistments between January 1940 and December 1945 are included.
Individuals who are younger than 17 or older than 45 at time of enlistment are dropped.
We restrict the sample to individuals who were draft based on their serial codes. Serial
codes that start with three or four indicate that the individual was drafted.
    We next find the total number of individuals drafted each year by demographic group.
We create demographic cells using race, year of birth, nativity, and marital status. All of
these variables were important determinants of draft probabilities.
    The next step is to create draft rates by demographic group and year. We use 1940
Census data to determine the population in each demographic cell. Most of the charac-
teristics are time-invariant except for marital status. Marital status was one of the key
determinants for whether someone was drafted. There is also significant variation across
metro areas in typical age at marriage and marriage rates. We create marriage hazard
rates using marriage rates across cohorts in 1940. We then follow each cohort from 1940
to 1945; first applying the marriage hazard rate and then subtracting the number of in-
  63 Black   men served almost exclusively in mess units for much of the war in the Navy.

                                                     84
dividuals who enlisted each year. For the next year, we apply the marriage hazard rate
to the remaining single individuals and repeat the process. Therefore, for each year we
have the number of married and single individuals for each demographic group in each
cohort. To create the draft rate for that year and demographic group we then take the total
number of individuals drafted and divide by the population in each given demographic
group.
    The final step is to apply these draft rates to each metro. We follow a similar process to
the above to generate the number of married and single individuals for each demographic
group in each year, using metro specific marriage hazard rates for whites and a national
rate for Blacks. We use a national rate for Blacks because some metro areas have small
Black populations which makes it difficult to calculate metro specific hazard rates. Once
we have the number of individuals in each demographic group for each year we apply the
national draft rates for that group and aggregate to create the total number of individuals
drafted in each metro. We then divide by the male population ages 15-64 in 1940.
    We also create an actual draft rate measure for comparison and to see if our predicted
draft rate does predict the actual draft rate. When calculating the actual draft rate we scale
the denominator by an estimate of the population growth between 1940 and 1943. We do
this to account for the fact that a large number of people migrated during the first part of
the war. Without this correction, using 1940 population as a denominator would lead to
higher draft rates in areas with higher net in-migration. Since war expenditure increase
migration (see Appendix Section D.3 this would create a positive correlation between
draft rate and war expenditures.
Results. Appendix Table A4 shows that our predicted draft rate is a strong predictor of
the actual draft rate. Therefore, it seems as though it is a valid measure of draft intensity.
Table A4 shows that both the predicted and actual draft rate are negatively correlated with
war expenditures. Moreover, the predicted draft rate is positively correlated with labor
shortages, even conditional on war expenditures. This correlation provides evidence that
our predicted draft variable has the expected consequence on labor supply.


B.3   Other data
We supplement the above data with several additional data sources.
Labor shortage data. We digitized reports on the extent of labor shortages during WWII
by month. These reports were from the monthly Labor Market Reports compiled by the
War Manpower Commission. These classified labor markets by whether they were fac-
ing labor shortages. Labor shortages were defined based on comparing expected hiring


                                             85
versus the number of people expected to be looking for work combined with subjective
adjustments by government officials.
   We create our measure of labor market shortages by taking the percentage of months
between 1942 and 1944 that the labor market experienced severe labor shortages (on the
map this corresponded to labor markets with completely shaded circles). About 20% of
metro-month observations were coded as severe labor shortages.
Defense industry employment during WWII. The War Manpower Commission regu-
larly surveyed employers in war industries or critical labor markets on their employment.
These surveys were ES-270 reports. These reports did not cover the entire labor market
but did cover a large share of war industry employment. For more details and examples
of usage in other research, please see Collins (2001) or Rose (2018).


C     Labor Market Context

C.1   Occupational distribution and changes 1940-50
First, some notes on occupational categories. The aggregate occupational categories are
"Profession, Technical;" "Farmers;" "Managers, Officials, and Proprietors;" "Clerical and
Kindred;" "Sales workers;" "Craftsmen;" "Operatives;" "Domestic Service;" "Service';'
"Farm Laborer;" and "Laborer". Appendix Figure A.2 shows the average wages and
education for white men by occupation. The occupations are colored based on which ag-
gregate occupational category they belong to. It is clear that occupations in the "Domestic
Service;" "Service';' "Farm Laborer;" and "Laborer" pay significantly less on average and
also employ workers with lower education levels.
    Appendix Table A1 shows the occupational distribution for white and Black men in
1940 and 1950. Several facts are immediately clear. First, Black and white men have very
different occupational distributions with Black men being concentrated in unskilled oc-
cupations. As seen in Appendix Figure A.2, these are the occupations with the lowest
pay and lowest education. Secondly, the occupational distribution for Black men sig-
nificantly changed between 1940 and 1950 with large increases in the "Craftsmen" and
"Operatives" categories. These observations are consistent with Collins (2000). The occu-
pational distribution for white men changed as well but to a much lesser extent. These
results are consistent with the finding of occupational upgrading for Black men in Collins
(2000). These facts provide preliminary motivation for our focus on the impact of WWII
expenditures on occupational upgrading for Black men.



                                            86
C.2   Occupational segregation
An immediate question is to what extent these occupational differences between Black
and white men can be explained by differences in education or location. For example,
Black men were much more likely to live in the South and less likely to live in metro areas
and had significantly less education on average. However, there are plenty of examples
of explicit discrimination, for example Appendix Table A2 lists a number of unions with
explicit or effective bars on Black membership. There are two interesting questions to ask:
first, which occupations seem to be most segregated, and second, which metro areas seem
to be most segregated?
    First, we compare segregation across occupations by looking at the expected number
of Black workers, based on random allocation within education group and region, and
compare it to the actual number of workers. We restrict the sample to men living in metro
areas who are employed at the time of the Census. We define education groups as 0-5
years, 6-8 years, 9-11 years, 12-15 years, and 16+ years. Following Margo (1995), we ac-
count for school quality differences by multiplying years of education by 0.85 for Black
men born in the South with less than 15 years of education. This adjustment roughly
corresponds to the difference in average school term length between Blacks and whites in
segregated Southern schools during the 1920s. Occupations are defined using the occupa-
tion and industry categories in Table 77 of the state breakouts in the 1950 Census Volume
II. The number of expected Black workers is calculated by:

                                               Blackre
                        Expectedo =    (        Popre
                                                        Positionsore )
                                      r    e

   Where Black   re
            Popre is the share of Black men within region r and educational group e and
Positionsore is the number of positions in occupation o held by men in region r and ed-
ucational group e. To get a measure of the gap for each occupation we then divide by
the actual number of Black men observed in occupation o. Appendix Table A3 reports
the occupations with the top fifteen largest and smallest ratios of expected vs. actual
employment.
   A second question of interest is comparing occupational segregation across regions.
A natural index to measure occupational segregation is the Duncan index (Duncan and
Duncan, 1955). The Duncan index is defined as:

                                               Black or       Whiteor
                           Duncanr =       | Blackr       -
                                                              Whiter
                                                                      |
                                          o

Fundamentally, this index is a measure of "evenness", i.e. how evenly are Black men dis-


                                               87
tributed across occupations. There are two related issues with this metric. First, if Black
men are a small percentage of the population or many occupations have few positions
then there will be substantial deviations from evenness due to pure chance as noted in
Carrington and Troske (1997). Secondly, this metric does not distinguish between differ-
ences due to education versus occupational segregation. While occupational segregation
can cause educational differences, our focus here is on occupational segregation condi-
tional on education.
    We can adjust the Duncan index by estimating the expected Duncan index, E[ Duncanr ],
if workers are allocated randomly across jobs conditional on education and calculating
the adjusted index:

                                 Adj       1 Duncanr - E[ Duncanr ]
                         Duncanr       =
                                           2   1 - E[ Duncanr ]
   We calculate E[ Duncanr ] by simulating fifty random occupational distributions for
each metro area where the number of Black individuals in each occupation and education
group are simulated using binomials where the probability of "success" is the share of
Black men within the relevant education group.
   Appendix Figure A.1 displays a map where the shading corresponds to the value of
the adjusted Duncan index. The primary results are that there is substantial occupational
segregation and that the segregation is not limited to the South.


C.3   Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition
Another way of examining the labor market context is to decompose wage differences
in an Oaxaca-Blinder framework. We can decompose the aggregate wage gap into the
portion that can be explained by differences in observables and the portion that cannot be
explained by observables. The cross-sectional regression of (log of) wage on observables
is:
                                       Yi =  Xi +  i

Evaluating the OLS estimate at the mean values gives:

                                            ¯ =
                                            Y  ^X
                                                ¯

   The difference between Black and white outcomes can be decomposed into:

                    ¯ Wh - Y
                    Y             ^ (X
                           ¯ Bl = Wh ¯ Wh - X
                                            ¯ Bl ) + ( ^ Wh - ^ Bl ) X
                                                                     ¯ Bl
                                       Observables        Unobservables


                                               88
where the first term gives the portion of the wage gap that can be explained by observable
differences and the second portion cannot be explained by observable characteristics.64
For 1940 and 1950, we regress (log of) wages on a set of variables for education (years
of education interacted with region of birth, whether graduated high school, whether
graduated college), occupation (indicators for eleven aggregate occupation categories),
industry (indicators for twelve aggregate industry categories), region, and a cubic in age.
The resulting decompositions are given in the first two columns of Appendix Table A10.
We restrict the sample to native born men living in metro areas.
    There are several key results. First, there is a large wage gap but it declines signifi-
cantly between 1940 and 1950 - declining from 0.63 log points in 1940 to 0.38 log points
in 1950. Second, education and occupation differences are the most important observ-
able factors. Third, there is still a large portion of the gap that cannot be explained by
observable characteristics.
    We can take this decomposition a step further and decompose the changes between
1940 and 1950. We focus on decomposing the change in the explained gap into a "price"
effect and "pure" effect. The price effect is due to changing coefficient values that benefit
one race relatively more than the other (changes in ). The pure effect is due to relative
changes in observables (changes in X   ¯ ).



      ^ (X
40-50 Wh ¯ Wh - X         ^ ,50 (
                ¯ Bl ) = Wh             ¯ Wh - 40-50 X
                                                     ¯ Bl ) + 40-50 ^ Wh ( X
                                                                           ¯ Wh,40 - X
                                                                                     ¯ Bl ,40 )
                                  40-50 X
                                                Pure                                  Price

    The results are given in the last three columns of Appendix Table A10. Overall, educa-
tion and occupation changes explain most of the decline in the wage gap due to observ-
ables. The change in the gap due to education is almost entirely due to price effects (lower
returns to education). On the other hand, the change in the gap due to occupation is due
to both price effects (relatively higher returns for occupations with more Black men) and
pure effects (Black men changing occupation). The price effects are consistent with the
finding in Margo (1995) of wage compression across education groups and occupations
that relatively benefited Black men. However, we also observe meaningful changes in
the wage gap due to changes in the occupational composition of Black men, which is
consistent with occupational upgrading.


  64 We  evaluate the gap at the coefficient values for white men. We could have evaluated the gap at the
coefficients for Black men or some combination of the two but alternative approaches do not change our
qualitative findings.

                                                   89
D     Robustness and Supplementary Analysis

D.1    Impact of war expenditures on labor market outcomes during WWII
ES-270. Our main analysis looks at changes between 1940 and 1950 but it is also instruc-
tive to look at how war expenditures impacted employment during the war. The first
way we can analyze the impact during the war is to look at the impact on employment
in war industries using the ES-270 reports. For more discussion on the data please see
Appendix Section B.3. We use our standard difference-in-differences strategy and our
outcome is the share employed in defense industries. There are several issues with this
outcome variable. First, not all establishments are included in the ES-270 reports. Second,
we do not have a concurrent estimate of the employed population. Finally, the ES-270
data is split by race or gender but not by race and gender.
    Despite these issues it is still useful to look at the impact of war expenditures on out-
comes during the war. First, our hypothesized mechanism requires employment changes
during the war so if we do not see concurrent effects then we might question our results.
Secondly, it is useful to compare the impact on whites and Blacks during the war. If there
are effects on both during the war but only on Blacks after the war then it strengthens the
hypthesis that it is due to changes in discrimination rather than experience gained during
the war.
    Appendix Table A5 has the results. Higher war expenditure is strongly associated
with higher defense industry employment for Blacks and whites. Therefore, it seems as
though war expenditures did affect both Blacks and whites during the war.


D.2    Short-term labor market outcomes
Geographic unit of analysis. Another concern is that our results might be dependent
on the geographic unit of analysis. We repeat our main Table (Table 2) but for states
and commuting zones. The results for states are presented in Appendix Table A6 and
the results for commuting zones are presented in Appendix Table A7. In both cases our
findings are similar to our main results at the metro level.
Occupational segregation. Another interpretation consistent with our results on occu-
pational upgrading is that white men changed occupations within the skilled occupation
group and Black men moved into those vacated occupations. In this scenario there is no
decrease in occupational segregation. Therefore we want to check to see if the occupa-
tional distribution of Black men and white men became more similar in areas with higher
war expenditures at a more granular level. We two measures for occupational segrega-

                                             90
tion. First, we use a Duncan index to measure deviations from evenness. Second, we use
an adjusted Duncan index that is deviations from the expected evenness after accounting
for randomness. We use our standard difference-in-differences approach:

            Yrt =  1 WarExpr × Postt +  2 Dra f tr × Postt + Postt + r + Xirt  +  irt                  (13)

The results are presented in Appendix Table A8. Higher war expenditures are associated
with lower occupational segregation for both measures. Therefore, it does seem as though
the occupational composition for white and Black men became more similar in places
with higher expenditures.
Excluding likely migrants. Our results could potentially be explained by selective migra-
tion. Black men with better skills and/or education could have migrated to metropolitan
areas with higher war expenditures. They then stayed in these metropolitan areas after
the war which could explain higher wages and occuptional upgrading. In order to test
this theory, we re-run our main results but exclude potential interstate migrants in 1950.
We define potential interstate migrants as anyone who was born in a different state that
their state of residence and does not have a child eight years or older born in their cur-
rent state of residence. If they have a child who was eight years or older and born in the
same state then it is likely they did not move to their current state after WWII started. We
validate this approach using the 1940 Census which asked for the place of residence five
years prior and find it is highly accurate in identifying non-migrants.65
    We use our standard difference-in-differences approach, except at the individual level
with additional controls for age (cubic polynomial), marital staus, and region of birth:

            Yirt =  1 WarExpr × Postt +  2 Dra f tr × Postt + Postt + r + Xirt  +  irt                 (14)

The results are presented in Table 3. The results excluding potential migrants are very
similar to our main results. Therefore, it does not seem as though our results can be
solely explained by selective migration.
Impact on younger cohorts. One potential explanation for the persistence of our results
is that Black men gained valuable work experience during World War II which led to
persistent productivity improvements. If this explains the persistence then workers who
move to metropolitan area with higher war expenditures or future generations would
not benefit from the accumulated experience. A way to test this explanation is to see
occupational gains for cohorts who were too young to have gained significant experience
  65 The   1950 Census only asks for the place of residence on year prior. Validation results available upon
request.

                                                     91
during the war.
    Men who are ages 18-24 in 1950 would have been 18 or younger in 194466 and therefore
would have not been able to accumulate significant experience or would have done so
at the cost of reduced education. We compare 18-24 year olds in 1950 versus 1940 and
then repeat the exercise using 18-34 year olds in 1960 versus 1940. We use our standard
difference-in-differences approach, except at the individual level with additional controls
for age, marital staus, and region of birth:

           Yirt =  1 WarExpr × Postt +  2 Dra f tr × Postt + Postt + r + Xirt  +  irt    (15)

The results are presented in Table 4. The coefficients for the full sample and the restricted
age samples are very similar. It does not seem as though the results can be explained
purely by the experience gained during the war. One note of caution when interpret-
ing the results is that younger cohorts could have benefitted from increased education;
however, results are similar if education is included as a control.
Who upgraded? A natural question is who upgraded? Our robustness Figure 5 provides
some preliminary evidence that upgrading occured across demographic groups. At an
aggregate level, we can examing how occupational upgrading varied with age or educa-
tional status. Appendix Figure A.5 shows the share of men who are in skilled occupation
by age for 1930, 1940, and 1950. The shares are roughly constant between 1930 and 1940
but then there is a major shift between 1940 and 1950. The most interesting finding is
that the upgrading occured in all age groups. This suggests that changes in discrimina-
tion, rather than compositional changes, might be important. Similar results can be seen
when looking at upgrading by educational groups. The upgrading occured for all edu-
cational groups, with the smallest changes for the highest education group. Again, large
changes in occupational skill level even for the lowest levels of education (0-5 years) is
most consistent with declines in discrimination rather than compositional changes.
    A related question is what occupations within the skilled category did Black men en-
ter? Table A9 gives the relationship between war expenditures and changes in employ-
ment shares for 11 aggregate occupation categories. Black men left domestic service, ser-
vice worker, farm labor and common laborer occupations and primarily entereted oper-
ateives and craftsmen occupations (semi-skilled / skilled blue-collar). These occupations
are both very common in manufacturing which was the key defense industry.




  66 War   expenditures were ramping down in 1945.

                                                     92
D.3    Effect of war expenditures on migration
First, the migration of Black families cannot be understood without discussing the Great
Migration. This overview paragraph draws heavily from Collins (2020), an excellent re-
view of economic research on the Great Migration. Prior to WWI, around 90% of Black
individuals lived in the South. Over the next six decades, millions migrated out of the
South until less than half of Black individuals lived in the South in 1970. This migration
took place in two waves; the first starting due to labor shortages during WWI67 and end-
ing with the Great Depression. The second wave was precipated by WWII and ended in
the 1960s. Collins and Wanamaker (2014) show that migrants had large earning gains.
Migrants also had major impacts on the receiving Northern cities. Boustan (2009) shows
how migrants impacted the labor market outcomes of Black and white workers in the
North. Large influxes of new migrants also reduced intergenerational mobility for Black
individuals (Derenoncourt, 2019). Finally, Black migrants also caused "white flight" to
the suburbs (Boustan, 2010).
    World War II expenditures were an important influence on the decision to migrate.
Boustan (2010) and Derenoncourt (2019) instrument for migrant flows to Northern cities
by using pre-existing migration networks interacted with "push" shocks in Southern
counties. One of these shocks they use is war expenditures per capita. They find that
war expenditures do predict migrant outflows, with higher expenditure areas associated
with less out-migration. For this project, our concern is how war expenditures worked
as a "pull" factor - i.e. were migrants more likely to go to areas with higher war expen-
ditures. Figure A.6 shows the correlation between the change in (log of) population and
war expenditures per capita. War expenditures are strongly associated wtih population
increases for Black men between 1940 and 1950 but not between 1930 and 1940. For white
men they are not strongly associated in 1940 to 1950 but there is a negative association in
the pre-period which might indicate a positive impact relative to the existing trend.
    Table A11 uses our basic specification 1. After adding controls there is still a strong
relationship between migration and war expenditure for Black and white men. The effect
appears to be larger for Black men. Therefore, migration does seem to be an important
response. The importance of migration provides motivation for our quantitative model.
Finally, Table A12 compares actual migration with model predicted migration. The model
does a good job of predicting migration when minimal controls are used; however, it
predicts higher rates of migration once more detailed controls are added. Potentially,
there is some region level shocks that could account for this difference.
  67 Labor shortages were caused due to war demands combined with the sudden halt to European immi-
grant flows - see Collins (1997).

                                                93
D.4    Education of the next generation
School attendence 1930-40 and 1940-60. We repeat our analysis of the effect of war ex-
penditures on school enrollment for the periods 1930-40 and 1940-60 instead of 1940-50.
We follow our main difference-in-differences approach.
    The results for 1930-40 are presented in Appendix Table A14. We do not see any signifi-
cant relationship between war expenditures and changes in school enrollment. Therefore,
there does not seem to be significant positive pre-trends or a slight negative trend.
    The results for 1940-60 are presented in Appendix Table A13. We see a positive rela-
tionship between war expenditures and schooling for Black boys but no significant effect
for Black girls. This result is consistent with our 1940-50 results that find stronger impacts
on Black boys. The effect size is smaller which does indicate the effect could fade with
time. An alternative explanation could be that attendance of 16-18 year olds increased
with time which reduces our ability to measure the treatment effect because there are
fewer potential "switchers".
High school graduation rates. One concern with the effect of war expenditures on high
school graduation rates (Figure 7) is the potential presence of pre-trends. The 5% sample
for 1960 might not have sufficient power to rule out pre-trends. One alternative is to
conduct the same analysis using the 1940 Census to see if there were pre-existing trends.
Appendix Figure A.7 shows these results. For boys, the coefficients on "War exp * Black"
seem to be consistently close to zero. For girls, there is little evidence of a positive trend
in the years immediately leading up to WWII. There is potentially some trend in the early
1930s at the onset of the Great Depression that is driven by differential changes in the
education of white girls. These results are consistent with our estimates for girls being
noisier and less significant than our estimates for boys.


E     Quantitative Appendix

E.1   Equilibrium
Consumption. First, consider the consumption side. Because trade is costless and prefer-
ences are identical across regions, consumption prices are equalized across space.
   Consumption of industry i in region r is given by

                                           C
                                     Crit Prit = µi PtC Crt                               (16)




                                              94
where                                                              µi
                                                            C
                                                           Pit
                                       PtC   =                                           (17)
                                                 i
                                                           µi
                                         C denotes the consumption price of industry i.
denotes the final good price and where Pit
Consumption of industry i from origin j in destination r is given by

                                                       Y          -
                                                      Pjit
                                 Cjrit = µ jit         C
                                                                        Crit             (18)
                                                      Pit

where PjitY is the production price in region j of industry i and where the consumption

price of industry i in all regions is

                                                                            1
                                                                           1- 
                                                                  1- 
                                C
                               Pit =      µ jit            Y
                                                          Pjit                           (19)
                                             j


Production. Next, consider the production side. Industry i profit maximization implies
that in region r the output of industry-occupation io pair is given by

                                                       Y          -
                                                      Priot
                                Yriot = µriot           Y
                                                                         Yrit            (20)
                                                      Prit

where Yrit is the region r output of industry i, where the output price in region r of indus-
try i is
                                                                                1
                                                                               1- 
                                                                   1- 
                               Y
                              Prit =     µriot             Y
                                                          Priot                          (21)
                                         o

and where PriotY denotes the region r output price of industry-occupation pair io.

   The share of workers in group g who choose to live in region r, denoted by rgt  N 

Nrgt / Ngt is given by
                                                        
                                 N        Urgt Wagergt
                                rgt =                                               (22)
                                       r Ur gt Wager gt

where Nrgt denotes the measure of group g workers who choose to live in region r and
where Wagergt is the average wage earned by those in group g conditional on choosing
region r. The share of workers in group g and region r who choose to work in industry-




                                                     95
                          L
occupation io, denoted by riogt  Nriogt / Nrgt , is given by

                                                                 Y )
                                                      ( Triogt Priot
                                       L
                                       riogt =                      Y )
                                                                                                             (23)
                                                    i o ( Tri o gt Pri ot

which is also the share of income earned within industry-occupation io for group g in
region r. The total efficiency units supplied by group g in industry-occupation io in region
r is
                                                                         -1
                                                           L                  N
                                  Lriogt =  Triogt         riogt              rgt Ngt                        (24)

where    1 - 1              and  is the gamma function. The average wage of group g in
region r is given by
                                                                                     1
                                                                                     
                                                                                  
                                   Wagergt =                               Y
                                                                   Triogt Priot                              (25)
                                                          io

Market clearing. Region r's output of industry i must equal the sum of consumption
across all regions for each ri pair
                                    Yrit =  Crjit                             (26)
                                                               j

Locally, markets must clear in each rio triplet

                                                Yriot =     Lriogt                                           (27)
                                                               g


Market clearing and balanced trade link production and consumption

                                        PtC Crt =    Wagergt rgt
                                                             N
                                                                 Ngt                                         (28)
                                                      g


Equilibrium. An equilibrium is a vector of consumption prices PtC , Pit      C , production
         Y , PY
prices Prit   riot , wages Wagergt , quantities produced {Yrt , Yrit , Yriot }, consumption
                                                  N , L
levels Crt , Crit , Cjrit , and labor allocations rgt riogt , Lriogt for all region pairs jr, in-
dustries i, occupations o, and worker groups g that satisfy (16)-(28).
Solution algorithm. The system has 13 equations (16) - (28) and 13 unknowns:

              Y       Y               L       N                              C
             Priot , Prit , Wagergt , riogt , rgt , Lriogt , Yriot , Yrit , Pit , PtC , Crt , Crit , Cjrit

                                                                           Y }. Then,
In each region and time period, guess industry-occupation output prices { Priot
in the following order, solve for all remaining endogenous variables. Solve for (i) pro-


                                                          96
                   Y } using (21), (ii) average wages {Wage } using (25), (iii) allocations
duction prices { Prit                                         rgt
   N                       L
{rgt } using (22) and {riogt } using (23), (iv) efficiency units of labor { Lriogt } using (24),
(v) industry-occupation output {Yriot } using (27), and (vi) industry output {Yrit } using
(20). Solve for (vii) industry consumption prices { Pit  C } using (19), (viii) aggregate con-

sumption prices { PtC } using (17), (ix) aggregate consumption {Crt } using (28), (x) in-
dustry consumption {Crit } using (16), and (xi) bilateral consumption {Cjrit } using (18).
Finally, iterate over the initial guess of industry-occupation output prices { Priot Y } using

(26).


E.2   Decomposition
In this section, we provide the system of equations with which to solve for the implica-
tions of shocks and show how to measure these shocks. We define x        ^ = xt+1 / xt for any
variable x; it is the relative value of a variable in a "new equilibrium" (t + 1) relative to
in the initial equilibrium (t). The point of writing the system in changes is that it dramat-
ically reduces the set of parameters we need to estimate to conduct our decomposition
and counterfactuals.
      In practice, the shocks that we feed into the system are changes in productivity, Triogt ,
and changes in amenities, Urgt , across time. Here, however, we allow for a more general
set of shocks, including in addition shocks to demand across origin and industry pairs,
µ jit , changes in demand across occupations within industries, µriot , and changes in the
number of workers in each group at the national level, Ngt . We show here that for given
values of  = 1 and  = 1, it is without loss of generality to normalize µ jit and µriot to
be fixed over time, since any changes in these parameters can be absorbed by changes in
Triogt without affecting any results.


E.3   System in changes
We express our system of 13 equations (16) - (28) and 13 unknowns in changes as follows:

                                        ^CC ^     ^C ^
                                        Pit rit = Pt Crt                                   (29)
                                                               µi
                                       ^tC =
                                       P                 ^C
                                                         Pit                               (30)
                                                   i

                                                       ^Y      -
                                                       Pjit
                                  ^ jrit = µ
                                  C        ^ jit                    ^ rit
                                                                    C                      (31)
                                                       ^C
                                                       Pit




                                                   97
                                                                                      -
                                                                            ^Y
                                                                            P
                                         ^riot = µ
                                         Y       ^ riot                      riot         ^rit
                                                                                          Y                                    (32)
                                                                             ^
                                                                            PYrit
                                                                                                1
                                                                                               1- 
                                                                                      1- 
                                     ^C =
                                     Pit           SC   ^ jit
                                                    jit µ
                                                                               ^Y
                                                                               Pjit                                            (33)
                                                      j
                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                    1- 
                                                                                        1- 
                                   ^Y =
                                   Prit         Sriot
                                                 Y
                                                      ^ riot
                                                      µ                         ^Y
                                                                                Priot                                          (34)
                                                  o
                                                                                            
                                                                          ^
                                                                   ^ rgt Wage
                                                                   U
                                       N                                      rgt
                                     ^ rgt
                                           =                                                                                   (35)
                                                    N
                                                  r r                               ^
                                                                            ^ r gt Wage
                                                                            U
                                                      gt                                r gt

                                                               (T^riogt P
                                                                        ^ Y )
                                      L                                  riot
                                    ^ riogt
                                              =                                                                                (36)
                                                  i o          L     (T^ri o gt P
                                                                                ^Y
                                                                                            ri o t )
                                                                                                       
                                                                    ri o gt
                                                                                       -1
                                       ^ riogt = T
                                                 ^riogt   L                            
                                                                                            ^ rgt
                                       L                ^ riogt                             N                                  (37)
                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                    
                                 Wagergt =                 riogt
                                                           L                           ^Y
                                                                                ^riogt P
                                                                                T       riot                                   (38)
                                                          io

                                                  ^rit =
                                                  Y                  s jt C
                                                                          ^ rjit                                               (39)
                                                                        j

                                              ^riot =
                                              Y                     sriogt L
                                                                           ^ riogt                                             (40)
                                                                    g

                                         ^tC C
                                         P   ^ rt =        srgt Wagergt N
                                                                        ^ rgt                                                  (41)
                                                               g
                                                           Y )1- 
                                                  µ jit ( Pjit
In this system of equations, SC
                              jit                        Y )1-                denotes the share of each region's expen-
                                               r µrit ( Prit
                                                                                                                Y        1- 
                                                    Y                                                  µriot ( Priot )
diture on industry i that is produced in region j; Sriot                  Y        1- denotes region
                                                                       ( Prio  t
                                                                                 )               o µrio       t
                                                                               Crjit
r's share of expenditure within industry i on occupation o; s jt   C                      is the share of
                                                                              j     rj it
region r's industry i output shipped to j, which equals region j's share of total income (or
                       Pt Cjt              L
expenditure), s jt =  Pt C    rt
                                 ; sriogt   riogt
                                             L    is the share of output in r of io produced by
                           r                          g    riog t
                           Wagergt Nrgt
group g; and srgt                is the share of labor income in r that accrues to g.
                          g Wagerg t Nrg
                               t
   The system has 13 equations (29)-(41) and 13 unknowns:

              ^Y , P
              P     ^Y                L
                                    ^ riogt    N ^
                                             ^ rgt            ^riot , Y          ^tC , C
                                                                             ^C, P
                                                                      ^rit , P                        ^ jrit
                                                                                              ^ rit , C
                                                                                       ^ rt , C
               riot rit , Wagergt ,         ,      , Lriogt , Y               it




                                                                     98
Given shocks (µ   ^ jit , µ         ^riogt , U
                           ^ riot , T          ^ rgt , and N  ^ gt ), elasticities ( , , , and  ), and initial equi-
librium shares (µi , SC             Y         L          N
                             jit , Sriot , riogt , rgt , s jt , sriogt , and srgt ), we can solve for all changes
using the previous system as follows. In each region and time period, guess industry-
occupation changes in output prices { P                    ^ Y }. Use (34) to solve for { P     ^ Y }, (38) to solve for
                                                            riot                                 rit
{Wagergt }, (36) to solve for {                L
                                            ^ riogt  }, (35) to solve for {         N }, (33) to solve for { P
                                                                                  ^ rgt                         ^ C }, (30)
                                                                                                                 it
               ^ C                                     ^                                 ^
to solve for { Pt }, (37) to solve for { Lriogt }, (41) to solve for {Crt }, (29) to solve for {C                     ^ rit },
(31) to solve for {C     ^ jrit }, (32) to solve for {Y          ^riot }, and (39) to solve for {Y    ^rit }. Finally, we
iterate over the values of { P         ^ Y } until we satisfy (40).
                                         riot


E.3.1     Calibrating the model to 1940 data

In constructing each share, we are only using data from the regions that we are consid-
ering. As an example, if we require total labor income earned in industry i across all
regions, then we are summing total labor income earned in industry i across all regions
in our sample (rather than across all regions in U.S.).
µi : µi is the share of expenditure on industry i, which we assume is constant across time
and regions. To measure µi in our model in a given year, the numerator is the sum of
labor income (since labor is the only factor of production) across regions in industry i and
the denominator is the sum of labor income across regions and industries (in the same
year).
SC      C
 jit : S jit is the share of national industry i expenditure that is produced in region j in
year t. Since labor is the only factor of production and there is no trade with the outside
world, the numerator is labor income earned in industry i in region j in year t and the
denominator is labor income earned in industry i summed across all regions in year t.
 Y : SY is region r 's year t share of labor income within industry i earned in occupation
Sriot riot
               Y , the numerator is labor income earned within io in region r in year t
o. To measure Sriot
and the denominator is labor income earned within i in region r in year t.
  L
riogt    L
       : riogt is both the share of labor income (and the share of employment) within re-
                                                                                     L
gion r for group g at time t that is earned (or worked) within io. We can measure riogt two
ways according to our model. In the first approach, we use employment. In the second
approach, we use labor income. In the first approach, the numerator of riogt L    is employ-
ment of group g in region r at time t in io and the denominator is the sum of employment
of group g in region r at time t across all io pairs. In the second approach, the numerator
     L
of riogt is the income of group g in region r at time t earned in io and the denominator is
the sum of income of group g in region r at time t across all io pairs.


                                                             99
  N :  N is the share of the population within group g that lives in region r at time t.
rgt    rgt
The numerator is the population of g in r at t and the denominator is the population of g
across all regions at t.
s jt : s jt is the share of total labor income earned in region r at time t. The numerator is
labor income in r at t and the denominator is labor income across all regions at t.
sriogt : sriogt is the share of labor income in region r and industry-occupation io that is
paid to group g. The numerator is labor income in region r and industry-occupation io
that is paid to group g and the denominator is the sum of labor income in region r and
industry-occupation io across all g.
srgt : srgt is the share of labor income in r that accrues to g at time t. The numerator is labor
income in r that accrues to g at time t and the denominator is the sum of labor income in
r at t across all groups.

E.3.2    Calibrating eta

To choose the value of  , we calibrate the model to 1940 data, matching the initial shares
described in E.3.1. Then we take the following steps.
   i. We pick a value of  .

  ii. We measure shocks, as described in E.3.3, where the value of two of these six shocks,
      T       T
       1 and  2 , depend on the choice of  .

  iii. We feed into the model the government spending shocks (associated with all  T and
       U parameters) and solve for the new equilibrium of the model.

  iv. We estimate regressions of the form in (1) in Section 3.3 using actual data and, sepa-
      rately, using model-generated data, where the dependent variables, Yrt are the share
      of employment in skilled occupations and the ln average wage of Black and white
      workers in each metro area and year (for 1940 and 1950).

   v. For each of the four coefficients of interest in the data, data
                                                                 1,race,Y , and in the model,
       model
       1,race,Y , where Y indicates the dependent variable and race indicates the sample,
      we construct the sum of squared differences

                              L( ) =             race ( data        model
                                                        1,race,Y -  1,race,Y )
                                                                               2
                                       Y ,race


        where race is a weight that we set to 1 if race = white and we set to 2 if race =
        Black, given our focus on explaining Black labor market outcomes.

                                                  100
Finally, we iterate over values of  to minimize L( ). This procedure yields  = 1.7.
Panels A and C of Table 6 display the resulting values of data          model
                                                          1,race,Y and  1,race,Y , respectively.


E.3.3   Measuring shocks

In addition to the shocks included in the body of the paper, we include two additional
shocks:

                                  i    i
                        ln µrit = ri + it + Gr It Ii i1 + irit                             (42)
                                  o     o
                       ln µriot = rio + iot + Gr It Ii [ o    o         o
                                                         1 +  2 Io ] +  riot               (43)

We will show that it is without loss of generality to assume that i1 , o        o
                                                                       1 , and  2 are all set
to zero for given values of  = 1 and  = 1.
Anti-discriminatory shocks. From (23), we have

                     L
                  ln riogt                     Y
                           =  ln Triogt +  ln Priot - ln     (Tri o gt Pri
                                                                        Y
                                                                           o t)
                                                                                

                                                             io

The previous expression and (8) yield

              L      T      T
           ln riogt =riog + iogt + Gr It Ii  T    T       T        T
                                             1 +  2 Io +  3 I g +  4 Io I g

                         T
                       + riogt        Y
                               +  ln Priot - ln      (Tri o gt Pri
                                                                Y
                                                                   o t)
                                                                        

                                                     io


                                                                   Y ) , 
which can be re-expressed as (10), where rgt  - ln i o ( Tri o gt Pri               Y
                                                                      ot riot   ln Priot +
Gr It Ii  T
          1 +  2 Io , riog  riog , iogt  iogt ,  riogt   riogt ,  3   3 , and  4   4 .
                T              T            T            T            T            T

We estimate (10) once measuring the dependent variable using employment shares (see
column 1 of Table 5) and, for robustness, another time using labor income shares (see
column 2 of Table 5).
   From (22), we obtain

                            1    N
                              ln rgt - ln Wagergt = ln Urgt + gt
                            
                                            
where gt  - 1
             ln r          Ur gt Wager gt      . The previous expression and (9) yield

                1    N
                  ln rgt - ln Wagergt = rg + Gr It [ U   U                U
                                                     1 +  2 I g ] +  gt +  rgt             (44)
                


                                               101
The previous equation can be expressed as (11), where rt  U         1 Gr It . We report our
estimate from (11) in column 7 of Table 5. This concludes the baseline identification of the
anti-discriminatory effects of wartime spending.
Compositional shock I: amenity parameter U     1 (or all amenity parameters). Both amenity
parameters are estimated using variants of (44). In our baseline approach, first estimate
(11) to identify U
                 2 , subtract this estimate from both the left- and right-hand side of (44),
and estimate

                  1    N                  ^ U Ig = rg + gt + U Gr It + U
                    ln rgt - ln Wagergt -   2                1         rgt                     (45)
                  

See column 8 of Table 5 for the resulting estimate of U                          1      2
                                                            1 . We also estimate  U and  U
together in a single step by estimating (44) directly; see column 9 of Table 5.
Compositional shock II: productivity parameter  2 (or productivity parameters  2 ,  3 ,  4 ).
From (20), we obtain

                    Y                                   Y           Y
                ln Priot Yriot = ln µriot + (1 -  ) ln Priot +  ln Prit + ln Yrit

From (23) and (25), we have

                          Y                     1
                      ln Priot = ln Wagergt +     ln riogt - ln Triogt - ln 
                                                

Combining the previous two expressions yields

                                                           Y
        riogt =      - ln µriot + (1 -  ) ln Triogt -  ln Prit - ln Yrit + (1 -  )             (46)
                  1-

where we have defined

                                     Y
                   riogt  -      ln Priot Yriot +  ln Wagergt + ln riogt
                              1-

Combining the (46) with (8) and (43) yields

     riogt = riog + iogt + rit +  2 Gr It Ii Io +  3 Gr It Ii Ig +  4 Gr It Ii Ig Io + riogt   (47)

where rit  - 1-          Y                          o     T               o        T
                     ln Prit - 1- ln Yrit +  - 1-  1 +  1 ,  riogt  - 1-  riot +  riogt ,
                                                 

riog  - 1-     o      T                    o    T                o     T         T
             rio + riog , iogt  - 1- iot + iogt ,  2  - 1-  2 +  2 ,  3   3 , and
                                                             

 4   T  4.
   In practice, we could estimate the previous expression directly or we could subtract

                                                102
our estimates of ^ 3 Gr It Ii Ig and ^ 4 Gr It Ii Ig Io from the left- and right-hand sides of the
previous expression and instead estimate

                                ~ riogt = riog + iogt + rit +  2 Gr It Ii Io + riogt
                                                                                                                             (48)

where     ~ riogt  riogt + ^ 3 Gr It Ii Ig + ^ 4 Gr It Ii Ig Io . In our baseline approach, we estimate
 2 using (48), and report results in column 3 of Table 5, whereas in robustness we estimate
 2 ,  3 , and  4 using (47), and report results in column 4 of Table 5.
Compositional shock III: productivity parameter  1 (or all productivity parameters).
Equations (16), (18), and (26) yield

                                                               1-                  -1
                                     Y
                                    Pjit               Y
                                         Yjit = µ jit Pjit              C
                                                                     × Pit              µi  PtC Crt
                                                                                            r

The previous expression and (21) yield

                                                                           1- 
                                                                           1- 
                                                                   1-                        -1
                    Y
                   Pjit Yjit = µ jit          µ jiot        Y
                                                           Pjiot                     C
                                                                                  × Pit               µi  PtC Crt
                                              o                                                          r


The previous expression and the definition of SY
                                               jiot , which implies

                                                                                  1- 
                                                                          Y
                                                                 µ jio t Pjio
                                                     1-                       t
                                µ jiot        Y
                                             Pjiot         =
                                                                         SY
                                                                                           for any o
                                o                                         jio t


yield
                                            1-             1- 
                                                                           1-                    -1
                                                                                                      µi  PtC Crt
                    Y                       1-              1- 
                   Pjit Yjit        SY
                                     jiot         = µ jit µ jiot  Y
                                                                 Pjiot               C
                                                                                  × Pit
                                                                                                         r

Combining the previous expression with (23) and (25), which imply

                                   Y                               1
                               ln Pjiot = ln Wage jgt +              ln  jiogt - ln Tjiogt - ln 
                                                                   

yields

                            1-                       1-                                                   -1
             Y
        ln( Pjit Yjit ) +      ln SY
                                   jiot = ln µ jit +    ln µ jiot + ln                             C
                                                                                                  Pit          µi  PtC Crt
                            1-                       1-                                                           r
                                                                                        1
                                                  + (1 - ) ln Wage jgt +                  ln  jiogt - ln Tjiogt - ln 
                                                                                        


                                                                   103
which is equivalent to

                                                   
                      jiogt = -        ln µ jit -    ln µ jiot + it +  ln Tjiogt
                                    1-            1-

                                      C     -1
where it   ln  -          
                         1-    ln    Pit         µi r PtC Crt and where

                                  Y             
              jiogt  -       ln( Pjit Yjit ) -    ln SY
                                                      jiot +  ln Wage jgt + ln  jiogt                    (49)
                          1-                   1-

We substitute out ln µ jit , ln µ jiot and ln Tjiogt using (8), (42), and (43) to obtain

                        
             jiogt = -     i + iti
                                   + Gj It Ii i1 + ijit
                      1 -  ji
                      
                  -       o + iot
                               o
                                   + G j I t Ii [  o    o        o
                                                   1 +  2 Io ] +  jiot + it
                    1 -  jio
                  +  T      T                 T    T       T        T           T
                     jiog + iogt + G j It Ii  1 +  2 Io +  3 I g +  4 Io I g +  jiogt


which can be simplified to

    jiogt =  jiog + iogt +  1 Gj It Ii +  2 Gj It Ii Io +  3 Gj It Ii Ig +  4 Gj It Ii Io Ig +  jiogt    (50)

where iogt  it - 1-          i        o      T                     i         o       T
                           it - 1- iot + iogt ,  jiog  - 1-  ji - 1-  jio +  jiog ,  jiogt 
                                                                          
    i          o         T                 i        o        T               o     T          T
- 1-   jit - 1-  jiot +  jiogt ,  1  - 1-  1 - 1-  1 +  1 ,  2  - 1-  2 +  2 ,  3   3 ,
                                                                         

and  4   T     4 . In robustness, we estimate  1 ,  2 ,  3 , and  4 all together using (50) and
report results in column 6 of Table 5. In our baseline approach, we instead estimate

                                ~ jiogt =  jiog + iogt +  1 Gj It Ii +  jiogt
                                                                                                         (51)

where
                    ~ jiogt   jiogt - 
                                      ^ 2 G j I t Ii I o - ^ 3 G j I t Ii I g - ^ 4 G j I t Ii I o I g

In (51), we have subtracted from the left- and right-hand side the terms associated with
 2 ,  3 , and  4 which we have previously estimated. We report results in column 5 of Table
5.




                                                          104
