                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       GOVERNMENT ADVERTISING IN MARKET-BASED PUBLIC PROGRAMS:
           EVIDENCE FROM THE HEALTH INSURANCE MARKETPLACE

                                            Naoki Aizawa
                                            You Suk Kim

                                        Working Paper 27695
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27695


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2020




First draft: July 31, 2019. We are especially grateful to Brad Shapiro for a number of suggestions
and discussions at various stages of this project. We thank Marika Cabral, Leemore Dafny, Liran
Einav, Hanming Fang, Serafin Grundl, Ben Handel, Jonathan Kolstad, Corina Mommaerts, Matt
Notowidigo, Ken Onishi, Elena Patel, Elena Prager, Mark Shepard, Amanda Starc, Justin Sydner,
Chris Taber, and JoelWaldfogel, as well as many seminar and conference participants at DC IO
Day, Federal Reserve Board, Midwest IO Fest (U.Chicago), National Tax Association
Conference, NBER Insurance Meeting, NBER Summer Institute (health care), University
ofWisconsin-Madison, and Virtual Quantitative Marketing Seminar for helpful comments. Joel
McMurry and Logan Schultheis provided outstanding research assistance. The analysis and
conclusions set forth are those of the authors and do not indicate concurrence by other members
of the staff, by the Board of Governors, or by the Federal Reserve System, nor do they
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Naoki Aizawa and You Suk Kim. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Government Advertising in Market-Based Public Programs: Evidence from the Health Insurance
Marketplace
Naoki Aizawa and You Suk Kim
NBER Working Paper No. 27695
August 2020
JEL No. G2,I1,I3,L1,M3

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper studies government and private marketing activities in the context of the Affordable
Care Act health insurance marketplace. Using detailed TV advertising data, we present evidence
that government and private advertising are targeted to different geographical areas and provide
different messaging content. Then, we estimate the impacts of government and private
advertising on consumer demand by exploiting discontinuities in advertising along the borders of
local TV markets. We find that government advertising has a market-expansion effect and
enhances welfare. We also find that private advertising is not more effective than government
advertising in increasing total program enrollment. Although private advertising is still effective
in increasing insurer's own enrollment, it does not have positive spillovers to other insurers but
has a modest business-stealing effect. We then develop and estimate an equilibrium model of
marketplaces to illustrate mechanisms through which government advertising affects the market
equilibrium. Our simulation suggests that government advertising can simultaneously increase
total program enrollment and reduce excessive advertising spending among private insurers.


Naoki Aizawa
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin-Madison
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
naizawa@wisc.edu

You Suk Kim
Division of Research and Statistics
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
20th & C Streets, NW,
Washington, D.C. 20551
you.kim@frb.gov
1     Introduction
The government often conducts marketing and outreach activities for public programs. In tradi-
tional public programs­such as Medicaid, the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP),
and the Supplemental Security Income Program­where the government directly provides the ben-
efit to enrollees, government marketing activities are done partly in response to low take-up among
eligible populations. Common explanations for the low take-up are lack of information about eli-
gibility and transaction costs associated with enrollment (Currie (2006)). Government marketing
activities are considered to be an important policy to efficiently deliver public programs by miti-
gating these choice frictions (Aizer (2007); Finkelstein and Notowidigdo (2019)).
     Government marketing activities are also used to advertise market-based public programs,
where benefits are provided by private firms in regulated markets. Market-based public programs
have become common in markets for health insurance, education, and mortgages.1 Many studies
document significant choice frictions in these programs as well, which suggests a potential positive
role of marketing activities.2 In contrast to traditional public programs, private firms participating
in a market-based program often conduct advertising for the program.3
     This practice raises a natural but yet-to-be-answered market design question: what are appro-
priate interventions for the government in the presence of private marketing activities? The answer
depends on how private marketing activities work. For example, the government may not need to
market these programs if private marketing is more effective in increasing program enrollment than
government marketing or has positive spillovers to other firms by providing general information
about the program. On the other hand, government marketing can be useful if private marketing
merely steals enrollees from other firms and has a limited effect on total program enrollment, or if
marketing is costly for certain firms due to a lack of economy of scale, for example, resulting from
fixed costs of marketing. Moreover, the government's objectives might differ from those of private
firms (e.g., a preference for redistribution). Such a difference in objectives may also call for the
government's intervention in marketing.
     This paper studies the effects of marketing activities by the government (both federal and state)
and private insurers in the Affordable Care Act (ACA) health insurance marketplace. Among pos-
sible marketing tools, we focus on TV advertising because advertising is the largest component

    1 Market-based health insurance programs include the Affordable Care Act marketplace, Medicare Advantage,

and Medicare Part D. An example for education benefits is a charter school. The Making Home Affordable program
(MHAP) was set up in 2009 to help underwater homeowners modify or refinance their mortgages through private
lenders. The federal government's advertising of the MHAP cost more than $125 million (makinghomeaffordable.
gov/press-release/Pages/pr_09242014.aspx).
    2 For example, see Polyakova (2016) and Handel et al. (2020) for health insurance, Andrabi et al. (2017) and

Allende et al. (2019) for education markets, and Johnson et al. (2018) for mortgage markets.
    3 For example, see Hastings et al. (2017) for pensions and Aizawa and Kim (2018) for health insurance.



                                                       1
of government marketing activities.4 Credibly estimating how advertising works in the ACA mar-
ketplace is highly relevant for policy debates. For example, marketing experts who worked on
the government's marketplace outreach activities argue that close to 40% of the ACA take-up rate
is associated with government advertising and warn that the substantial reduction of the federal
marketing budget for the marketplace in 2018 would be detrimental to marketplace enrollment.5
Additionally, many regulations on pricing and plan designs in the marketplace make marketing
activities of private insurers an even more important tool to increase their enrollment because ad-
vertising is less regulated. In this paper, we first document how the government and private insurers
target their advertising. Then, we estimate the impact of government and private advertising on
consumer demand. Finally, we examine the equilibrium impact of changing government advertis-
ing, taking into account its interaction with private advertising.
    We exploit detailed TV advertising data from Kantar Media, which allow us to identify the
sponsor of each advertisement and to observe advertising content through a video file of each
advertisement. This information enables us to classify advertisements into different categories,
including whether the advertisement provides specific information about the ACA marketplace­
for example, the end date of the open enrollment period and the availability of financial assistance.
We first document that although certain types of content are commonly discussed in advertisements
by both the government and private insurers, about 60% of private advertisements do not provide
specific information about the marketplace but merely promote a private insurer's brand. Then,
we provide suggestive evidence that private advertising is geographically targeted to markets with
higher potential profitability, whereas advertising by both federal and state governments is targeted
to a broader set of markets. These findings suggest that the government and private insurers have
different incentives behind their marketing activities.
    Using insurer-level enrollment data, we then estimate a model of consumer demand for ACA
health plans to study the effectiveness of advertising by the government and private insurers. In
our model, we allow advertising by federal and state governments and by private insurers to have
different effects on the decision to purchase health insurance. To address the potential endogeneity
concern that advertising may be targeted to certain markets based on unobserved characteristics,
we exploit the discontinuity in advertising spending along the borders of local TV markets (e.g.,
    4 The Department of Health and Human Services, which is responsible for health programs, typically spends more
on adverting than other departments except for the Department of Defense (Kosar (2014)).
     5 See comments by individuals who worked on ACA outreach under the Obama administration in

the following news articles washingtonpost.com/news/powerpost/paloma/the-health-202/2017/
10/23/the-health-202-obamacare-may-lose-1-1-million-because-of-advertising-cuts/
59eccffd30fb045cba000924/                     and               vox.com/the-big-idea/2017/9/12/16294784/
aca-outreach-advertising-sabotage-funding. Before 2018, the federal government spent $100 mil-
lion annually on marketing for the marketplace, which was comparable to advertising spending by private insurers for
the marketplace based on our data in this paper. In 2018, the federal government drastically cut its spending to $10
million.

                                                         2
Shapiro (2018), Spenkuch and Toniatti (2018), and Shapiro et al. (2019)). We utilize the border
identification approach to estimate not only the average effect of advertising by different sponsors,
but also how the effect of advertising differs depending on its contents.
    We find that government advertising, especially by the federal government, has a market-
expansion effect, increasing overall enrollment for the marketplace. The estimated demand elastic-
ity with respect to federal advertising is about 0.05, which is much lower than commonly asserted
in public debates. However, it is much larger than typical estimates of effects of private advertising
in other products (Shapiro et al. (2019)). Moreover, its cost effectiveness is comparable to a recent
randomized experiment in which the IRS sent letters to the uninsured population who paid a tax
penalty under the ACA (Goldin et al. (2019)). Using a welfare framework (e.g., Finkelstein and
Notowidigdo (2019)), we show that federal advertising likely enhances welfare at least up to its
observed level of spending.
    Further, we find that private advertising is not more effective than federal advertising in in-
creasing total program enrollment and that it is statistically less effective than federal advertising
in some specifications. Although private advertising is effective at increasing own enrollment, it
has a modest business stealing effect and does not have positive spillover to other insurers. We also
find that federal advertising that provides information about the open enrollment period and finan-
cial assistance under the ACA is much more effective in increasing enrollment. However, private
advertising with specific ACA-related information does not contribute to increasing enrollment,
which may explain its lack of positive spillover effects.
    Our demand analysis provides a number of new insights on government and private marketing
activities in market-based programs. However, it alone does not take into account the equilibrium
impact of government advertising on private advertising. If government advertising crowds out
private advertising, then its equilibrium effect on total enrollment could be limited. The cost of
crowding out also depends on whether private advertising is beneficial: while private advertising
may induce consumers to switch to better plans, its spending can be excessive in the market equi-
librium. To illustrate these trade-offs, we model and estimate the supply side of the marketplace,
where insurers optimally choose the level of advertising spending given the level of government
advertising. Then, we conduct counterfactual experiments that simulate the effect of changing
government advertising on the market equilibrium.
    We find that increasing government advertising by three times from its baseline level leads to
an increase in market-level enrollment of 7.6% (1.30 percentage points of potential marketplace
enrollees) in markets with relatively large baseline federal advertising spending. At the same time,
private advertising spending decreases, on average, by $0.25 per dollar increase in federal advertis-
ing. Interestingly, the overall market-level enrollment changes modestly regardless of whether we
allow private insurers to respond to the change in government advertising. This is partly because


                                                  3
advertising competition among private insurers leads to a prisoner's dilemma and thus excessive
equilibrium advertising spending. Although private advertising may induce consumers to switch
to better insurers, existing studies suggest that this welfare gain is very modest.6 Thus, government
advertising can be an effective tool to reduce both choice frictions for consumers and inefficiency
in private advertising competition.
     Our counterfactual experiments provide the first formal analysis that illustrates mechanisms
through which government advertising interacts with private advertising in market-based public
programs. Our structural equilibrium model is still stylized and can be extended to incorporate
other ways that private and government advertising interact with each other. However, it offers a
crucial first step to understand their interactions, and various channels we uncover in our analysis
are likely relevant even in richer models.
     Finally, while our findings are specific to the context of the ACA marketplaces, they have broad
implications in evaluating the design of other market-based public programs. A common rationale
for providing essential benefits for the society through a market-based approach is that private
firms can provide services more effectively. However, one of important lessons from our analysis
is that private marketing activities are not always more effective than government marketing activ-
ities. This suggests that policy makers should not rule out the possibility of utilizing government
marketing as an important market design tool to mitigate consumer choice frictions.

Related Literature First, this paper contributes to the literature studying the design of health in-
surance markets. This literature has extensively focused on pricing/product regulations and subsidy
designs/risk adjustment­e.g., Hackmann et al. (2015) and Handel et al. (2015) for pricing regula-
tions; Shepard (2016) and Ho and Lee (2019) for medical network provider regulations; Brown
et al. (2014) for risk adjustment; and Cabral et al. (2018), Curto et al. (2020), Duggan et al. (2016),
Tebaldi (2017), and Polyakova and Ryan (2019) for capitation payments or subsidy designs. Sev-
eral studies (e.g., Cebul et al. (2011) and Aizawa and Kim (2018)) examine private marketing
activities in non-ACA health insurance markets. A few recent studies in the health policy litera-
ture (Karaca-Mandic et al. (2017), Gollust et al. (2018), and Shafer et al. (2020)) document how
advertising is correlated with aggregate enrollment in Medicaid and the marketplace.7 We con-
tribute to this literature by providing the first estimate of causal impact of government advertising
and then evaluating government marketing as a market design tool, including how it interacts with
marketing competition by private insurers.
    6 As Finkelstein et al. (2019) show, the welfare gain from inducing consumers to switch toward better plans is likely

to be much smaller than the welfare gain from increasing program enrollment (i.e., switching from being uninsured to
insured) in part because the marketplace regulates minimum quality of plans.
    7 For example, Karaca-Mandic et al. (2017) document that advertising is positively correlated with Medicaid en-

rollment and negatively correlated with the number of uninsured. All of these studies explicitly acknowledge that they
do not address the endogeneity of advertising and do not interpret their estimates as causal.

                                                           4
    More broadly, this paper contributes to the active literature on government interventions that
increase take-up of public programs. Most studies evaluate marketing and outreach activities for
traditional public programs, such as Medicaid (Aizer (2007)) and SNAP (Finkelstein and No-
towidigdo (2019)).8 Very recently, Domurat et al. (2019) and Goldin et al. (2019) study random-
ized experiments of direct mailings with information on the marketplace that the government sent
to specific populations.9 They do not study private marketing activities or the interaction between
government and private marketing activities in market-based public programs, which is the main
topics of this paper.
    Finally, this paper contributes to the literature on advertising. A growing number of stud-
ies evaluate advertising by private companies in an equilibrium framework for different contexts.
Hastings et al. (2017) is the closest to ours in that it studies private marketing activities in a market-
based public program (privatized pension). For private markets, see Goeree (2008) for the personal
computer; Dubois et al. (2018) for junk food; Gordon and Hartmann (2016), Moshary (2017), and
Spenkuch and Toniatti (2018) for U.S. elections; and Shapiro (2018) and Sinkinson and Starc
(2018) for pharmaceuticals. More recently, Shapiro et al. (2019) estimate the effect of advertising
on consumer demand in a variety of products based on the border identification approach. Finally,
our analysis is also related to the growing literature evaluating the effectiveness of advertising
content (e.g., Bertrand et al. (2010)).
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides institutional background on the marketplace.
Section 3 introduces our main data and provides descriptive evidence. Section 4 presents our
demand model and its estimates. Section 5 discusses our supply side model and counterfactual
simulation results. Finally, Section 6 concludes.


2     Background on the Health Insurance Marketplace
The health insurance marketplace is a federal/state-based health insurance program for the non-
elderly (people younger than 65) in the United States. It was established in 2014 as part of the ACA.
The marketplace is designed to provide health insurance for non-elderly uninsured individuals,
which was close to 20% of the population before the ACA. In the marketplace, private insurers
offer health plans, and the federal government offers premium and cost-sharing subsidies to low-
income enrollees. Individuals can decide to purchase health plans during the open enrollment
period, typically starting in the beginning of October of the preceding year when the new coverage
begins. Each plan is an annual contract, and individuals need to re-enroll every year.


    8 See   also Hastings and Weinstein (2008) who study the importance of outreach in public schools.
    9 Domurat    et al. (2019) consider individuals who had accounts in marketplaces but did not sign up.

                                                            5
Regulations on Health Insurance Plans. There are a number of regulations on plans sold in
the marketplace. First, each plan must meet a minimum quality defined over the generosity and
coverage of health care. Each plan is categorized based on a "metal" ranking, which indicates
different levels of generosity: Bronze, Silver, Gold, and Platinum. Bronze plans are the least
generous, which still cover health care costs of about 60% of actuarially fair value. These plans
must cover essential benefits, including at least 10 different types of specified health services.
    The premium is also subject to a number of regulations. First, it is subject to a modified commu-
nity rating regulation within each rating region. Specifically, each state is divided into geographical
rating regions, and a rating region consists of multiple counties or zip codes. Within each rating
region, insurers are not allowed to explicitly discriminate their pricing and product offerings based
on the consumer's health status.10 Second, the medical loss ratio regulation requires an insurer to
maintain a loss ratio­i.e., the ratio of total claim costs over the total premium revenues­of at least
80% at the state level. This regulation directly limits the markup that insurers can charge. Third,
an insurer's request for a premium increase of more than 10% is subject to state- or federal-based
rate reviews and must publicly disclose the proposed premium increase and the justification of the
increase.
    These numerous regulations on pricing and plan benefits make it more difficult for private
insurers to compete with competitors via product designs only, which make marketing activities
potentially more important in this market. In fact, the ACA did not impose any extra regulations on
marketing activities in the marketplace. Thus, marketing activities are thus a potentially important
way for insurers to enroll more consumers.

Consumer Subsidies. Consumers are offered premium subsidies from the federal government,
with the amount of the dependent upon household income. A household with a lower income
receives a more generous subsidy. Moreover, the subsidy depends on whether the state government
expanded Medicaid. If Medicaid is expanded, subsidies are given to households with incomes
between 138% and 400% of the federal poverty level (FPL); households with incomes below 138%
of the FPL qualify for Medicaid. Without Medicaid expansion, subsidies are given to households
with incomes between 100% and 400% of the FPL; households with incomes below 100% of the
FPL can still purchase a plan from the marketplace without subsidies.11 Consumers purchasing
Silver plans also receive income dependent cost-sharing subsidies. Overall, the government spends
close to $40 billion per year on premium and cost-sharing subsidies.
    10 Insurers can still charge different premiums based on an individual's age and smoking status under a pre-specified

rule. The maximum premium ratio between the oldest (age 64) and the youngest (age 18) must be equal to a factor of
3, and the smoker's insurance premium is 1.5 times as high as that for non-smokers.
    11 The ACA also imposes the tax penalty to the uninsured, known as the individual mandate. Households with

income less than 100% of the FPL will be exempt from the individual mandate if the state government does not
expand Medicaid.

                                                           6
Marketplace Administration and Marketing. State governments have three options to admin-
ister marketplaces. First, they can participate in the federally facilitated marketplace, which is op-
erated by the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). Second, they can create their own
marketplaces (state marketplaces). Third, they can partner with the federal marketplace (partner-
ship marketplaces). Each of these three options provides state governments with different levels of
freedom in designing their marketplaces. In particular, different models allow more or less control
in tailoring consumer outreach and assistance to state populations. Under the state marketplace
model, states assume full responsibility for operating consumer assistance, including marketing
through TV advertising. Their marketing expenses are largely funded by the federal government.
In the federally facilitated marketplace, however, the federal government is responsible for con-
ducting these activities. In the partnership marketplace, enrollment is conducted through the central
website for the federally facilitated marketplace (HealthCare.gov), but the state retains the outreach
function.


3       Data and Descriptive Evidence
This paper combines data from multiple sources. We use the enrollment data for 2014­2018 from
the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) to construct market shares for insurers. We
obtain detailed information on advertising from Kantar Media. This data set provides occurrence-
level TV advertising information on local and national advertisements by private insurers and fed-
eral and state governments for 2013­2018.


3.1     Data Sources
3.1.1    Firm- and Market-Level Data

Our analysis combines enrollment data of federally facilitated and partnership marketplaces and
the two largest state marketplaces from California (CA) and New York (NY). Each year, the CMS
releases enrollment data for 38 states in federally facilitated or partnership marketplaces. The data
provide information on enrollment at the insurer-county level for each year from 2014 to 2018 and
its breakdown by gender, age, household income, and smoking status. In addition, we also obtain
enrollment data from state marketplaces in CA and NY. These data provide total enrollments for
each insurer-county-year but do not include totals by demographic group.
     To construct market shares for each insurer in a county, we obtain county-level market size
from the American Community Survey (ACS). Following Tebaldi (2017) and Polyakova and Ryan
(2019), we define the market size of each county as the sum of the number of uninsured individuals
and the number of individuals who individually purchased health insurance instead of obtaining it

                                                  7
from their employers. This number measures the number of potential marketplace enrollees. We
also obtain county-level health characteristics, such as the fraction of populations with poor or fair
self-reported health from the County Health Rankings by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation
(CHR).12

3.1.2    Advertising Data

Our advertising data are from the Campaign Media Analysis Group at Kantar Media. The data
provide detailed characteristics of advertising related to health insurance, particularly the ACA
health insurance marketplace, at the occurrence level. There are two unique aspects of the data
that make it suitable for our research. First, the data allow us to identify which entity (the federal
government, state governments, or private insurers) sponsored a given advertisement. Moreover,
the data contain information about ACA-related political advertising and advertising by insurance
navigators, who help consumers with enrolling in the marketplace. Second, we can access a video
file of each advertisement in the data, which allows us to characterize the message content of each
advertisement and see how content varies across sponsors.
     The main measure of our analysis is each sponsor's per-capita advertising spending in a local
TV market (usually called a designated market area (DMA)), which typically consists of a major
city and surrounding counties.13 We create this measure by combining spending on advertisements
on local DMA-level TV channels and spending on advertising on national network TV.14

Identifying Advertisement Relevant for the Marketplace We exploit detailed information in
the database to identify which advertisements are relevant for marketplaces. Using Amazon Web
Services, we transcribed each advertisement and examined its content based on keywords. As a


   12 Note  that the health measures reported in the CHR data in each survey year are based on outcomes in previous
years. For example, the county-level self-reported health status reported in survey years from 2016 to 2018 is based
on actual self-reported health status as of two years before. In other words, the data from 2016 to 2018 provide
information about self-reported status from 2014 to 2016. Because the data do not provide information about health
status in 2017 or later, we assign health status for 2016 and later to those later years. We do not believe that our results
are sensitive to the way we construct the county-level health measure because actual county-based health status is
likely to be very persistent over time. We also experimented with an alternative way to construct the health measure
by calculating the average health status for each county across years. We find our main results robust.
    13 We also observe gross rating points (GRP), which is often used in other research on advertising. However, we

believe that per-capita advertising spending is more suitable for this paper. We observe GRPs only for a subset of
advertisements in the data, whereas we observe dollar spending for all advertisements. Further, GRPs measure the
share of the general population exposed to a particular advertisement. However, because the ACA marketplace is
mainly relevant for a very particular set of the population, GRPs may misrepresent how much of the population is
exposed to a relevant advertisement.
    14 Specifically, we sum two ratios: (i) the ratio of a sponsor's total spending in local TV channels in a DMA to the

DMA-level market size and (ii) the ratio of a sponsor's national network TV spending to the national market size. The
way in which we construct the per-capita spending is similar to Sinkinson and Starc (2018).

                                                             8
result, we can identify whether an advertisement (i) is related to the marketplace, (ii) merely pro-
motes a private insurer's brand, or (iii) is related to health insurance but not about the marketplaces
(i.e. Medicare). In our analyses, we consider types (i) and (ii) and exclude type (iii). Depending on
advertisement sponsors, we use a slightly different algorithm to classify each advertisement into
type (i), (ii), or (iii). We provide details in Appendix C.


3.2    Summary Statistics
First, we document the volume of advertising relevant for the marketplace by each sponsor type.
Figure 1 reports monthly time-series patterns of advertising spending by governments and insurers.
We find that private ACA-related advertising is somewhat larger than advertising by state and
federal governments. However, the magnitude of total government advertising (federal and state
combined) is still sizable, generally more than $100 million per year. This amount is comparable
to total private advertising for health insurance (ACA and non-ACA advertisements combined).
Regardless of sponsors, most advertisements were placed around the open enrollment periods of
the marketplace.


                                    Figure 1: Time Series of Advertising Spending
                               40



                               30
                   $ Million




                               20



                               10



                               0
                               2013m1    2014m1      2015m1         2016m1      2017m1        2018m1
                                                               ym

                                              Private non-ACA Ad             Private ACA Ad
                                              State Ad                       Federal Ad



Note: This figure plots monthly expenditures in millions for TV advertisements by the federal and state governments
and private insurers' ACA-related and non-ACA-related advertisements. The four different advertisement types are
stacked in this figure. Data source: Kantar Media.


    In 2017, the federal government decided to cut its total marketing budget for 2018 to only


                                                           9
$10 million. As seen in Figure 1, TV advertising in 2018 by the federal government is reduced
to almost zero. At the same time, there is a large increase in both ACA and non-ACA private
advertising. As a result, the total volume of advertising is roughly unchanged from 2017. Because
there are many other changes that may induce an increase in private advertising in 2018, we do not
interpret this relationship as causal. However, this data pattern motivates us to study interactions
between government and private advertising in Section 5.


               Figure 2: Geographical Patterns of Government and Private Advertising




                                                                                                                No Data
                                                   <25%                                                         <25%
                                                   25% to 50%                                                   25% to 50%
                                                   50% to 75%                                                   50% to 75%
                                                   >75%                                                         >75%


                  (a) Fed Ad per Capita                                       (b) State Ad per Capita




                                                   <25%
                                                   25% to 50%
                                                   50% to 75%
                                                   >75%


                (c) Private Ad per Capita

Note: This figure plots geographical patterns of advertisements by the federal and state governments (Panels (a) and
(b)) and private insurers (Panel (c)). In each panel, a DMA is highlighted in different colors depending on relative
advertising spending. The larger the total spending in an DMA is, the darker its color is. DMAs for which state
governments are not responsible for marketing are highlighted in grey and denoted as "No Data" in Panel (b). Data
source: Kantar Media.

    Figure 2 shows DMAs in which different sponsors advertised for the 2014 open enrollment
period. The figure shows that federal and state governments advertised in very different DMAs­
state governments advertised mainly in DMAs with state or partnership marketplaces, while the
federal government advertised mainly in DMAs with federally facilitated marketplaces. The same
figure also shows that the distribution of government and private advertising spending differs sig-


                                                          10
nificantly across DMAs. For example, compared with private insurers, the federal government
advertises extensively in Arizona and Florida.


                                Table 1: Summary Statistics at DMA-Year Level
                                                By Fed Ad Spend   By State Ad Spend   By Priv Ad Spend
                                                  (1)      (2)      (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)
                                                Below Above       Below     Above     Below     Above
                                                Median Median     Median Median       Median Median
                   Fed Ad per Capita ($)         0.14     0.50     0.27      0.17      0.25      0.35
                   State Ad per Capita ($)       0.41     0.22     0.19      1.88      0.26      0.40
                   Priv Ad per Capita ($)        1.16     0.94     0.76      1.53      0.11      2.02
                   Medicaid Expanded             0.66     0.64     0.94      0.98      0.61      0.69
                   Market Size (100,000)         1.99     2.95     2.00      3.62      1.26      3.57
                   No. of Insurers               3.55     3.37     3.46      3.79      2.89      4.06
                   Share: Income  138% of FPL    0.23     0.23     0.23      0.19      0.23      0.23
                   Share: Age  55                0.18     0.18     0.18      0.19      0.18      0.18
                   Share: Poor or Fair Health    0.17     0.17     0.17      0.16      0.18      0.17
                   N. Obs.                       434      350      124        124      392       392

Note: This table reports summary statistics of market characteristics depending on federal, state, and private advertis-
ing spending. Odd (even)-numbered columns present characteristics of DMAs below (above) the medians of the three
types of advertising. We restricted the sample year up to 2017 for this table because there is no federal advertising
in 2018, although our demand estimation in Section 4 uses the sample up to 2018. For Columns (3) and (4), we re-
stricted the sample to DMAs that include counties from states reponsible for marketing the marketplace. The number
of observations is not balanced for Columns (1) and (2) because there are many DMAs that received zero local federal
advertising. "Medicaid Expanded" is the fraction of markets where Medicaid was expanded under the ACA. "Share:
Income138% of FPL" is the share of individuals with incomes below or equal to 138% of FPL. "Share: Age55"
is the share of individuals aged 55 or above. "Share: Poor or Fair Health" is the share of individuals with poor or fair
self-reported health. Data source: Kantar Media.


    Table 1 presents summary statistics on characteristics of markets, split by the intensity of fed-
eral, state, and private advertising spending. For columns regarding state advertising ((3) and (4)),
we restricted the sample to DMAs that include counties from states responsible for marketing the
marketplace. The table shows that government and private advertising spending are not perfectly
correlated with each other. Comparing Columns (1) and (2), it is apparent that private advertising
spending is lower in DMAs with above-median federal advertising spending. The table also shows
that almost all DMAs where state governments directly advertised the marketplace have expanded
Medicaid (comparing Columns (3) and (4) with other columns).15 Private advertising is also larger
in those DMAs. Moreover, although advertising in general tends to be larger in DMAs with a
greater market size, private advertising is especially larger in these markets. Lastly, demographic
characteristics considered for this table do not seem highly correlated with any types of advertis-
ing. However, this result does not rule out the possibility that advertising is still targeted based on
these demographic variables if these demographic variables are correlated with other factors that

   15 Everystate with positive advertisement spending also expanded Medicaid. The Medicaid dummy is not equal to
one in Columns (3) or (4) because some DMAs include counties from states with and without expanded Medicaid.

                                                          11
are also taken into account for targeting. In Section 3.3, we use DMA-level regressions to study
more systemically how advertising is targeted.


                                                Table 2: Ad Contents
                                                                             (1)       (2)       (3)
                                                                          Private   Federal    State
                        Share: Any ACA-related                              0.37      1.00      1.00
                        Share: Open Enrollment                              0.24      0.22      0.24
                        Share: Financial Assistance                         0.22      0.31      0.42
                        Share: Open Enrollment and Financial Assistance    0.14      0.20      0.16
                        Share: Healthcare Reform                            0.14      0.18      0.02
                        Share: Uninsured                                    0.02      0.03      0.10
                        Share: Penalty                                      0.09      0.00      0.02
                        N. Obs.                                           998,017   249,215   508,275

Note: This table reports summary statistics of messages in advertisements by private insurers and the federal and
state governments for 2014­2018. The unit of observation is each advertisement occurence, and reported numbers are
averages weighted by each advertisement's dollar cost. Numbers in each column do not necessarily sum up to one
because each advertisement can have multiple messages. Data source: Kantar Media.


    Table 2 shows summary statistics of advertisement content depending on sponsor types (fed-
eral and state governments as well as private insurers). With transcripts of advertisements in our
sample, we first consider the following types of advertising content: whether an advertisement
mentions the open enrollment period, financial assistance under the ACA, healthcare reform, being
uninsured, or the financial penalty of not having health insurance. Details on how these variables
are constructed are in Appendix F. We then tabulate the proportion of advertisements that mention
keywords related to each topic by sponsor type.16
    There are certain similarities among advertisements by different sponsors. For example, all
sponsor types commonly discuss the open enrollment period and financial assistance in their ad-
vertisements. These two types of content are the most common in ACA-related advertisements
for all sponsors. Moreover, these two types of content are often discussed together in the same
advertisement by all sponsor types. The fourth row of Table 2 shows that there are more advertise-
ments that discuss both the open enrollment period and financial assistance than advertisements
that discuss contents other than the open enrollment period or financial assistance.
    However, there are also significant differences in content between government and private ad-
vertisements. For example, about 60% of private advertisements do not mention any of the key-
words related to the marketplace that we considered, whereas all federal and state advertisements

   16 The  set of content we consider in Table 2 is not necessarily exhaustive. For example, one could also look at
whether the federal government tried to use advertising as a tool of political persuasion or whether an advertisement
conveys misinformation about the marketplace. We focus on the types of content in the table because they are identified
in a relatively objective way. Moreover, we believe that the misinformation channel is less relevant in our specific
context because of regulations that ban marketing activities providing misinformation in health insurance markets
(e.g., see CMS Managed Care Manual for regulations of marketing activities).

                                                            12
are ACA-related (by definition).17 These private advertisements without ACA-related content usu-
ally seem to promote an insurer's brands, quality, and various insurance options provided by its
plans. On the other hand, even when federal or state advertisements do not mention the specific
content defined above, they still inform consumers of the presence of marketplaces, always show-
ing the web addresses of the federal and state marketplaces, as in Figure 4 in the Online Appendix.
    This difference in content between advertisements sponsored by governments and private insur-
ers is indicative of their different incentives. The large fraction of private advertisements unrelated
to the specific information of the ACA marketplace reflects that the goal of private advertising is
to maximize an insurer's own profit. Such a goal may not always be aligned with the government's
likely goal to increase total enrollment in the marketplace. For example, private advertisements
unrelated to the marketplace may be effective in increasing enrollment for an insurer at the ex-
pense of enrollment for other insurers. In contrast, the government may aim to reduce transaction
costs of enrolling in the marketplace by providing specific information. For this reason, we expect
that advertisements from different sponsors providing different content have different effects on
demand, which we will examine more closely in our demand analysis in Section 4.


3.3     Suggestive Evidence for Geographical Targeting of Advertising
We now carry out preliminary analyses to explore how advertising, both by governments and pri-
vate insurers, is geographically targeted. We investigate how advertisement spending is correlated
with DMA characteristics by estimating the following regression:

                                                 k
                                        ln(1 + admt ) = Xmt  + t + mt .                                          (1)

The dependent variable admt k represents advertising spending per capita by sponsor type k  { f , s, p},

which is the federal government ( f ), state government (s), or private insurer ( p). Explanatory vari-
ables Xmt include various DMA-level characteristics considered in Table 1. t refers to a year fixed
effect. Although we are reluctant to view our estimates as causal, we aim to learn which market
characteristics are associated with greater advertising spending by sponsor type.
    Table 3 presents estimates of the regression in Equation (1). Columns (1) and (2) report re-
sults for federal and state advertising, respectively. Column (3) presents results for all private
advertising, and Column (4) restricts private advertising to ACA-related content. We find that
both governments and private insurers do more advertising in markets with more private insurers.
However, government advertising is not particularly targeted based on DMA-level demographic

   17 We  also checked a random sample of private advertisements visually to see whether they show the web address
of the marketplace (e.g. Healthcare.gov), but none of them, including even ACA-related ones, do. In contrast, federal
and state advertisements always show the web address of their marketplaces.

                                                         13
                               Table 3: Targeting of Advertising: Aggregate Results
                                                                   (1)        (2)           (3)              (4)
                                                                 Federal     State     Private (All)   Private (ACA)
          Share: Income  138% of FPL (%)                           -0.001   -0.032        0.016          0.008
                                                                  (0.002)    (0.008)      (0.008)         (0.003)
          Medicaid Expanded=1                                    -0.098                   0.545           0.195
                                                                  (0.058)                 (0.224)         (0.099)
          Medicaid Expanded=1 × Share: Income  138% of FPL (%)     0.003                 -0.018            -0.005
                                                                  (0.002)                 (0.009)         (0.005)
          Share: Age  55 (%)                                       0.001      -0.019      0.017             0.003
                                                                  (0.002)    (0.014)      (0.008)         (0.004)
          Share: Poor or Fair Health (%)                           0.002      0.010        -0.008         -0.002
                                                                  (0.002)    (0.011)      (0.008)         (0.005)
          No. of Insurers                                        0.017      0.116        0.059           0.019
                                                                  (0.006)    (0.025)      (0.015)         (0.007)
          Log of Market Size                                     0.029        -0.010     0.147           0.074
                                                                  (0.008)    (0.053)      (0.025)         (0.013)
          Year FE                                                   Y          Y            Y               Y
          N. Obs.                                                  784        332          983             983
          Adj. R2                                                 0.148      0.238        0.212           0.210

Note: This table reports estimates of the coefficients in Equation (1). Because there is no federal advertising spending
in 2018, we restricted our sample years to 2014­2017 for Column (1). For Column (2), we restricted the sample to
DMAs that include counties from states for which states are reponsible for marketing the marketplace. For the same
column, we do not include the dummy variable for Medicaid expansion because every state with positive advertisement
spending expanded Medicaid. Standard errors are in parentheses and clustered at the DMA level. The stars indicate:
*** for p<0.01, ** for p<0.05 and * for p<0.1.


characteristics. In contrast, private advertising varies much more with demographic characteris-
tics and health care policies. For example, we find that private advertising is significantly larger
in markets with more potential enrollees. Moreover, Medicaid expansion is associated with 72%
( 100  (exp(0.545) - 1)) more total private advertising. In addition to the demographic variables,
we also examine targeting based on the share of the population reporting poor or fair health across
DMAs, but we do not find statistically significant correlations with advertising by any sponsor.18 , 19
    These differences may reflect different objectives of the government and private insurers. Pri-
vate insurers have an incentive to conduct advertising to increase their profits. Thus, they may want
to advertise in markets with more potential enrollees or markets with better risk pools. Medicaid
expansion can make the average risk pool of the marketplace less risky by absorbing low-income
populations, which are more likely to be high-risk.20 The government, on the other hand, may not
be profit-maximizing and thus follows different targeting patterns. We next estimate the impact
of advertising on consumer demand to better understand how advertising from different sponsors
    18 We also examined other health measures such as health care costs, and the fraction of obesity and diabetes, but

find similar patterns. These results are available upon request.
    19 In Appendix G, using the list of message content from Table 2, we investigate how per-capita advertisement

spending for each type of content and sponsor is targeted to different DMAs. We also find differences in targeting of
advertising that provide specific content by different sponsors.
    20 See Sen and DeLeire (2018) for evidence that Medicaid expansion improves the risk pool of the marketplaces.



                                                          14
increases enrollment.


4       The Impact of Advertising on Consumer Demand

4.1     Market-level Analysis
To examine the effect of government and private advertising on consumer demand, we first estimate
its impact on market-level enrollment in the marketplace. The primary objective of this analysis
is to understand whether advertising has any meaningful effect on market expansion. Although
advertising could potentially have an impact on Medicaid enrollment, we abstract from such an
analysis.21

4.1.1    Identification: Border Strategy

In estimating the effects of advertising, endogeneity of advertising is a threat to credible identifica-
tion. Private insurers may choose to advertise more in markets where expected profits from adver-
tising are large, and they may have higher expected profits in some markets because of unobserved
heterogeneity in consumer demand. For example, some insurers may have better brand images
in certain markets and thus concentrate their advertising campaigns in such markets. In contrast,
it is not clear whether the government implements a sophisticated targeting strategy. Even if the
government is sophisticated, it is not obvious whether it targets market with high or low demand
for insurance. Depending on how advertising and demand for insurance are correlated, a naive
regression of county-level enrollment on advertising may lead to under- or over-estimation of the
effects of advertising.
     In order to address the endogeneity of advertising, we build on the work of Shapiro (2018),
Tuchman (2019), Moshary (2017), Aizawa and Kim (2018), and Spenkuch and Toniatti (2018)
and implement a border identification strategy.22 The border strategy exploits a discontinuity of
advertising expenditures across a border between DMAs. This discontinuity arises because the
Federal Communications Commission regulations grant media companies local broadcast rights
at the DMA level. A DMA typically contains a major city and surrounding counties. Thus, there
are "border counties" in an outer part of a DMA that are located adjacent to at least one county in
a different DMA. The border strategy relies on the regulation-induced discontinuities in exposure


   21 Our preliminary analysis suggests that the effect on Medicaid enrollment is likely limited. This result is available

upon request.
   22 The main idea behind this type of border strategy is already presented in the seminal work by Holmes (1998)

and Black (1999). See Li et al. (2020) for the relationship between the border strategy and the Waldfogel instrument
(Waldfogel (2003)), which is commonly used in the industrial organization literature.

                                                           15
to advertising across neighboring border counties in the same state but different DMAs.23 An
advertising decision is likely based on characteristics of the entire DMA, not a specific border
county. Differences in DMA-level characteristics between two neighboring DMAs can result in
discontinuities of advertising exposures to two neighboring border counties in different DMAs
although the two border counties likely have similar unobserved heterogeneity in demand.
    To implement the border strategy, we first identify pairs of adjacent border counties in the same
state that belong to two different DMAs, which we refer to as a border pair. With fixed effects for
border pair-by-year, we control for unobserved heterogeneity in demand that is common within
each border pair and year. Using the panel structure of our data, moreover, we additionally include
county fixed effects to control for county-level unobserved heterogeneity in demand that is per-
sistent over time. With the two sets of fixed effects, remaining unobserved heterogeneity is at the
level of each county and year within a border pair. Our identifying assumption is that the remain-
ing unobserved heterogeneity is uncorrelated with advertising. In other words, we assume that
growth in advertising spending in a DMA is uncorrelated with changes in county-level unobserved
heterogeneity in demand over time.
    One important advantage of the border strategy is that it teases out separate exogenous variation
in advertising by different sponsors. It is possible that advertising spending of private firms and
the government are jointly determined in equilibrium in each DMA. However, what matters for the
identification is that unobserved heterogeneity in consumer demand in border counties is uncor-
related with growth in advertising by different sponsors, which are determined at the DMA level.
As long as our identification assumption is met, all we need to separately identify sponsor-specific
effects of advertising is variation in the difference of advertising spending by different sponsors
across border pairs.
    Moreover, the border strategy allows us to identify the effect of advertising separately from
other ways in which the government or insurers can increase enrollment. The border strategy re-
quires that growth in other marketing activities across a DMA border is uncorrelated with growth in
TV advertising spending across the DMA border. For example, the state government may conduct
outreach activities besides TV advertising such as sending reminders to specific enrollees (e.g.,
Domurat et al. (2019) and Goldin et al. (2019)). These activities often target specific individuals as
opposed to a county as a whole. Other outreach activities, such as in-person assistance programs,
may vary across counties. However, such activities will violate the identifying assumption only
if geographical targeting in these activities systemically depends on variation of TV advertising
across a DMA border and if these activities are effective.24 Private insurers may engage in other
   23 We   only compare border counties in the same state because marketplaces in different states can be very different.
   24 Because we control county fixed effects, some variation in in-person assistance programs, such as enrollment cen-

ters, is already controlled for in our analysis. Moreover, Myerson (2019) estimate that in-person assistance programs
have no effects on marketplace enrollments although they increase Medicaid enrollment.

                                                           16
marketing activities, such as digital advertising. Regardless of its effectiveness, they are designed
to target at the individual level and therefore are unlikely to discretely change across DMA borders
in a way that is correlated with a growth in TV advertising.
     The identifying assumption for the border strategy will be more plausible if county character-
istics are indeed balanced in the cross section. Having balanced county characteristics on either
side of the border is not a necessary condition of our identification assumption because we use the
panel structure of the data. However, one might expect that counties with similar observed charac-
teristics are likely to have similar trends for unobserved heterogeneity. Indeed, we find that market
characteristics are also almost identical between pairs of border counties with different advertising,
as discussed in detail in Appendix A.
     An important caveat to the border strategy is that the estimated effect is only local to potential
marketplace enrollees in border counties. Thus one must be cautious in generalizing the estimated
effect to non-border counties. In Appendix A, we show that there is a considerable amount of
overlapping support in observables between border and non-border counties. This suggests that
the estimated effect of advertising could be generalizable to even non-border counties.
     Another caveat to the border strategy is that its reliance on many fixed effects potentially raises
a concern about whether we have enough variation in advertising. In Appendix A, we report that
we have enough advertising variation within border pairs to adopt this methodology.

4.1.2   Effects of Advertising on Market-level Enrollments

We estimate the following county-level regression:

                                            k
                    ln(sbct ) =    ln(1 + adbm (c)t )k + xbct  + bt + c + r(c)t + bct .                         (2)
                                  kK

The dependent variable refers to the log of the share of individuals that enrolled in marketplace
                                                                         k
plans in border pair b, county c, and year t . On the right-hand side, adbm (c)t refers to the advertising
expenditure of category k per potential marketplace enrollee in border pair b, DMA m(c) to which
county c belongs, and year t .25 Advertising of category k refers to advertising by different sponsors.
                                                 f            s
In the main specification, K = { f , s, mp}. adbm(c)t and adbm  (c)t denote advertising by federal and
                                         mp
state governments, respectively, and adbm(c)t is market-level private advertising, defined as the sum

   25 Throughout  the paper, we measure advertising spending as a flow, as opposed to a stock. A stock measure of
advertising spending is more appropriate for markets where consumers make purchasing decisions at a relatively high
frequency, such as weekly or monthly frequency. For example, see Shapiro (2018), Sinkinson and Starc (2018), Dubois
et al. (2018), and Tuchman (2019), who study consumer purchases of pharmaceuticals, e-cigarettes, and junk food,
respectively. We view that a flow measure is more appropriate for our context because advertising is concentrated
around the open enrollment in each year and because health insurance purchasing decision is only made once in a year
during the open enrollment period.

                                                        17
of advertising expenditures by all insurers in each DMA and year. In some specifications, we
include advertising of other categories to control for additional variables that also vary discretely
across DMA borders: insurance navigators (nv) and political advertising on the ACA by Democrats
(dem) and Republicans (rep).26 Note that TV advertising decisions are typically made on the basis
of a DMA, which contains several counties. Thus, we assume individuals in different counties
but in the same DMA are exposed to the same advertising level. We add one to the advertising
variables before taking the logarithm because there are markets with zero advertising spending
by the government or private insurers. Because both dependent and independent variables are in
logarithms, the coefficient k is an elasticity of county-level demand for marketplace plans with
respect to advertising by a sponsor k.
    Next, xbct refers to a set of time-varying characteristics for each county-year pair (ct ). We
include the number of insurers and the market size. To control for unobserved heterogeneity in
demand, we include fixed effects for a border pair-by-year (bt ), county (c ), and rating area-by-
year (r(c)t ). As discussed above, the border strategy relies on the first two fixed effects. The first
controls for time-varying unobserved heterogeneity across border pairs, and the second controls for
time-invariant unobservables that vary within border pairs at the county level. In addition, a rating
area is a collection of counties within which an insurer sets characteristics for its plans. Thus, r(c)t
controls for effects of plan characteristics on enrollments, although we do not explicitly include
specific plan characteristics in the regression models. An alternative way to control for differences
in plan characteristics across rating areas and years is to further restrict the sample to border pairs
that are included in the same rating area. We present estimates from the alternative sample in
Section 4.3 for robustness checks.

4.1.3    Estimation Results

Table 4 presents regression results from various specifications. Columns (1)--(3) differ only in
included fixed effects, and Column (4) controls for additional advertising categories as well as the
full set of fixed effects. Standard errors in all specifications are two-way clustered at the level
of DMA-by-year and county. The advertising variables vary at the DMA-by-year level, and the
county is a unit of the panel structure in the data.
    In almost all specifications, the coefficient estimates for advertising by the federal govern-
ment are positive and statistically significant, and their magnitudes are largely invariant across the
four specifications. Based on the estimates in Column (3), we find that a 1% increase in fed-
eral advertising leads to a 0.05% increase in the market shares of individuals that enrolled in the
marketplace. Extrapolating the coefficient to larger changes, if the federal government doubles
   26 The classification of political advertising is based on information on the political party affiliation of advertising
sponsors in the data.

                                                           18
                      Table 4: The Effects of Advertising on Market-level Enrollments

                                                          (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)
                                      Fed Spend          0.041     0.041      0.050       0.050
                                                        (0.028)    (0.015)    (0.021)     (0.021)
                                      State Spend        -0.028     0.019      -0.011      -0.008
                                                        (0.035)    (0.027)    (0.034)     (0.034)
                                      Priv Spend         0.006      0.011      0.023        0.024
                                                        (0.016)    (0.012)    (0.018)     (0.017)
                                      Navi Spend                                           -0.055
                                                                                          (0.122)
                                      Dem Spend                                          0.049
                                                                                          (0.016)
                                      Rep Spend                                           -0.015
                                                                                          (0.008)
                                      No. of Insurers   0.046       0.012       0.012       0.013
                                                         (0.011)    (0.007)    (0.008)    (0.008)
                                      Market Size         0.000    -0.009     -0.026     -0.026
                                                         (0.000)    (0.004)    (0.006)    (0.006)
                                      BorderYear FE        Y          Y          Y          Y
                                      County FE                       Y          Y          Y
                                      RatingYear FE                              Y          Y
                                      N. Obs.           18,862     18,840      18,182     18,182
                                      Adj. R2            0.707      0.913       0.919     0.919

Note: This table reports the estimates of the coefficients in Equation (2). Different columns have different combina-
tions of Border×Year fixed effects, County fixed effects, and Rating Area×Year fixed effects. The unit of the market
size (the number of potential enrollees) is in thousands. Standard errors are in parentheses and two-way clustered at
the DMA×Year and the County level. The stars indicate: *** for p<0.01, ** for p<0.05 and * for p<0.1.


advertising spending, then the market-level share will increase by 1 percentage point (pp) given
that the unconditional average of the market-level take-up rate is 0.2. Another way to interpret
the coefficient is that, conditional on advertising by other sponsors, eliminating federal advertising
will decrease enrollment by 5%. This estimate is much smaller than those mentioned in policy
debates which assert that 40% of enrollment is associated with federal advertising.27
    Although the magnitude of the estimate seems modest, it is very large compared with a typical
elasticity of demand with respect to TV advertising estimated with a credible research design. For
example, Shapiro et al. (2019) show that the median of estimated advertising elasticities for many
different private goods is 0.014. Moreover, in a context closer to that studied here, the effectiveness
of federal advertising is quite comparable to the cost effectiveness of a direct mail reminder to
enroll in the marketplace that the Internal Revenue Service sent to taxpayers, which is studied by
Goldin et al. (2019). We provide a more detailed comparison in Online Appendix B.1.
    In contrast, the coefficient estimates for advertising by state governments are very small and al-
most close to zero. This small average effect of state advertising could mask heterogeneous effects
of advertising by different states. In marketplaces for which state governments are responsible for
marketing activities instead of the federal government, each state government organizes its own
   27 See   footnote 5 for details.

                                                                   19
marketing activities. Thus, it is reasonable to expect that some states have more resources avail-
able for designing more effective marketing activities than others. To explore this possibility, in
Section 4.4.1, we examine how effective state advertising is in CA relative to other states, where
the state government spent a large amount of resources for marketing its own marketplace.28 We
find a large and positive effect of state advertising in CA, which is indicative of heterogeneous
effects of advertising by different state governments.
    Next, we find that market-level private advertising is not more effective than government ad-
vertising in increasing market-level enrollment in any specifications. The point estimates for the
effect of private advertising are smaller than those for federal advertising and statistically insignif-
icant in all specifications. Based on these estimates, we robustly reject that private advertising is
more effective in expanding total enrollment than federal advertising.
    There are two possibilities behind this result. First, as recent research on advertising doc-
uments, private firms may not necessarily be very good at using advertisements to increase de-
mand.29 Second, even if private advertising is very effective in increasing demand for insurers that
conduct advertising, it does so, at least in part, by stealing consumers from other insurers. In this
case, private advertising may reallocate consumers among insurers to some extent and thus result
in a smaller market-level effect. In the next section, we will estimate the effect of advertising on
individual insurer demand to further investigate this issue.
    Our main specifications do not reject the possibility that federal advertising is equally as effec-
tive as market-level private advertising. However, we can make a slightly sharper comparison of
the effects of federal and private advertising in an alternative specification where the advertising
variables enter the regression in levels instead of logs (see Table 16 in Online Appendix). In this
specification, federal advertising is more effective than private advertising at the 10% significance
level. Table 16 also shows that with an alternative sample that is restricted to border pairs in the
same rating area, we reach the same conclusion at the 5% significance level.
    In Column (4) of Table 4, we include additional categories of advertising in the regression to
control for other factors that also vary discretely across DMA borders: advertising by insurance
navigators and political advertising on the ACA by Democrats and Republicans. The coefficient
estimates for the three main advertising variables do not vary with the additional variables. Inter-
estingly, the estimated effects of political advertising are consistent with how each party views the
ACA. On the one hand, Democratic advertising increases market-level enrollment, and its effect is
comparable to federal advertising. On the other hand, the point estimate for Republican advertising
is negative.
    Given our estimates, it is difficult to clearly distinguish statistically the effectiveness of adver-

  28 See   Lee et al. (2017) for the summary of marketing campaign of CA marketplace programs.
  29 For   example, see Blake et al. (2015) and Lewis and Rao (2015).

                                                        20
tising by different sponsors except for a few specifications, partly due to relatively large standard
errors of the estimates. Nevertheless, in Table 14 in the Online Appendix, we still find that the ef-
fect of federal advertising is statistically larger than the combined effect of non-federal advertising
in the marketplace. Thus, federal advertising is more effective in increasing total enrollment than
typical advertising by sponsors other than the federal government.

4.1.4    Welfare Implications of Federal Advertising

It is useful to investigate welfare implications of the magnitude of the market-expansion effect of
federal advertising. Our welfare framework is motivated by Finkelstein and Notowidigdo (2019),
who study welfare impacts of the government's information provision to potential public program
enrollees who face choice frictions. We define total social welfare given federal advertising spend-
ing as T SW = SSh qh (ad f )dF (h) - ad f . T SW denotes total social welfare, and SSh denotes the
social surplus from enrolling a consumer of demographic type h. One can think that SSh is the sum
of consumer and producer surplus net of the government expenditure for an enrollee such as the
premium subsidy. qh (ad f ) denotes total program enrollment given federal advertising spending
ad f , and this demand function embeds an individual's optimal decision to enroll in the market-
place subject to choice frictions such as being unaware of the marketplace. Federal advertising can
reduce these choice frictions, thereby increasing take-up.30 We assume away the possibility that
federal advertising affects the social value of health plans, which implies that welfare gains from
federal advertising calculated in our framework is likely a lower bound. For simplicity, we assume
that qh (ad f ) = q
                  ¯ (ad f ). In other words, the marginal effect of federal advertising on take-up is the
same for all consumers.31 Moreover, we assume a partial equilibrium framework where private
insurers do not change their advertising in response to federal advertising, which will be relaxed in
a later analysis.
     In this framework, federal advertising increases total social welfare if SS × q   ¯ (ad f ) > 1. We
define SS = SSh dF (h), which is the social surplus from enrolling an average consumer. In Online
Appendix B.2, we show based on our estimate of the effect of federal advertising that if SS > $32,
then federal advertising enhances welfare. It is very difficult to credibly estimate the social value
of health insurance SS. However, as discussed in Online Appendix B.2, existing studies suggest
that SS is likely to be much bigger than $32 after taking into account government spending for

    30 Although there are various models with choice frictions that rationalize q (ad f ), one plausible framework is
                                                                                    h
a consideration set model, where federal advertising affects an individual's awareness of marketplaces (See Online
Appendix B.2 for details). This is a reasonable description of an individual's decision process because we show in
Section 4.2.4 later that federal advertising that provides specific information about marketplaces, such as the end date
of the open enrollment period and financial assistance, is effective.
    31 Although this assumption could be restrictive, we do not find robust evidence for heterogeneity in advertising

effects across demographic types later in Section 4.4.1.

                                                          21
uncompensated care for uninsured individuals. This result suggests that federal advertising likely
enhances welfare in partial equilibrium.
    Here, we further discuss how much more we can learn about the role of the federal government
based solely on our market-level demand estimates. First, given our estimates, we rule out the pos-
sibility that private advertising is more effective than government advertising. This suggests that
the government can possibly further expand total enrollment by directly advertising for the mar-
ketplace, although a more complete analysis should take into account private insurers' endogenous
responses. Moreover, one of common arguments that support public provision of private goods
is that private firms may lack economies of scale. In our context, the fixed cost of advertising is
likely to account for the fact that small private insurers choose not to advertise.32 Government ad-
vertising can induce more switching from uninsured to insured, including switching to those small
insurers who still provide health insurance that satisfies the minimum quality. This strengthens the
case for the government to directly advertise for the marketplace.


4.2     Demand Model
We now analyze the impact of advertising on enrollment at the insurer level. This analysis will
help us understand whether private insurer advertising is effective in increasing enrollment for the
advertising insurer as well as its impact on other insurers. Moreover, this demand model will be an
ingredient in our equilibrium model in Section 5.

4.2.1    Utility Specification

Consider individual i who lives in market ct , which is defined as a county-year pair. The number
of marketplace insurers available in each market is denoted by Jct . Because the outside option­
for example, being uninsured­is always available, a consumer has a total of Jct + 1 options. The
consumer optimally chooses the insurer that maximizes his utility.33 We assume that the consumer
obtains indirect utility ui jct from insurer j > 0 as follows:

                                    ui jct =    ln(1 + ad kjm(c)t )k +  jct + i jct                                       (3)
                                               kK




   32 We find that the average enrollment size of insurers that did not advertise is about a half of that of insurers that did

advertise. Although an insurer's enrollment size is endogenous to advertising, this stark difference in the size between
the two types of insurers is unlikely due to advertising given our modest estimates of the effect of advertising.
   33 Because plan-level enrollment data are available, it is possible to model plan choice within insurers. However,

the data provide total enrollment for each plan aggregated across multiple counties. Moreover, because the effects of
advertising on market- and insurer-level demand are the first order channels, we leave this extension for future work.

                                                             22
An individual's insurer choice is affected by the amount of advertising in various categories ad k    jm(c)t ,
where each category is defined over advertisement sponsor and content.34 It is also affected by
non-advertising utility from an insurer ( jct ).
     The set of advertising categories we consider in the main specification is a collection of the per-
capita spending by different advertising sponsors: K = { f , s, p, r, nv, dem, rep}, where an important
change from the market-level analysis is our treatment of private advertising. We let ad p       jm(c)t
                                                                                                        de-
note advertising by insurer j, which varies over insurers within the same market. An important
difference from the market-level analysis is that we consider ad p     jm(c)t
                                                                              instead of market-level pri-
                      mp
vate advertising (adm(c)t ). Note that with our framework, an insurer j's advertising will inherently
have some business-stealing effects. In other words, its advertising will increase its own market
share at the expense of rivals' market shares as well as the outside option. Thus, the effect on
total enrollment can be smaller even if private advertising is as effective as government advertising
in increasing demand for an individual insurer. To allow for a more flexible substitution pattern
among insurers with respect to private advertising, we include advertising by an insurer's rivals
                                                              p      35 The coefficient for ad r
(r) in some specifications such that ad r   jm(c)t = h= j adhm(c)t .                           jm(c)t will
determine whether private advertising has positive spillover to rivals or steals business from rivals.
If the coefficient, r , is positive and large relative to the coefficient on own advertising ( p ) , then
private advertising has a positive spillover effect: that is, private advertising increases not only
the insurer's own demand, but also rivals' demand, thereby leading to market expansion. To the
extent that some private advertising provides general information about the marketplace­for ex-
ample, the open enrollment period­it could potentially have positive spillover to rivals. Otherwise,
private advertising increases own enrollment from the outside option and steal consumers from
other insurers. In other words, if the coefficient r is positive but small or even negative, private
advertising will have at least some business stealing effect.
     As in the market-level analysis, we include federal ( f ), state (s), navigators (nv), Democrats
(dem) and Republicans (rep) advertising. Note that each of advertising has the j subscript; how-
ever, it does not change across insurers within the same DMA and year. Thus, if advertising by
governments increases an insurer's market shares, it will increase all other insurers' market shares
in the same way, thereby expanding the total enrollment in marketplace plans. We relax this as-
sumption in Section 4.4.2.
     Note that our demand model does not specify how advertising affects a consumer's choice.

   34 We assume that advertising affects demand through the indirect utility function in our model. Alternatively, one

can model specific channels through which advertising affects demand ­ for example, a consumer's awareness of a
product or providing experience characteristics of product quality. We do not take this approach, however, because
separately identifying different effects of advertising is challenging with our data.
   35 We also experimented with an alternative specification, where we define rivals' advertising as the average per-

capita spending by rivals. This variable definition does not affect our results.

                                                         23
Although this specification is common in many studies in marketing, it is important to point out
that it is consistent with many different models, including models with consumer choice frictions.
For example, as Hastings et al. (2017) shows, our indirect utility function encompasses a pure
consideration set model (e.g., Goeree (2008)) in which the role of advertising is to increase the
probability that a consumer will consider the plan j. Instead of making specific assumptions on
how advertising affects a choice, Section 4.2.4 shows which advertising content is more effective
for a consumer's choice, which sheds some light on how advertising affects a choice.
    Non-advertising utility ( jct ) denotes utility from characteristics of an insurer's plans such as
premiums, generosity of coverage, provider networks, and so on. It also includes an insurer's
characteristics such as brand image. For the purpose of this paper, it is not crucial to estimate how
much utility depends on specific plan characteristics. Thus, we do not explicitly model how each
plan characteristic affects utility.
    A consumer's outside option ( j = 0) is to stay uninsured or purchase an off-marketplace plan,
from which a consumer receives utility of ui0ct :

                                                      ui0ct = i0ct .                                                (4)

Note that the deterministic portion of ui0ct is normalized to 0 for all ct because only the relative
utilities can be identified in a discrete choice model. Lastly, i jct is an individual i's preference
shock for each plan. We assume that i jct is independently and identically distributed according to
a Type I extreme-value distribution.36
    Also, note that variables in the utility function do not include the subscript for border pair (b)
because we will first write a general model for demand for insurers. When we estimate the model,
we will also employ the border strategy, where we will add the subscript for border areas (b) to
appropriate variables when discussing identification.

4.2.2    Identification and Estimation

To estimate the model, we exploit the one-to-one mapping between each insurer's market share and
the deterministic part of ui jlct given in Equation (3) as in Berry (1994). Define  jct  ui jct - i jct .
Then it is easy to show, based on the assumption on i jct , that

                                              jct = ln(s jct ) - ln (s0ct ) ,

   36 One could assume a nested logit error term to allow for additional flexibility in substitution patterns.
                                                                                                           For example,
we can have all inside options in a single nest. However, we would need an instrument to estimate the nesting parameter
because we only have aggregate data on market shares. We find it challenging to come up with a reasonable instrument
because we include an extensive set of fixed effects due to the border identification strategy. Thus, we do not consider
a nested logit model.

                                                            24
where s jct denotes insurer j s empirical market share. We will denote the empirical counterpart of
 jct by ^ jct . Then the estimating equation is given by

                                 ^ jct =
                                            ln(1 + ad kjm(c)t )k +  jct .                           (5)
                                           kK

Notice that estimating coefficients in Equation (5) simply requires running a linear regression.
However, estimating the coefficients with an ordinary least square regression is likely to result
in biases in our advertising coefficients (k ) because of endogeneity of advertising, as discussed
earlier in Section 4.1.1. Thus, we employ the border strategy to estimate the coefficients.

Border Strategy at the Insurer Level Consider an insurer j in county c in border pair b. With
the border strategy, we assume that the insurer's non-advertising utility is

                                  jbct =  jbt +  jc +  jr(c)t +  jbct .                             (6)

First,  jbt refers to fixed effects for insurer j, border pair b, and year t . They capture any common
factor that affects demand for insurer j in both counties in border pair b in year t . Second,  jc
refers to insurer×county fixed effects, which capture any time-invariant factor that commonly
affects demand for an insurer in a county. Second,  jr(c)t denotes fixed effects for insurer j, rating
area r(c), and year t . An insurer is restricted to offer the same price for a given plan within a
rating area and a year. Thus, we indirectly control for an insurer's plan characteristics with  jr(c)t .
Alternatively, we control for this heterogeneity by further restricting our sample to border pairs in
the same rating area. We show results with this alternative sample in Section 4.3 for robustness
checks. Lastly,  jbct denotes the remaining component in  jbct .
    Combining Equations (5) and (6), we have the following estimating equation with the border
strategy:
                      ^ jbct =
                                ln(1 + ad kjbm(c)t )k +  jbt +  jc +  jr(c)t +  jbct                (7)
                            kK

The identifying assumption is that none of the advertising variables are correlated with the struc-
tural error term  jbct ­i.e., unobserved heterogeneity in demand for an insurer that varies at the
level of county and year within a border pair.

4.2.3   Estimation Results

Table 5 presents coefficient estimates in the utility function described in Equation (3) with dif-
ferent specifications. Columns (1)­(7) differ only in the included fixed effects and advertising
controls. Standard errors for all specifications are two-way clustered at the level of DMA-by-year


                                                    25
                      Table 5: Estimated Coefficients in Insurer-Level Demand Model

                                       (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)
                Fed Spend             -0.009     0.079     0.131      0.125      0.123      0.129      0.127
                                      (0.059)    (0.043)   (0.048)    (0.053)    (0.053)    (0.054)    (0.054)
                State Spend            0.012     -0.050     -0.033    -0.033     -0.031     -0.028     -0.025
                                      (0.054)    (0.052)   (0.059)    (0.070)    (0.070)    (0.069)    (0.069)
                Priv Spend           0.217      0.309      0.149      0.093                 0.090
                                      (0.042)    (0.056)   (0.043)    (0.048)               (0.047)
                Priv ACA Spend                                                    0.048                   0.042
                                                                                 (0.054)                (0.054)
                Priv non-ACA Spend                                               0.121                  0.121
                                                                                 (0.056)                (0.055)
                Rival Spend                                                                   -0.043     -0.044
                                                                                             (0.047)    (0.046)
                Navi Spend                                                                    -0.390     -0.391
                                                                                             (0.240)    (0.240)
                Dem Spend                                                                      0.049      0.047
                                                                                             (0.037)    (0.037)
                Rep Spend                                                                      0.017      0.018
                                                                                             (0.018)    (0.018)
                No. of Insurers      -0.190     -0.203     -0.189     -0.091     -0.091     -0.087     -0.087
                                      (0.020)    (0.019)    (0.023)    (0.024)    (0.024)    (0.024)    (0.024)
                Market Size          0.001      -0.012     -0.022     -0.021     -0.021     -0.022     -0.022
                                      (0.000)    (0.003)    (0.006)    (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.006)    (0.006)
                FirmBorderYear FE       Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y          Y
                County FE                          Y          Y
                FirmCounty FE                                            Y          Y          Y          Y
                FirmRatingYear FE                             Y          Y          Y          Y          Y
                N. Obs.               39,782     39,770     38,316     36,558     36,558     36,558     36,558
                Adj. R2               0.791       0.824     0.897      0.938       0.938     0.938      0.938

Note: This table reports the estimates of the coefficients in Equation (7). Different columns have different com-
binations of Firm×Border×Year fixed effects, County fixed effects, Firm×County fixed effects, and Firm×Rating
Area×Year fixed effects. In Columns (5) and (7), we replace private advertising with private advertising that does
and does not provide marketplace-related content. Columns (6) and (7) present the estimates with specifications with
additional advertising variables. The unit of the market size (the number of potential enrollees) is in thousands. Stan-
dard errors are in parentheses and two-way clustered at the DMA×Year level and the Firm×County level. The stars
indicate: *** for p<0.01, ** for p<0.05 and * for p<0.1.


and insurer-by-county. The main advertising variables vary at the level of DMA-by-year, and the
unit of panel structure in the data is at the level of insurer-by-county.
    Table 5 shows that, in all specifications, an insurer's own private advertising is effective in in-
creasing demand for an insurer. Based on the estimate from Column (6), which contains the most
extensive set of fixed effects, the average elasticity of insurers' demand with respect to advertising
is 0.03 among insurers that had positive advertising spending.37 The magnitude of this estimated
impact of private advertising is largely consistent with typical findings in the marketing litera-
ture estimating the elasticity of demand with respect to advertising (see Shapiro et al. (2019)). In
Columns (5) and (7), we include private advertising that does and does not provide content about

   37 Becausethe elasticity becomes zero for insurers with zero advertising spending, we only calculated the number
among insurers with positive advertising.

                                                             26
the marketplace instead of the total private advertising spending. We find that private advertis-
ing without marketplace-related content is statistically significant although we cannot statistically
distinguish the two estimates.
    We also find that the estimates for rivals' advertising in Columns (6) and (7) are small and
negative, and they are not statistically significant. This finding suggests that private advertising
does not have positive spillovers to rivals and that it has a business-stealing effect to some degree.
In Table 15 in Online Appendix, we provide more direct evidence of the business-stealing effect of
private advertising. The table reports a reduced-form model regression of the log of the enrollment
size (not mean utility, as shown here) on advertising variables along with the usual fixed effects and
controls. We find that rivals' advertising has a negative effect in markets with a smaller number
of rivals conducting advertising and that its point estimate is almost identical to the coefficient
estimate for own private advertising. Therefore, both our demand model and reduced-form model
estimates suggest that private advertising increases enrollment from the outside option as well as
other insurers and does not have positive spillovers to rivals.
    The estimates for advertising by federal and state governments are consistent with our finding
with the market-level regression. Federal advertising is effective in increasing demands for all
insurers, whereas advertising by state governments has limited effects.

4.2.4   Advertising Content

Our demand estimates so far confirm that both federal and private advertising are effective in
increasing enrollment to some degree. A natural question is which features of the advertising
affect enrollment. We now utilize information on advertisement content to provide suggestive
evidence about plausible mechanisms behind the results. Specifically, we estimate a model that
allows for advertising with different content to have different impacts on demand. We do not
allow for the separate effect for each of the types of content we considered in Section 3 because
it will be difficult to precisely estimate effects for content types that are infrequently provided in
advertisements. Thus, we consider separate effects only for the two most common content types:
the open enrollment period (OE) and financial assistance (FA).
    We briefly summarize main findings here and discuss the details of specifications and main
findings in Online Appendix C. First, we find that the coefficient of federal advertising providing
content about both OE and FA is very large and statistically significant. Moreover, it is larger than
the rest of federal advertising, suggesting complementarity between the two content categories
for consumers. In contrast, the coefficient of private advertising providing content about both OE
and FA is very small and not statistically significant. Further, it is statistically smaller than the
coefficient of federal advertising providing the same content. However, the coefficient of private
advertising not providing any specific information about the marketplace is positive and statisti-

                                                 27
cally significant, which is consistent with our finding in Table 5. These results hint at a possible
reason why private advertising does not have positive spillovers. If private advertising was very
effective in providing general information about the marketplace such as OE or FA, it would have
positive spillovers to rivals' enrollments and have greater impacts on market-level enrollments.38
Additionally, our finding also suggests a role of federal advertising in providing information about
the marketplace, which results in higher program enrollment.39


4.3     Robustness Checks
4.3.1   Alternative Specifications

In our main specifications in Equations (2) and (3), we used a log-transformation of advertising
variables (ln(1 + ad )). Although this specification is common in many studies on TV advertising,
one may wonder whether our results are robust to this specific functional form. Moreover, there
are some DMAs with no federal or state advertising, and some insurers did not advertise at all in
certain DMAs in certain years. Thus, the estimated effects of advertising could reflect changes in
advertising spending only on the extensive margin (whether advertising is positive or zero), not on
the intensive margin (the effect of dollar changes in advertising).
    Moreover, another question is whether our results are robust to an alternative way to control for
unobserved heterogeneity that varies across rating areas. In the main specification, we included the
fixed effects for rating area-by-year in the market-level regression and the fixed effects for insurer-
by-rating area-by-year in the insurer-level demand model. An alternative way to control for this
unobserved heterogeneity is to further restrict the sample to border pairs that are included in the
same rating area.
    We estimate our models with alternative specifications. First, we estimate the model with the
level of advertising instead of the log specification. Second, we specify a more flexible functional
form by distinguishing the effects of advertising on the extensive and intensive margins. Then
we estimate the same regressions with the restricted border sample. Results with the alternative
specifications are reported in Tables 16 and 17 in the Online Appendix.
    We find that advertising effects are robust to the alternative specifications. First, even with the
level of advertising in the estimating equations, our main results remain qualitatively unchanged:
the effects of federal advertising are positive and significant in both market- and insurer-level

    38 For example, Shapiro (2018) and Sinkinson and Starc (2018) find spillovers of advertising in the context of

prescription drugs.
    39 It is not very clear, without further information, why information provided from private advertising is not as

effective. It could be due to a consumers' mistrust of information from private firms. In the context of the mortgage
market, Johnson et al. (2018) find that many consumers did not act on information provided by banks on the federal
refinancing program because of their suspicion of banks' motives.

                                                         28
models, and private advertising is also positive and significant in the insurer-level demand model.
Second, the estimates of intensive-margin effects of advertising are consistent with our baseline
results without the extensive-margin effects. Most of the estimates for extensive-margin effects
are not statistically significant, except for federal advertising. Lastly, the estimates remain largely
similar even with the restricted border sample.

4.3.2   Effects of Advertising in New vs. Mature Markets

One possibility is that the true effects of advertising may vary with the length of time the market-
place has been active, and our estimated effects are simply the average effects over time. On the
one hand, because many advertisements in our sample provide information about the marketplace
to some degree, this information provision may have a larger market expansion effect in the early
years of the marketplace. On the other hand, advertisements providing information about the open
enrollment period could be effective even in the later years of the marketplace. Moreover, if there
is a steady influx of new customers to the marketplace each year, then advertising may still be
effective even when the marketplace is mature.
    Table 18 show that the effectiveness of advertising does not decrease over time. With Columns
(1) and (2), we compare the estimates obtained with the subsample that includes data up to 2016
and the full sample (up to 2018). Given the standard errors of the estimates for federal and private
advertising, we cannot statistically distinguish the estimates in Columns (1) and (2). Additionally,
Column (3) presents the estimates for the specification where the advertising variables are inter-
acted with a linear time trend. The estimates for the interaction terms suggest that the effectiveness
of advertising had been stable at least for the first five years.


4.4     Heterogeneous Effects and Interaction between Government and Pri-
        vate Advertising
The results above show that advertising by the federal government and private insurers is effec-
tive, on average, in increasing market- or insurer-level enrollments. Here, we investigate whether
advertising is more effective for certain markets and for certain consumers, and whether private
advertising is more effective depending on government advertising.

4.4.1   Heterogeneous Effects

Because this paper studies an insurance market, an obvious follow-up question is whether adver-
tising has any significant heterogeneous effects. We examine whether the effect of advertising




                                                  29
depends on certain market characteristics or on consumers with different characteristics. We also
examine more closely the null effect of state advertising.
    The details of specifications and results are reported in Online Appendix D. Here, we briefly
summarize main findings. First, we find some interaction effects between each state's Medicaid
expansion status and advertising. Second, we do not find robust evidence that advertising has sig-
nificant heterogeneous effects across consumers of different health status, based on several proxy
variables (age, income, and market-level health variables). We interpret these results as showing
that advertising has at most limited effects on the risk pool or degree of adverse selection in the
ACA marketplaces. Third, we find that there is meaningful heterogeneity in the effects of adver-
tising by different state governments. In particular, state advertising in California (CA) has a large
positive effect on enrollment. Although it is beyond the scope of this paper to examine why state
advertising in CA is so effective, we conjecture that it could be due to a large amount of marketing
resources available for the CA marketplace (Lee et al. (2017)).

4.4.2    Interaction between Government and Private Advertising

The previous specifications assume that there is no complementarity between federal and private
advertising in terms of their effects on demand. We conducted an additional analysis by adding
interaction terms between federal and private advertising in the demand model. In Table 25 in
the Online Appendix, we present results for separate interaction models using both logs and levels
of advertising spending as explanatory variables. Although the estimate of the interaction term
in the log specification have a large standard error, it is more precisely estimated in the level
specification. Both estimates are statistically insignificant, and the point estimates are close to
zero. Even though the point estimates are positive, the magnitude is too small to suggest that there
is important complementarity between federal and private advertising. Thus, we reach a robust
conclusion that the effect of private advertising does not vary depending on federal advertising
spending in the same market. The lack of complementarity also implies that federal and private
advertising are substitutes from a private insurer's perspective, which has implications about how
private insurers would respond to changes in federal advertising­a topic in the next section.


5       Equilibrium Model and Counterfactual Experiments
Our findings from the consumer demand model suggest that government advertising can be a use-
ful tool to expand program enrollment for the marketplace. However, to fully assess the importance
of government advertising, it is important to understand its effects on private advertising. Given
the lack of complementarity between government and private advertising (see Section 4.4.2), gov-


                                                 30
ernment advertising may crowd out private advertising. An extreme possibility is that government
advertising perfectly crowds out private advertising, failing to expand program enrollment. More-
over, the cost of crowding out depends on whether private advertising is beneficial: private adver-
tising may induce consumers to switch to better plans; however, the spending of private advertising
can be inefficient in the market equilibrium.
    To illustrate these economic trade-offs, we set up the supply-side of the marketplace and char-
acterize the equilibrium. We model an insurer's profit-maximizing advertising decision in an im-
perfect competitive market, following the literature of empirical industrial organization (e.g., Dubé
et al. (2005), Goeree (2008), and Gordon and Hartmann (2016)). Then, we estimate the supply side
parameters and conduct counterfactual experiments.


5.1      Supply-Side Model of Advertising in Marketplaces
5.1.1    Equilibrium

In the model, we assume that each insurer j chooses advertising ad pjmt in DMA-year mt . To sim-
plify the analysis, we take insurance companies' geographical choices and product characteristics,
including pricing, as exogenous in these counterfactuals. Let  jmt be the average flow profit of
insurer j by enrolling an individual in a DMA market m in year t , net of claim costs to insure this
consumer, without considering the cost of advertising.40 Then, an insurer's annual profit in DMA
m and year t is expressed as

                                                      f           --p
                                  jmt =  jmt q jmt (admt     s
                                                         , admt , admt ) - C jmt (ad p
                                                                                     jmt ),                          (8)

where q jmt is the DMA-level consumer demand of insurer j given the advertising by the federal
                 f                                                         --
                                            s ), and each private insurer (ad p ), and C(ad p ) is the
government (admt ), state governments (admt                                  mt             jmt
cost of advertising by insurer j. We use the demand model given by Equation (3) in Section 4.2.
    Each insurer chooses its own advertising to maximize total profits  jmt in each DMA-year
market, mt .41 There are strategic interactions among insurers because demand for an insurer de-
pends not only on its own advertising, but also on other insurers' advertising. We characterize
the static Bertrand-Nash equilibrium, where the interior equilibrium advertising expenditure is the

   40 
        jmt captures not only the premium revenue and expected reimbursement costs for this enrollee, but also other
relevant ACA policies such as risk adjustment. Instead of fully specifying different components that determine prof-
itability, we focus on endogenous responses by insurers through advertising in our counterfactual analysis.
    41 This approach is limited because insurers may decide how much to advertise to maximize their long-run profits.

Fully characterizing the dynamic problem is a very challenging task and requires additional assumptions (e.g., time
preference of insurers). Instead, we use this static equilibrium to illustrate the main mechanism that is likely to exist
even in fully specified models as well. Moreover, existing studies (e.g., Tebaldi (2017) and Polyakova and Ryan
(2019)) also use a static equilibrium and capture an insurer's behavior reasonably well. Thus, we view our framework
as a useful first step.

                                                            31
solution to the first-order condition:

                                                  jmt
                                                        = 0.                                               (9)
                                                 ad p
                                                    jmt

    In the counterfactual experiments that change government advertising, we use this equilibrium
condition to find a new equilibrium. We now discuss mechanisms through which government
advertising affects market equilibrium. Directly, government advertising increases consumer de-
mand, possibly by mitigating consumers' choice frictions.42 Indirectly, government advertising
also affects a private insurer's incentive for advertising. Because government advertising affects
demand for private insurers, they will optimally adjust advertising, taking into account other in-
surers' incentives for advertising as described in Equation (8). This strategic interaction among
private insurers will further affect demand. The eventual equilibrium enrollment is then deter-
mined by these direct and indirect effects.
    Our supply-side model imposes several strong assumptions and only incorporates a few spe-
cific mechanisms, which naturally raises concerns over the robustness of our results and warrants
further discussion. First, we assume that insurers correctly know the effectiveness of their adver-
tising. Second, we abstract from potential heterogeneity in profits across consumers with different
characteristics because we did not find robust evidence for heterogeneous effects of advertising
across consumer types. As pointed out by Blake et al. (2015), Lewis and Rao (2015) and Shapiro
et al. (2019), it is difficult to justify the assumption that private firms have perfect information on
the effectiveness of advertising in many product markets, where the estimated returns of advertis-
ing are very small or sometimes negative. Although it is difficult to compare our estimates of the
return of advertising with a prior that advertisers typically have, we will show in Section 5.1.2 that
our estimate of an insurer's profitability based on the advertising optimality condition is reason-
able. Moreover, we focus on the average effect of advertising, instead of choices of advertising
contents, to mitigate bias from mis-specification of the supply-side model.
    However, it is still important to clarify how our results will be affected by these assumptions.
For example, the main results will be qualitatively unchanged if private insurers simply misun-
derstand the effect of government and private advertising on own demand (as long as they believe
advertising effective). However, if private insurers believe that the interaction between govern-
ment and private advertising on demand is large and positive, which we clearly reject from our
estimates in Section 4.4.2, government advertising may crowd in private advertising. Although
one can still obtain qualitatively similar effects on the program enrollment in a model with a posi-
tive interaction between government and private advertising, our model would predict qualitatively

   42 As we explain in Section 4.2.1, our demand model implicitly captures the idea that government advertising
mitigate consumers' choice frictions by increasing their awareness of the marketplace.

                                                      32
different implications about how private insurers would respond to changes in government adver-
tising. Given our suggestive evidence in Section 3 and our understanding of this market, however,
we believe that this possibility is not very plausible.43 We acknowledge that the assumptions of our
supply-side model are restrictive, and relaxing these assumptions to obtain more accurate policy
predictions would be a fruitful area of research. However, we view the present effort, providing
the first formal analysis of the effect of government advertising in a transparent and parsimonious
equilibrium framework, as a crucial first step to understanding how government advertising affects
private marketing activities in equilibrium.

5.1.2    Estimation

We utilize Equation (9) to estimate the average annual flow profit per enrollee  jmt . The main
idea is that the first order condition will allow us to express  jmt as a function of the derivative of
insurer-level enrollment with respect to advertising ad p jmt evaluated at the observed level. We can
calculate the derivative based on the demand model and the estimated coefficients given by Column
(4) in Table 5.44 One important caveat is that this equilibrium condition does not necessarily hold,
especially for insurers with zero equilibrium advertising. To keep our analysis simple, our coun-
terfactual analysis considers re-optimization only by insurers with positive baseline advertising
expenditures.45 The details of the estimation procedure are described in Appendix E.
    We find that the median estimated  jmt among insurers with positive advertising is about $756.
We view this magnitude as reasonable. The average annual benchmark premium in the marketplace
in 2017 is about $4,320 according to the Kaiser Family Foundation.46 If insurers expect to have
a 15% profit margin, especially given an 80% medical loss ratio requirement under the ACA, our
estimated perceived profitability of $756 is reasonable.




    43 For    example, private insurers boosted their advertising in response to the decline of
federal       advertising,      see,      e.g.,      https://www.forbes.com/sites/brucejapsen/2017/11/19/
insurer-ads-boost-obamacare-despite-trumps-marketing-squeeze
    44 We choose this specification partly because the estimated effect of rival advertising is negative but not statistically

significant. Given the logit structure, our specification will still result in a modest business stealing effect. We therefore
view that this is the most conservative choice given our estimate, which is also consistent with the finding of the modest
business stealing effect from our reduced form regression of insurer-level enrollment in Table 15.
    45 This assumption is reasonable for the counterfactual experiment that increases government advertising which

crowds out private advertising. We may underestimate private advertising responses for the counterfactual experiment
which decreases government advertising. However, the main economic channels remain the same and allowing all
insurers to re-optimize their advertising may rather strengthen our finding by increasing the response of excessive
private advertising.
    46 https://www.kff.org/health-reform/state-indicator/average-marketplace-premiums-by-metal-tier



                                                             33
5.2     Implication of Changing Government Advertising
We use the estimated equilibrium model to examine the importance of government advertising by
exogenously changing its level. Based on demand estimates that the effect of state advertising
is small on average, we only consider changing federal advertising. We first simulate market
outcomes in a scenario where private insurers do not respond to the change. Then we calculate
market outcomes by solving for an equilibrium in which private insurers optimally adjust their
advertising spending. Because there was no federal advertising in 2018, we focus on markets with
positive federal government advertising in 2014-2017.


  Table 6: Counterfactual Experiments: Changes in Federal Government Advertising Spending
                                                                 Benchmark   Fed Ad×0                 Fed Ad×3
                                                                             Partial eq.   Full eq.   Partial eq.   Full eq.
           All Markets                 Enrollment (%)            18.98       18.64         18.65      19.55         19.54
                                       Private Advertising ($)   1.43        1.43          1.51       1.43          1.35
           Market with Large Federal   Enrollment (%)            17.87       16.66         16.72      19.22         19.17
           Ad Spending (top 10%)       Private Advertising ($)   1.65        1.65          2.22       1.65          1.38


Note: This table presents simulated outcomes in counterfactual scenarios. Column "Benchmark" presents outcomes
observed in the data. Column "Fed Ad×0" presents outcomes in a scenario where federal advertising is shut down to
zero. Column "Fed Ad×3" presents outcomes in a scenario where federal advertising is tripled. "Partial eq." present
outcomes, assuming private insurers do not adjust their advertising. "Full eq." present outcomes, allowing for private
insurers to re-optimize their advertising. We report outcomes for all markets and only for markets with large federal
advertising spending. The latter is defined as markets with top 10% of federal advertising spending in the benchmark.
The reported numbers are averages of DMA×Year-level enrollments and total private advertising spending per capita.
In the benchmark economy, the average federal advertising is $0.32 per capita for all markets and $1.26 per capita for
markets with large federal spending.


    Table 6 displays the main results. First, we find that reducing federal government spending
to zero modestly reduces market-level enrollment. Although the overall effect is small (18.98%
to 18.64%), market-level effects depend on the baseline government spending. For markets with
larger baseline government spending (top 10% or above $0.68 per capita), we find that the decline
in enrollment is about 1.12 percentage points.47 Importantly, equilibrium responses of private in-
surers have a very small effect on market-level enrollment. This finding is important because we
find that private insurers indeed increase their advertising substantially in response to the counter-
factual change in federal advertising. On average, a dollar decrease in federal advertising spending
per capita increases private advertising by $0.25.48 In markets with large baseline federal spend-
ing, we find that private advertising increases by $0.57 per capita, which is equivalent to a $0.45
   47 The average baseline government spending is $0.32 per capita for all markets and $1.26 per capita for markets

with large federal advertising spending.
   48 This number is obtained by dividing the change in private advertising (0.08) by the baseline federal advertisement

spending (0.32).

                                                                 34
increase for a dollar decrease in federal advertising.49 , 50
    Table 6 also reports results from another counterfactual experiment, in which government ad-
vertising is increased by three times. We find that market enrollment increases about 7.6% from the
baseline economy (or 1.30 percentage points increase) in markets with large baseline federal ad-
vertisement spending. Consistent with results from the scenario where we shut down government
advertising, this additional government advertising lowers private advertising: a dollar increase
in federal advertising decreases private advertising by $0.13. However, a comparison between
"Partial eq." and "Full eq." shows that the private advertising crowded out by the government
advertising has a small impact on the overall market-level enrollment.
    These results suggest that changes in private advertising in response to the government ad-
vertising have a small effect on the total program enrollment. This is partly because advertising
competition among private insurers leads to a prisoner's dilemma and thus excessive equilibrium
advertising spending. To examine this issue more closely, we compare the elasticity of an insurer's
enrollment with respect to advertising with and without taking into account equilibrium responses
by its rivals. Specifically, Table 26 in the Online Appendix reports baseline elasticities in partial
equilibrium and compares this baseline to equilibrium elasticities that allow for endogenous in-
surer responses in our two sets of counterfactuals. We find that the equilibrium elasticities are
lower than the baseline elasticities for markets with at least two insurers with positive baseline ad-
vertising spending. Thus, once accounting for equilibrium responses by rivals, changes in private
advertising lead to smaller changes in the share of enrollment across insurers, suggesting the pres-
ence of excessive advertising spendings. At least in markets in which insurers compete through
advertising, federal advertising likely crowds out excessive private advertising to some extent.
    Of course, some of the private advertising crowded out by government advertising could in-
crease consumer welfare if it induces consumers to switch to insurers that provide better plans.
However, existing studies document that such welfare gain is likely to be much smaller than the
   49 One   might think that we could further validate our model externally by comparing our counterfactual results and
empirical estimates of changes in private advertising in response to the cut of federal advertising in 2018. Because
federal advertising was distributed unevenly across regions, one can potentially estimate the response by private in-
surers with a difference-in-differences (DID) regression. We explored the possibility but found that the common trend
assumption in DID is unlikely to be met. Comparing neighboring DMAs with larger and smaller pre-2018 federal
advertisement spending, we found that pre-2018 private advertisement spending did not change similarly over years
between the two types of DMAs, possibly because the marketplace was still evolving differently across markets in
its first few years. When we estimated the DID regression despite the likely violation of its identifying assumption,
we found that the point estimates of the impact of the 2018 cut in federal advertising on private advertising tend to be
positive­consistent with our counterfactual results­but are statistically insignificant due to large standard errors. Given
the difficulty of applying the DID research design, we do not rely on the DID estimates to validate the counterfactual
results.
    50 This result may also be affected by the specification of the demand model, where we do not include the inter-

action between private and government advertising as a determinant of consumer demand. As discussed in Section
4.4.2, however, we do not find a statistically significant estimate for the interaction term between the two advertising
variables.

                                                           35
welfare gain from increasing program enrollment, partly due to the presence of the minimum
quality regulation imposed by the ACA.51 Thus, welfare gains from an increase in government
advertising through larger marketplace enrollment are likely to outweigh potential welfare losses
from crowding out of private advertising.
    Although it is beyond the scope of our paper to conduct a full welfare analysis, it is still valuable
to discuss welfare implications of government advertising in this context.52 In order to estimate
the effect of government advertising on social welfare, we will need additional elements in our
demand model to identify (i) how much advertising reduces choice frictions, (ii) the social surplus
of increasing program enrollment, and (iii) the social value and cost of advertising. First, our
demand model estimates provides estimates about how much advertising reduces choice frictions
(item (i)). Second, we discussed the social surplus of increasing the program enrollment (item (ii))
in Section 4.1.3 based on the findings in the literature. Lastly, our equilibrium analysis provides
a new insight for the social value and cost of advertising (item (iii)). Especially, crowding out
of private advertising by government advertising has two effects: the first effect is to mitigate
excessive advertising spending by private insurers, and the second effect is to reduce a potentially
welfare enhancing switching of consumers to better insurers if they advertise more. Given the
limited welfare gain in this market from consumer switching, our findings suggest that government
advertising can be an effective market-design tool through which to enhance social welfare.
    Much of the discussions so far focused on the efficiency aspect of government advertising.
However, government advertising is also rationalized if the federal government and private insurers
have different objectives. In Section 3.3, we found that the federal government and private insurers
target their advertising differently, which indicates they likely have different objectives. Thus, it is
likely to be difficult for private markets alone to generate geographical variation in advertising that
the government would like to achieve.


6     Conclusion
This paper studies government advertising in publicly designed private markets in the context of
health insurance marketplaces. We first show suggestive evidence that advertisements by the gov-
ernment (both federal and states) and private insurers are targeted to different geographical areas
and provide different messaging content. Then, we estimate the impact of government and pri-
   51 The small welfare effect of inducing consumers to switch to better plans is due in part to the fact that the market-

place regulates the minimum quality of health insurance plans, which is set as 60% of actuarially fair value. Consistent
with this view, Finkelstein et al. (2019) estimate that a consumer's willingness to pay for switching to a more gener-
ous plan is just 11% to 30% of willingness to pay from switching from being uninsured to being insured with a less
generous plan in the Massachusetts marketplace.
   52 Grossman and Shapiro (1984) offer a theoretical analysis that shows that the welfare impacts of advertising in an

economy with differentiated products are highly non-trivial.

                                                           36
vate advertising on consumer demand. Our empirical design exploits discontinuities in advertising
along the borders of local TV advertising markets to address the endogeneity of advertising. We
find that government advertising has a market-expansion effect and enhances welfare. Private ad-
vertising is not more effective than government advertising in increasing total program enrollment.
Although private advertising is still effective in increasing insurer's own enrollment, it does not
have any positive spillovers to other insurers. By using an estimated equilibrium model, we il-
lustrate mechanisms through which government advertising affects the market equilibrium. Our
simulation suggests that government advertising can simultaneously increase total program enroll-
ment and reduce excessive advertising spending among private insurers. Overall, it suggests that
government advertising can be an important market design tool for market-based public programs.
    We view this study as a first step towards understanding government marketing and outreach
activities for publicly designed private markets. Future work should explore the role of govern-
ment advertising in other markets, such as those for education and mortgages. Another interesting
avenue to explore is the effectiveness and efficiency of other marketing and outreach activities
beyond TV advertising. Moreover, it is likely to be fruitful to extend our equilibrium model to
incorporate much richer structures to obtain deeper insights on interactions between government
and private marketing activities.

References
Aizawa, N. (2019). Labor market sorting and health insurance system design. Quantitative Economics,
  10(4):1401­1451.
Aizawa, N. and Kim, Y. S. (2018). Advertising and risk selection in health insurance markets. American
  Economic Review, 108(3):828­67.
Aizer, A. (2007). Public health insurance, program take-up, and child health. The Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 89(3):400­415.
Allende, C., Gallego, F., and Neilson, C. (2019). Approximating the equilibrium effects of informed school
  choice. Working Paper, Princeton University.
Andrabi, T., Das, J., and Khwaja, A. I. (2017). Report cards: The impact of providing school and child test
  scores on educational markets. American Economic Review, 107(6):1535­63.
Berry, S. T. (1994). Estimating discrete-choice models of product differentiation. The RAND Journal of
  Economics, pages 242­262.
Bertrand, M., Karlan, D., Mullainathan, S., Shafir, E., and Zinman, J. (2010). What's Advertising Content
  Worth? Evidence from a Consumer Credit Marketing Field Experiment*. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 125(1):263­306.
Black, S. E. (1999). Do better schools matter? parental valuation of elementary education*. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 114(2):577­599.
Blake, T., Nosko, C., and Tadelis, S. (2015). Consumer heterogeneity and paid search effectiveness: A
  large-scale field experiment. Econometrica, 83(1):155­174.




                                                    37
Brown, J., Duggan, M., Kuziemko, I., and Woolston, W. (2014). How does risk selection respond to
  risk adjustment? new evidence from the medicare advantage program. American Economic Review,
  104(10):3335­64.
Cabral, M., Geruso, M., and Mahoney, N. (2018). Do larger health insurance subsidies benefit patients or
  producers? evidence from medicare advantage. American Economic Review, 108(8):2048­87.
Cebul, R. D., Rebitzer, J. B., Taylor, L. J., and Votruba, M. E. (2011). Unhealthy insurance markets: Search
  frictions and the cost and quality of health insurance. American Economic Review, 101(5):1842­71.
Currie, J. (2006). The take up of social benefits. Poverty, the Distribution of Income, and Public Policy,
  pages 80­148. New York: Russell Sage.
Curto, V., Einav, L., Levin, J., and Bhattacharya, J. (2020). Can health insurance competition work? evi-
  dence from medicare advantage. forthcoming, Journal of Political Economy.
Domurat, R., Menashe, I., and Yin, W. (2019). The role of behavioral frictions in health insurance market-
  place enrollment and risk: Evidence from a field experiment. Working Paper 26153, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.
Dubé, J.-P., Hitsch, G., and Manchanda, P. (2005). An Empirical Model of Advertising Dynamics. Quanti-
  tative Marketing and Economics (QME), 3(2):107­144.
Dubois, P., Griffith, R., and O'Connell, M. (2018). The effects of banning advertising in junk food markets.
  The Review of Economic Studies, 85(1):396­436.
Duggan, M., Starc, A., and Vabson, B. (2016). Who benefits when the government pays more? pass-through
  in the medicare advantage program. Journal of Public Economics, 141(Supplement C):50 ­ 67.
Finkelstein, A., Hendren, N., and Shepard, M. (2019). Subsidizing health insurance for low-income adults:
  Evidence from massachusetts. American Economic Review, 109(4):1530­67.
Finkelstein, A. and Notowidigdo, M. J. (2019). Take-Up and Targeting: Experimental Evidence from SNAP.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(3):1505­1556.
Goeree, M. S. (2008). Limited information and advertising in the us personal computer industry. Econo-
  metrica, 76(5):1017­1074.
Goldin, J., Lurie, I. Z., and McCubbin, J. (2019). Health insurance and mortality: Experimental evidence
  from taxpayer outreach. Working Paper 26533, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gollust, S. E., Wilcock, A., Fowler, E. F., Barry, C. L., Niederdeppe, J., Baum, L., and Karaca-Mandic, P.
  (2018). Tv advertising volumes were associated with insurance marketplace shopping and enrollment in
  2014. Health Affairs, 37(6):956­963.
Gordon, B. R. and Hartmann, W. R. (2016). Advertising competition in presidential elections. Quantitative
  Marketing and Economics, 14(1):1­40.
Grossman, G. M. and Shapiro, C. (1984). Informative advertising with differentiated products. The Review
  of Economic Studies, 51(1):63­81.
Hackmann, M. B., Kolstad, J. T., and Kowalski, A. E. (2015). Adverse selection and an individual mandate:
  When theory meets practice. American Economic Review, 105(3):1030­66.
Handel, B., Hendel, I., and Whinston, M. D. (2015). Equilibria in health exchanges: Adverse selection
  versus reclassification risk. Econometrica, 83(4):1261­1313.
Handel, B. R. (2013). Adverse selection and inertia in health insurance markets: When nudging hurts.
  American Economic Review, 103(7):2643­82.
Handel, B. R., Kolstad, J. T., Minten, T., and Spinnewijn, J. (2020). The social determinants of choice
  quality: Evidence from health insurance in the netherlands. working paper, UC Berkley and LSE.

                                                    38
Handel, B. R., Kolstad, J. T., and Spinnewijn, J. (2019). Information frictions and adverse selection: Policy
  interventions in health insurance markets. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 101(2):326­340.
Hastings, J., Hortaçsu, A., and Syverson, C. (2017). Sales force and competition in financial product mar-
  kets: The case of mexico's social security privatization. Econometrica, 85(6):1723­1761.
Hastings, J. S. and Weinstein, J. M. (2008). Information, School Choice, and Academic Achievement:
  Evidence from Two Experiments. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(4):1373­1414.
Hendren, N. (2016). The policy elasticity. Tax Policy and the Economy, 30(1):51­89.
Ho, K. and Lee, R. S. (2019). Equilibrium provider networks: Bargaining and exclusion in health care
  markets. American Economic Review, 109(2).
Holmes, T. J. (1998). The effect of state policies on the location of manufacturing: Evidence from state
  borders. Journal of Political Economy, 106(4):667­705.
Johnson, E. J., Meier, S., and Toubia, O. (2018). What's the Catch? Suspicion of Bank Motives and Sluggish
  Refinancing. The Review of Financial Studies, 32(2):467­495.
Karaca-Mandic, P., Wilcock, A., Baum, L., Barry, C. L., Fowler, E. F., Niederdeppe, J., and Gollust, S. E.
  (2017). The volume of tv advertisements during the aca's first enrollment period was associated with
  increased insurance coverage. Health Affairs, 36(4):747­754.
Kosar, K. R. (2014). Advertising by the federal government: An overview. Congressional Research Service
  Report for Congress .
Lee, P. V., Pegany, V., Scullary, J., and Stevens, C. (2017). Marketing matters: Lessons from california to
  promote stability and lower costs in national and state individual insurance markets. Technical Report,
  Covered California.
Lewis, R. A. and Rao, J. M. (2015). The unfavorable economics of measuring the returns to advertising.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(4):1941­1973.
Li, X., Hartmann, W. R., and Amano, T. (2020). Preference externality estimators: A comparison of border
   approaches and ivs. Working paper, Peking University, Stanford GSB, and Harvard Business School.
Moshary, S. (2017). Price discrimination across pacs and the consequences of political advertising regula-
 tion. Working paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Myerson, R. (2019). Information gaps and health insurance enrollment: Evidence from affordable care act
 assister programs. Working paper, University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Polyakova, M. (2016). Regulation of insurance with adverse selection and switching costs: Evidence from
  medicare part d. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, pages 165­195.
Polyakova, M. and Ryan, S. (2019). Subsidy targeting and market power. working paper, Stanford Univertisy
  and Washington University in St. Louis.
Sen, A. P. and DeLeire, T. (2018). How does expansion of public health insurance affect risk pools and
  premiums in the market for private health insurance? evidence from medicaid and the affordable care act
  marketplaces. Health Economics, 27(12):1877­1903.
Shafer, P. R., Anderson, D. M., Aquino, S. M., Baum, L. M., Fowler, E. F., and Gollust, S. E. (2020).
  Competing public and private television advertising campaigns and marketplace enrollment for 2015 to
  2018. RSF: The Russell Sage Foundation Journal of the Social Sciences, 6(2):85­112.
Shapiro, B. (2018). Positive spillovers and free riding in advertising of prescription pharmaceuticals: The
  case of antidepressants. Journal of Political Economy, 126(1):381­437.
Shapiro, B., Hitsch, G. J., and Tuchman, A. (2019). Generalizable and robust tv advertising effects. Working
  paper, Chicago Booth and Northwestern kellogg.

                                                     39
Shepard, M. (2016). Hospital network competition and adverse selection: Evidence from the massachusetts
  health insurance exchange. Working paper, Harvard University .
Sinkinson, M. and Starc, A. (2018). Ask Your Doctor? Direct-to-Consumer Advertising of Pharmaceuticals.
  The Review of Economic Studies, 86(2):836­881.
Spenkuch, J. L. and Toniatti, D. (2018). Political Advertising and Election Results. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 133(4):1981­2036.
Tebaldi, P. (2017). Estimating equilibrium in health insurance exchanges: Price competition and subsidy
  design under the aca. Working paper, University of Chicago .
Tuchman, A. E. (2019). Advertising and demand for addictive goods: The effects of e-cigarette advertising.
  Marketing Science, 38(6):994­1022.
Waldfogel, J. (2003). Preference externalities: An empirical study of who benefits whom in differentiated-
 product markets. The RAND Journal of Economics, 34(3):557­568.




                                                   40
               Online Appendix (Not For Publication)

A     Discussion of the Border Strategy
Differences between Pairs of Border Counties Table 7 compares market characteristics be-
tween border counties with low and high federal and state government and market-level private
advertising spending. For each of the three types of advertising, we identify which border county
within a border pair has a smaller expenditure. We collect such border counties with respect to
federal, state, and private advertising spending for Columns (1), (3), and (5), respectively. For
even-numbered columns, we collect border counties with higher expenditures within border pairs.
    The table shows that border counties with lower and higher advertising expenditures are very
similar in terms of market characteristics except for advertising spending. First, the number of
insurers selling marketplace plans, the degree of market concentration (measured by HHI), and
the market size are very similar between border counties with low and high advertising spend-
ing. Moreover, distributions of incomes and ages among potential enrollees are also very similar
between the two groups of border counties. Lastly, average health statuses measured by market-
level shares of individuals with various health conditions are also almost identical between the
two groups of border counties. These results suggest that the identifying assumption is plausible.
Moreover, these results suggest that the targeting of advertising we documented in Section 3.3 is
likely to be driven by non-border counties, which do not share advertising market borders.

Differences between Border and Non-Border Counties An important caveat to the border
strategy is that the estimated effect is only local to potential marketplace enrollees in border coun-
ties. Thus one must be cautious in generalizing the estimated effect to non-border counties). To
ascertain how serious this issue is in our setting, we compare market-level characteristics between
border and non-border counties. Table 8 presents market-level characteristics between border and
non-border counties. Although there are differences between the two groups of counties, the dif-
ferences are small. For example, the differences in the number of insurers and HHIs do not exceed
10% of their unconditional averages. The distributions of ages and income groups are also similar
between border and non-border counties. Lastly, the differences in county-level health statuses
also do not exceed 10% of their unconditional averages. Thus, these findings suggest a significant
overlap in observables between border and non-border counties. This suggests that the estimated
effect of advertising could be generalizable to even non-border counties.

Variation in Advertising in Border Analysis One concern about the border strategy is that the
extensive set of fixed effects employed by the strategy could leave very little variation in advertising

                                                  41
                                Table 7: Comparing Either Side of Border Pairs
                                                     Federal Ad         State Ad           Priv Ad
                                                    (1)       (2)     (3)       (4)     (5)       (6)
                                                   Low       High    Low       High    Low       High
                    Fed Spend                      0.227    0.582    0.266    0.177    0.243     0.275
                                                  (0.202) (0.497)   (0.374) (0.180)   (0.329) (0.377)
                    State Spend                    0.161    0.100    0.515    1.462    0.205     0.269
                                                  (0.489) (0.448)   (0.845) (1.246)   (0.652) (0.776)
                    Priv Spend                     0.879    0.955    1.014    1.306    0.567     1.624
                                                  (1.404) (1.375)   (1.439) (1.582)   (0.890) (1.948)
                    No. of Insurers                2.552    2.553    2.863    2.903    2.494     2.521
                                                  (1.458) (1.488)   (1.379) (1.413)   (1.422) (1.439)
                    HHI among Insuers              0.697    0.707    0.661    0.654    0.708     0.705
                                                  (0.242) (0.244)   (0.236) (0.231)   (0.242) (0.242)
                    Log of Market Size             1.542    1.565    1.496    1.518    1.491     1.539
                                                  (1.197) (1.217)   (1.281) (1.307)   (1.210) (1.244)
                    Share: Income  138% of FPL     0.245    0.243    0.208    0.210    0.244     0.243
                                                  (0.088) (0.085)   (0.079) (0.080)   (0.088) (0.089)
                    Share: Age  55                 0.194    0.194    0.210    0.215    0.196     0.197
                                                  (0.053) (0.052)   (0.057) (0.054)   (0.053) (0.053)
                    Share: Poor or Fair Health     0.179    0.179    0.164    0.162    0.181     0.181
                                                  (0.052) (0.051)   (0.046) (0.046)   (0.051) (0.051)
                    Share: Obesity                 0.319    0.320    0.300    0.297    0.319     0.319
                                                  (0.041) (0.040)   (0.041) (0.044)   (0.042) (0.043)
                    Share: Diabetes                0.118    0.118    0.106    0.106    0.118     0.118
                                                  (0.023) (0.023)   (0.020) (0.021)   (0.024) (0.024)
                    Healthcare Cost (in $1000s)    9.691    9.690    8.886    8.853    9.661     9.627
                                                  (1.476) (1.350)   (1.267) (1.281)   (1.480) (1.442)
                    N. Obs.                        4,758    4,758    2,181    2,181    8,496     8,496

Note: This table compares market characteristics between border counties with low and high federal, state and private
advertising spending. For the first two columns, we collect border counties with lower federal advertising spending
within each of border pairs in Column (1) and border counties with higher federal advertising spending within each
of border areas in Column (2). We excluded border pairs with zero government advertising in both sides of borders
from the sample used to produce the table. For Columns (3) and (4), we group border counties similarly based on
state advertising spending. For Columns (5) and (6), we group border counties similarly based on market-level private
advertising spending. Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                          42
                          Table 8: Comparing Border and Non-Border Counties
                                                           (1)                (2)              (3)
                                                     Border Counties   Non-Border Counties   Overall
                       No. of Insurers                    2.685              2.451            2.540
                                                         (1.559)            (1.415)          (1.476)
                       HHI among Insuers                  0.676              0.716            0.700
                                                         (0.243)            (0.242)          (0.243)
                       Log of Market Size                 8.754              8.376            8.521
                                                         (1.623)            (1.241)          (1.412)
                       Share: Income  138% of FPL         0.229              0.240            0.236
                                                         (0.082)            (0.087)          (0.085)
                       Share: Age  55                     0.187              0.197            0.193
                                                         (0.051)            (0.054)          (0.053)
                       Share: Poor or Fair Health         0.166              0.180            0.175
                                                         (0.048)            (0.051)          (0.050)
                       Share: Obesity                     0.309              0.318            0.315
                                                         (0.042)            (0.042)          (0.042)
                       Share: Diabetes                    0.109              0.117            0.114
                                                         (0.022)            (0.024)          (0.024)
                       Healthcare Cost (in $1000s)        9.550              9.637            9.604
                                                         (1.527)            (1.483)          (1.501)
                       N. Obs.                            5,165              8,334           13,499

Note: This table presents market-level characteristics between border and non-border counties. Column (1) and (2)
present characteristics of border and non-border counties, respectively. Column (3) present characteristics of all coun-
ties. Standard errors are in parentheses.


spending. Thus, it is important to check whether remaining variation in advertising is sufficiently
large.
    We report the county-level residual variation in federal advertising, state advertising, and
county-level private advertising. We also report insurer-level residual variation in insurer-level
private advertising. The county-level residual variation is obtained by regressing each of the three
advertising variables on the fixed effects for border pair-by-year (bt ), county (c ), and rating
area-by-year (r(c)t ), which appear in Equation (2). The insurer-level residual variation in pri-
vate advertising is obtained by regressing insurer-level private advertising spending on the fixed
effects for insurer-by-border pair-by-year ( jbt ), insurer-by-county ( jr(c)t ), and insurer-by-rating
area-by-year ( jc ), which appear in Equation (6).
    Figure 3 reports the distribution of these residuals, and Column (1) of Table 9 reports the ratio
of the standard deviation of residual advertising spending to the unconditional mean of advertising
spending. For each advertising sponsor type, there is a reasonable amount of variation in residual
advertising spending. We find that the ratios range from 0.3 to 0.5, which are still sizable compared
with the ratio of the standard deviation of the raw advertising spending to its unconditional mean
in Column (2). In the figure for insurer-level private advertising, a mass of insurers with zero
advertising spending during the entire sample period results in a large spike at zero. However,
the ratio for the insurer-level private spending is still larger than ratios for most other advertising
types, which suggests that there is still a reasonable amount of variation in its residual advertising


                                                          43
spending.



                           Table 9: Residual Variation in Advertising Variables
                                                          (1)                  (2)
                                                          Residual Variation   Raw Variation
                                  Federal                 0.43                 1.06
                                  State                   0.51                 2.67
                                  Market-level Private    0.32                 1.58
                                  Insurer-level Private   0.44                 1.99


Note: This table presents the variation in advertising spending by each sponsor. Column (1) reports the ratio of
standard deviation of residual adverting spending over the mean of unconditional advertising spending for each adver-
tising sponsor. The column (2) reports the ratio of the standard deviation of unconditional advertising spending over
the mean of unconditional advertising spending for each advertising.




B      Additional Discussions on Federal Advertising

B.1     Cost Effectiveness
We compare our estimates of the effect of federal advertising on market-level enrollment to the
finding in Goldin et al. (2019), who evaluate the randomized experiment of sending a direct mailing
(a reminder) between 2016 and 2017 to individuals who paid the tax penalty because they were
uninsured in 2015. They find that a reminder increases the probability of being insured (at least
one month) by 0.85 percentage points, which reduces the probability of being uninsured by 2.7%
in their sample. They also show that roughly two thirds of the marginal individuals enrolled in the
marketplace, which implies that the probability of being uninsured decreased by 1.8% through an
increase in marketplace take-up. These changes are induced by receiving one direct mailing from
the federal government, whose cost is typically estimated to be about $0.5-$1.0.
    In our estimation sample, those who choose the outside option accounts for about 80% of the
market size. About 75% of them are uninsured, and a quarter of them obtain off-marketplace
health plans. For the purpose of this comparison, we assume that the marginal effect of federal
advertising is identical regardless of insured status. Then, our estimate implies that doubling fed-
eral advertising will reduce the total marketplace enrollment by 1 pp and thus the uninsured rate
by 0.75 pp. This implies that the uninsured rate decreased by 1.25%. Now, our average federal
advertising spending per capita is $0.32. Because roughly 60% of population is uninsured, we
can consider that these changes in enrollment is induced by $0.53 (0.32/0.6) spending of federal
advertising per each uninsured.


                                                                 44
                                    Figure 3: Residual Variation in Advertising Variables




                                                                          800
        5000
        4000




                                                                          600
           3000
     Frequency




                                                                   Frequency
                                                                      400
  2000




                                                                          200
        1000
        0




                  -.4      -.2             0       .2        .4           0          -.4            -.2                  0            .2        .4
                                       Residuals                                                                     Residuals


                                 (a) Federal Ad                                                                 (b) State Ad
                                                                          1.5e+04
        2500
        2000




                                                                           1.0e+04
          1500
     Frequency




                                                                   Frequency
  1000




                                                                          5000
        500
        0




                                                                          0




                  -1       -.5             0       .5        1                             -.2            -.1            0       .1        .2
                                       Residuals                                                                     Residuals


                        (c) Market-Level Private Ad                                              (d) Insurer-Level Private Ad

Note: This figure plots the distribution of residual variation in advertising spending by the federal and state govern-
ments (Panels (a) and (b)) and private insurers at the market level and at the insurer-level (Panels (c) and (d)). For
Panel (b), we excluded counties in states that delegated to the federal government the responsibility for marketing the
marketplace because such counties do not have any variation on state advertising due to the institutional feature. Data
source: Kantar Media.




                                                             45
   These back of envelope calculation suggests that the cost-effectiveness of TV advertising is
comparable, 70% or more depending on the precise cost of direct email, with the direct mail
experiment reported in Goldin et al. (2019).


B.2    Welfare Impact of Federal Advertising
We consider the welfare impact of increasing federal advertising spending by 1%. In an average
market, per-capita advertising spending is $0.32. Based on our demand estimate, a one-percent
increase in federal advertising spending ($0.0032) raises the marketplace enrollment by 0.05%,
which is about an increase in total enrollment by 0.01 pp given the average enrollment of 20% of
the market size. Then, as long as SS > $32, a marginal increase in federal advertising enhances
welfare.
    What is a reasonable estimate of SS in the literature? Social welfare from enrolling a consumer
should depend on consumer and producer surplus and government spending. Existing studies
(e.g., Finkelstein et al. (2019), Tebaldi (2017), and Polyakova and Ryan (2019)) find it difficult to
estimate accurately consumer and producer surplus in this context. Often, they tend to find that
consumer welfare from marketplace plans is significantly lower than the actual cost of providing
the plans or government spending. For example, Finkelstein et al. (2019) show that the median
willingness to pay for health insurance among potential enrollees for the subsidized Massachusetts
marketplace is about $100 per month, which is just about 33% of corresponding median claim
cost ($333 per month). Finkelstein et al. (2019) argue that this is mainly due to the fact that even
uninsured individuals are partially insured through uncompensated care, which may be financed
by the government. Thus, the correct social welfare calculation must account for a reduction of
uncompensated care. For example, they argue that the actual out-of-pocket cost of uninsured is
just 20% of the total cost and that the rest of the cost is likely to be paid by the government. As
a result, if an uninsured individual acquires insurance coverage, the government can potentially
save $266 per month (i.e. 80% of $333), assuming that the cost of financing uncompensated cast
is the social cost of having an uninsured individual. Thus, the net change in the social cost of
insuring one person would be $67 per month, which implies that annual welfare gain is about $396
(= (100 - 67) × 12). Although a more careful analysis in our own context is needed, the result
suggests that increasing federal advertising is very likely to result in welfare gains.
    Note that our analysis can be also interpreted through the framework to evaluate the marginal
value of public funds (Hendren (2016); Finkelstein and Notowidigdo (2019)). For example, in their
experiments of sending direct mailings to potential SNAP enrollees, Finkelstein and Notowidigdo
(2019) interpret that the welfare effect of sending a mailing consists of three components: (i) the
effect on consumer surplus (e.g., the reducing consumer's choice frictions), which can be posi-


                                                 46
tive; (ii) the direct government expenditure on the program (e.g., government payments for SNAP
benefits for additional consumers), which reduces the welfare; (iii) fiscal externality, which is the
government's additional expenditure because of a consumer's behavioral responses (e.g., the re-
duction of tax revenue due to the lower labor supply to be eligible for SNAP), which also reduces
the welfare. Note that we considered the first two factors and miss the third factor (fiscal exter-
nality) in our welfare calculation. The fiscal externality could happen, for example, if advertising
induces a consumer to reduce their working hours to be eligible to premium subsidies in the mar-
ketplace, leading to smaller tax revenues. We, however, view this channel as unrealistic because the
subsidies are available for a wide range of incomes (up to 400% of the federal poverty level). The
existing studies also support this interpretation (e.g., Aizawa (2019)). Moreover, it is likely that we
understate the welfare benefit of federal advertising because we ignore its effect on infra-marginal
populations. For example, federal advertising can decrease costs associated with enrolling for the
marketplace even for consumers who would enroll in the marketplace even without advertising.
Thus, the welfare gain could be larger than the one we calibrate in this paper.
    Finally, we did not specify the consumer choice process in our welfare framework, which deter-
mines the take-up rate q(ad f ). A model consistent with our framework is a model of consideration
sets (e.g., Goeree (2008)). In a simple version of such a model, an individual considers the option
                                                                             f
of choosing a health plan from the marketplace with the probability  ad . Then, an individual
would maximize the following utility function:

                                f                                         f
                          ad        max {Uhix + hix , Uo } + 1 -  ad          Uo

where Ux is the utility from the choice x, and hix is a preference shock for choosing a plan from
the marketplace with the distribution F . Then, the take-up rate q(ad f ) would be :

                                                 f
                               q(ad f ) =  ad        (1 - F (Uo - Uhix )) .


C     Detailed Discussion of Effects of Advertising Content
In this section, we first discuss details of how we estimate the effect of advertising content on
consumer demand and then document our findings. One difficulty in estimating content-level
effects is that it is difficult to identify which particular content is effective because an advertisement
often contains multiple types of content. Table 10 in the Online Appendix shows which types of
content tend to be provided together. As discussed in Section 3, there are many advertisements that
feature both OE and FA content. In contrast, the other types of content­healthcare reform, being
uninsured, and the penalty for not having health insurance­are much less likely to be provided
along with OE or FA. Moreover, the other types of content do not tend to appear together in the

                                                     47
same advertisement.
     Based on these data patterns, we allow for the separate effect of the following four different
types of advertising to reasonably isolate effects of content: (i) advertising that provides both
OE and FA content; (ii) advertising that provides content on either OE or FA, but not both; (iii)
advertising that provides the other types of content but not contents on OE or FA; (iv) advertising
that provides no specific information on the marketplace. Note that there are no federal or state
advertisements of type (iv) by definition. In contrast, about 60% of private advertisements did not
provide any specific information on the marketplace, as shown in Section 3.
     Table 19 in the Online Appendix presents coefficient estimates.53 Column (1) reports estimates
for a model, where we combine types (ii), (iii), and (iv) into one group while type (i) has its own
effects. In Column (2), we allow for each of the four types to have separate effects. We find
that the coefficient estimates for federal advertising of type (i)­providing content about both OE
and FA­are very large and statistically significant in both columns, suggesting complementarity
between the two content categories for consumers. Column (1) shows that federal advertising
other than type (i)­a combination of types (ii), (iii), and (iv)­has a much smaller estimate that is
not statistically significant. Column (2) presents separate estimates for federal advertising of types
(ii) and (iii), but neither of the two estimates is statistically significant. Note that as we include
more advertising types in the model, we are likely left with less variation in advertising of each
type, leading to larger standard errors. The relatively large standard errors for estimates in Table 19
make it difficult to statistically distinguish whether certain types of content are more effective than
others. At least, we can show from Column (1) that federal advertising of type (i) is statistically
greater than federal advertising of types (ii), (iii), and (iv) combined at the 10% significance level.54
Overall, our results indicate that federal advertising that provides both OE and FA content played
a major role in driving the market-expansion effect of federal advertising.
     In contrast, the coefficient estimate for private advertising of type (i) is small and not statisti-
cally significant in either column. Based on the estimates in Column (1), the estimate for private
advertising of type (i) is statistically smaller than the estimate for federal advertising of type (i).55
Column (1) also shows that the coefficient estimate for non-type (i) private advertising is positive
and statistically significant. Column (2) shows separate estimates for types (ii), (iii), and (iv), and

   53 One potential concern about this specification is that because each advertisement enters the regression in log, the

four types of advertising variables do not sum up to the total advertising spending in log. We also estimate a similar
model with the level of each advertising variable as a robustness check. The results are not qualitatively different from
the results from the main model and are reported in Table 20.
   54 The standard error of the difference between the two coefficient estimates is 0.17 with a t-statistics of 1.32.

However, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the two coefficients are the same.
   55 The standard error for the difference of the two coefficients is 0.15 with t-statistic of 1.66. The null hypothesis is

that the estimate for private advertising is greater than the estimate for the federal advertising at 5% significance level.
With the two-sided test, the null hypothesis that the two coefficient are the same is rejected at 10% significance level.

                                                            48
we find that only private advertising of type (iv)­not providing any specific information about the
marketplace­is statistically significant.56


D      Detailed Discussion of Heterogeneous Effects

D.1      Heterogeneous Effects across Markets
First, we examine whether the effectiveness of advertising may depend on the choice of other
healthcare policies. We specifically focus on whether the effect of advertising depends on a state's
Medicaid expansion status, which also drives targeting of advertising to some extent. We report in
Column (1) of Table 21 in the Online Appendix that the coefficient of the interaction term between
federal advertising and Medicaid expansion status is large and statistically significant. It suggests
possible complementarity between federal advertising and Medicaid expansion status.57 We also
find that the coefficient of the interaction term between private advertising and Medicaid expansion
status is positive, but it is small and not significant. These results imply that advertising spending
may not be necessarily larger in markets in which advertising is more effective. This finding does
not mean that advertising sponsors behave in a suboptimal way. Rather, they may target advertising
based on per-enrollee profitability or social welfare weight, which may vary across markets.


D.2      Selection Effects of Advertising
In our main specification, we do not allow effects of advertising to vary with consumer demo-
graphics. We find that advertisements are more targeted to markets with higher shares of certain
demographic groups in Section 3.3. Thus, it is natural to expect that advertising could be more ef-
fective for certain consumer types. These heterogeneous effects are important in health insurance
markets because they may potentially affect the degree of adverse or advantageous selection.58
    Unfortunately, our data do not provide information on enrollee-level health status. However,
we can still examine whether the effect of advertising depends on a county-level health measure


    56 The null effect of advertising by private insurers that provide specific contents does not necessarily imply that

private advertising is persuasive. It is still possible that private advertising that does not provide specific ACA-related
information conveys information about quality of plans offered by private advertising sponsors. Such information
could still be valuable to consumers in selecting a better plan within the marketplace. See Section 5.2 for more
discussions on this point.
    57 A caveat in interpreting these results is that there can be other factors that also affect the effectiveness of adver-

tising between states with and without Medicaid expansion.
    58 For example, Handel (2013) and Handel et al. (2019) argue that policies that affect consumer choice frictions

have important equilibrium effects by changing the degree of adverse or advantageous selection if consumer choice
frictions and their health types are correlated.

                                                            49
and whether the effect is different for consumers in different age and income groups. These demo-
graphic variables typically are highly correlated with health status.
    Column (2) in Table 21 presents the estimates for the specification that allows for interactions
between advertising variables and whether a market is "unhealthy." As in Section 3.3, we use a
county's share of individuals self-reporting poor or fair health as a measure of county-level health
status. We define an "unhealthy" market as a market in the top quartile of self-reported poor or
fair health, which includes all markets with greater than 21% of individuals reporting fair or poor
health. We find that none of the coefficients of the interaction terms are significant, although the
estimates are slightly noisy.
    Then we estimate Equation (7) by allowing heterogeneous effects to vary by age and income
using demographic group-level market share data. We consider two age groups and two income
groups: whether an individual age is at least 55 and whether an individual income is less than or
equal to 138% of the FPL. To capture demand heterogeneity across different demographic groups,
all of the usual fixed effects are now interacted with each demographic group. Because we do not
have a breakdown of market shares by age or income groups for CA or NY, we exclude the two
states from the sample for this analysis.59
    The main results are reported in Table 22. We find that the coefficients for the interaction terms
with demographic groups are relatively small and statistically insignificant, which is indicative of
limited heterogeneity across demographic groups.60


D.3      State Advertising
We also examine whether the effect of state advertising is heterogeneous across states. As dis-
cussed earlier, it is reasonable to expect such heterogeneity because each state government or-
ganizes its own marketing activities for marketplaces, for which the federal government is not
responsible for marketing. We focus on CA, which has spent a large amount of resources on mar-
keting campaigns for its own marketplace (Lee et al. (2017)). Table 24 presents estimates of the
model in which the effect of state advertising is allowed to be different for CA. In market-level
regressions, the point estimate for the coefficient for CA advertising is positive and large, but it is
   59 Excluding  the two states does not appear to change our results very much. We also estimated a model with inter-
actions between the advertising variables and county-level demographic characteristics with the sample that includes
CA and NY. As reported in Table 23, the results are not qualitatively different from the results with demographic
group-level market shares.
    60 One natural question is whether this limited heterogeneity is due to a statistical power from our data. To properly

address this question, one must acquire individual-level data, which is currently very challenging for federal market-
places. However, it is also important that the lack of this heterogeneity is certainly plausible. For example, Aizawa
and Kim (2018) find in Medicare Advantage that consumers with certain characteristics (e.g., consumers with better
cognitive ability) are more responsive to advertising, but many demographic characteristics, including income, are
not associated with effectiveness of advertising. Thus, one must obtain richer measurements for enrollment to further
pursue this issue.

                                                           50
imprecisely estimated, probably because we do not have enough statistical power due to the limited
number of markets in CA in the border sample. In insurer-level regressions, the coefficient of state
advertising in CA is very large and significant.
     This result suggests that the small average effect of state advertising is not homogeneous across
all states. Although our goal in this paper is not to understand reasons why CA advertising is more
effective than other state advertising, we conjecture that this result is potentially due to a large
amount of marketing resources available for the CA marketplace.


E      Supply-Side Specification and Estimation
In our empirical analysis, we assume that the cost of advertising for each insurer is observed ad-
vertising spending and the fixed (unobserved) cost, C jmt (ad p          p
                                                              jmt ) = ad jmt + jmt . This specification
allows us to recover an insurer's primitive in a straightforward manner. First, among firms with
positive advertisement expenditures, we can recover profitability  jmt by imposing an insurer's
first order condition. From consumer-side demand estimates, we can analytically calculate the
marginal enrollment at the observed advertising level. Then, we can obtain the estimates of  jmt
nonparametrically from the first order condition. Among firms with zero advertisement expendi-
ture, we need to recover jmt and  jmt jointly. One approach is to specify the functional form
of jmt (e.g., Goeree (2008)); an alternative is to use the moment inequality approach to identify
bounds of the parameters. Although both approaches could be implemented, we chose to let only
insurers with positive baseline advertising spending re-optimize in the counterfactual to keep our
analysis simple.


F      Detailed Discussion of the Advertising Data
Identifying Advertisements Relevant for the Marketplace We exploit detailed information in
the database to identify which advertisements are related to marketplaces. Using Amazon Web
Services, we transcribed each advertisement and examined its content based on keywords. As a
result, we can identify whether an advertisement (i) is related to the marketplace, (ii) merely pro-
motes a private insurer's brand, or (iii) is related to health insurance but not about the marketplaces
(i.e. Medicare). In our analyses, we consider types (i) and (ii) and exclude type (iii).
     Depending on advertisement sponsors, we use a slightly different algorithm to classify each
advertisement into type (i), (ii), or (iii). First, for advertisements by the federal government, we
initially select those with the HHS as their sponsor names.61 Among this set, we identify market-
    61 We
        also checked whether there are other federal sponsors that would place marketplace-related advertisements.
However, federal advertising seems to be done exclusively by the HHS.

                                                       51
place related advertisements (type (i)) by checking the transcript for mentions of "HealthCare.gov."
Because there are only about 100 distinct advertisements by the HHS, we verified our classifica-
tion by watching individual advertisements. Type (ii) does not exist for federal advertising, and we
exclude type (iii)­for example, advertisements in which HHS promotes Medicare.
     Second, for advertising by state governments, we initially select those advertisements with
sponsor names that match names of state marketplaces such as Covered California and New York
State of Health. Among this set, we again identified marketplace related advertisements (type
(i)) by checking advertisement transcripts and individual advertisement videos visually. Type (ii)
advertisements from state governments do not exist, and we exclude type (iii) advertisements from
state governments­for example, those about Children's Health Insurance Programs.
     Third, for private advertising, we rely only on transcripts because it is not feasible to watch
each of the thousands of distinct advertisements by private insurers. We first exclude advertise-
ments with type (iii) keywords such as "Medicare Advantage," "Medicare Part D," "Medigap,"
and "employer-sponsored insurance." Among the remaining advertisements, we identify type (i)
with keywords related to the marketplace such as "open enrollment" and "financial assistance."
The remainder are classified as type (ii).

Identifying Advertising Content We use Amazon Web Services (AWS) to transcribe the video
of each advertisement. AWS automatically translate transcripts of advertisements in Spanish into
English. We then view a sample of advertisements and generate a list of keywords that characterize
the contents of the advertisement. Each advertisement in the sample is then classified based on
these keywords and a set of dummy variables indicating the presence of each type of content is
generated. Although this approach is necessarily ad hoc, we find that it performs well in ex post
manual verification. The list of content types and keywords are shown below:

   · Reform: This dummy variable is equal to one if an advertisement contains at least one of
     the following terms: "affordable care act", "new law", "health care law", "health care reform
     law", "health care reform", "new health care", "reform", "health care act", "recent changes
     in health care", "changes that are coming in the health care system", "health care changes",
     or "changes in our health care".

   · Open Enrollment:. This dummy variable is equal to one if an advertisement contains at least
     one of the following terms: "open enrollment", "deadline","choose or change plan", "last
     day", "enrollment period", "registration period", "open registration", "enrollment is now
     open", "February fifteen", "fifteenth of February", "December fifteen", "fifteen of Decem-
     ber", "march thirty", "December 15", "January thirty first", "enroll-a-thon". If advertising
     contains "open enrollment for state and county employees","April thirtieth", then we assign


                                                52
  the dummy to take zero.

· Uninsured: This dummy variable is equal to one if an advertisement contains at least one of
  the following terms: "uninsured", "still need health insurance", or "existing condition".

· Penalty: This dummy variable is equal to one if an advertisement contains at least one of
  the following terms: "penalty", "penalties", "the fine", "required to have health insurance",
  "required by law", "requirement", "required to have".

· Financial: This dummy variable is equal to one if an advertisement contains at least one
  of the following terms: "financial assistance", "financial help", "income information", "es-
  timated income", "tax credit", "financial aid", "subsidy", "subsidies", "federal assistance",
  "government aid", "government to help", "money from the government", "qualify for assis-
  tance", "help pay", "help with their monthly payment", "eligible for money", "how much
  money you could get from the government", "government helping to pay", "federal help",
  "assistance to pay", "eligible for money", "getting money to help", "sum city", "financial
  health", "national assistance", "receive financial", "qualify for assistance", or "aid for your
  health insurance".

· ACA: this dummy variable is equal to one if at least one of dummy variables created above
  is equal to one.




                                             53
G      Additional Figures and Tables

             Figure 4: Screenshots of Advertisements by Federal and State Governments




                  (a) Federal Government                                         (b) California State Government




                                  Table 10: Cross Tabulation Ad Content Types
                                         (1)                   (2)                    (3)               (4)          (5)
                                 Open Enrollment=1   Financial Assitance=1   Healthcare Reform=1   Uninsured=1   Penalty=1
     Share: Open Enrollment             1.00                  0.51                   0.36              0.11         0.82
     Share: Financial Assistance       0.65                   1.00                   0.39              0.74         0.83
     Share: Healthcare Reform          0.18                   0.16                   1.00              0.29         0.24
     Share: Uninsured                  0.03                   0.14                   0.13              1.00         0.09
     Share: Penalty                    0.20                   0.16                   0.11              0.10         1.00
     N. Obs.                          485,656              612,937                 283,022           101,405      149,782
Note: This table reports cross tablutation of content types of advertisements by all sponsors during 2014­2018. Each
column reports the share of different content types within advertisements that provide a specific content type. The unit
of observation is each advertisement occurence, and reported numbers are averages weighted by each advertisement's
dollar cost.




                                                             54
                                     Table 11: Targeting of Federal Advertising
                                                              (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)       (5)
                                                           ACA-related     Financial   Open Enrollment   Penalty   Reform
    Share: Income  138% of FPL (%)                                -0.001    -0.000          -0.000         0.000    -0.000
                                                                 (0.002)   (0.001)         (0.001)       (0.000)   (0.001)
    Medicaid Expanded=1                                         -0.098      -0.043          -0.027        -0.001   -0.027
                                                                 (0.058)   (0.032)         (0.025)       (0.001)   (0.020)
    Medicaid Expanded=1 × Share: Income  138% of FPL (%)          0.003      0.001           0.001         0.000    0.001
                                                                 (0.002)   (0.001)         (0.001)       (0.000)   (0.001)
    Share: Age  55 (%)                                            0.001     -0.000          -0.000         0.000    0.001
                                                                 (0.002)   (0.001)         (0.001)       (0.000)   (0.001)
    Share: Poor or Fair Health (%)                                0.002    0.002           0.002           0.000    -0.001
                                                                 (0.002)   (0.001)         (0.001)       (0.000)   (0.001)
    No. of Insurers                                             0.017      0.008             0.001        -0.000   0.006
                                                                 (0.006)   (0.003)         (0.002)       (0.000)   (0.002)
    Log of Market Size                                          0.029      0.007             0.004         0.000   0.009
                                                                 (0.008)   (0.003)         (0.002)       (0.000)   (0.003)
    Year FE                                                        Y          Y              Y             Y         Y
    N. Obs.                                                       784        784             784          784       784
    Adj. R2                                                      0.148      0.466           0.542        0.017     0.366

Note: This table reports estimates of the coefficients in Equation (1). Each column presents estimates from the same
specification with the dependent variable of federal spending on advertisements providing a specific message. Because
there is no federal advertising spending in 2018, we restricted our sample years to 2014­2017. Standard errors are in
parentheses and clustered at the DMA level. The stars indicate: *** for p<0.01, ** for p<0.05 and * for p<0.1.




                                                           55
                                       Table 12: Targeting of State Advertising
                                                   (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)       (5)
                                                ACA-related   Financial   Open Enrollment   Penalty   Reform
               Share: Income  138% of FPL (%)     -0.032      -0.017         -0.012          -0.000   -0.002
                                                   (0.008)     (0.005)         (0.003)      (0.001)    (0.001)
               Share: Age  55 (%)                   -0.019     -0.014           -0.008       0.002      0.001
                                                   (0.014)     (0.007)         (0.005)      (0.001)    (0.000)
               Share: Poor or Fair Health (%)       0.010        0.008          0.005        0.001     0.001
                                                   (0.011)     (0.007)         (0.004)      (0.001)    (0.001)
               No. of Insurers                    0.116        0.072          0.044          -0.001     -0.001
                                                   (0.025)     (0.017)         (0.015)      (0.003)    (0.002)
               Log of Market Size                   -0.010      -0.008          0.017       0.010        0.003
                                                   (0.053)     (0.032)         (0.020)      (0.005)    (0.003)
               Year FE                               Y             Y            Y             Y          Y
               N. Obs.                              332            332          332          332        332
               Adj. R2                             0.238          0.185        0.184        0.036      0.162

Note: This table reports estimates of the coefficients in Equation (1). Each column presents estimates from the same
specification with the dependent variable of state spending on advertisements providing a specific message. State's
Medicaid expansion status is not included in covariates because state advertising are done in states expanding Medicaid
at DMA level. Standard errors are in parentheses and clustered at the DMA level. The stars indicate: *** for p<0.01,
** for p<0.05 and * for p<0.1.




                                                             56
                                   Table 13: Targeting of Private Advertising
                                                           (1)         (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)         (6)
                                                           All      ACA-related   Financial   Open Enrollment   Penalty     Reform
  Share: Income  138% of FPL (%)                         0.016       0.008        0.005            0.004        0.007       0.005
                                                          (0.008)     (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.003)          (0.002)   (0.002)
  Medicaid Expanded=1                                    0.545        0.195         0.075          0.104        0.159         0.087
                                                          (0.224)     (0.099)      (0.075)       (0.077)          (0.051)   (0.061)
  Medicaid Expanded=1 × Share: Income  138% of FPL (%)   -0.018       -0.005       -0.003         -0.002        -0.006       -0.003
                                                          (0.009)     (0.005)      (0.003)       (0.004)          (0.002)   (0.003)
  Share: Age  55 (%)                                     0.017         0.003      0.006            0.003         0.004      0.004
                                                          (0.008)     (0.004)      (0.002)       (0.003)          (0.002)   (0.002)
  Share: Poor or Fair Health (%)                           -0.008     -0.002        0.002         0.000            -0.003    0.000
                                                          (0.008)     (0.005)      (0.003)       (0.004)          (0.002)   (0.003)
  No. of Insurers                                        0.059       0.019         0.012         0.012             0.001     0.006
                                                          (0.015)     (0.007)      (0.006)       (0.006)          (0.004)   (0.005)
  Log of Market Size                                     0.147       0.074        0.052          0.054           0.021      0.028
                                                          (0.025)     (0.013)      (0.009)       (0.010)          (0.006)   (0.006)
  Year FE                                                   Y           Y            Y              Y              Y          Y
  N. Obs.                                                  983          983         983             983           983         983
  Adj. R2                                                 0.212        0.210       0.178           0.165         0.131       0.288

Note: This table reports estimates of the coefficients in Equation (1). Each column presents estimates from the same
specification with the dependent variable of private spending on advertisements providing a specific message. Standard
errors are in parentheses and clustered at the DMA level. The stars indicate: *** for p<0.01, ** for p<0.05 and * for
p<0.1.




                                                         57
           Table 14: Market-Level Demand Analysis: Federal vs Non-federal Advertising
                                                                 (1)             (2)
                                                          Log (ln(1 + ad ))   Level (ad )
                                        Fed Spend             0.053            0.033
                                                              (0.021)          (0.013)
                                        Non-fed Spend          0.005           0.002
                                                              (0.009)          (0.001)
                                        No. of Insurers        0.012            0.012
                                                              (0.008)          (0.008)
                                        Market Size          -0.026           -0.026
                                                              (0.006)          (0.006)
                                        BorderYear FE            Y                Y
                                        County FE                Y                Y
                                        RatingYear FE            Y                Y
                                        N. Obs.                18,182          18,182
                                        Adj. R2                 0.919           0.919

Note: Non-fed Spend is the combined advertising spending by all sponsors other than the federal government: state
governments, private insurers, navigators, Democrats, and Republics. Column (1) and (2) report estimates with the
specifications, where the advertising variables enter in log and in level, respectively. In both colums, we can reject the
null that the coefficient estimate for federal advertising is different from non-federal advertising at the 5% level. All
specifications include Border×Year fixed effects, County fixed effects, and Rating Area×Year fixed effects. The unit
of the market size (the number of potential enrollees) is in thousands. Standard errors are in parentheses and two-way
clustered at the DMA×Year level and the County level. The stars indicate: *** for p<0.01, ** for p<0.05 and * for
p<0.1.




                                                              58
             Table 15: Reduced-Form Effect of Advertising on Insurer-Level Enrollment
                                                                            (1)        (2)        (3)
                    Fed Spend                                             0.087        0.088      0.091
                                                                          (0.046)     (0.047)    (0.047)
                    State Spend                                           -0.052       -0.057     -0.057
                                                                          (0.066)     (0.066)    (0.065)
                    Priv Spend                                            0.089       0.088       0.086
                                                                          (0.045)     (0.044)    (0.044)
                    Rival Spend                                           -0.031      -0.080     -0.084
                                                                          (0.041)     (0.047)    (0.048)
                    1[Num of Rivals with Positive Ads2]=1 × Rival Spend               0.192      0.194
                                                                                      (0.078)    (0.078)
                    1[Num of Rivals with Positive Ads2]=1                             -0.099     -0.101
                                                                                      (0.059)    (0.058)
                    No. of Insurers                                       -0.095     -0.095     -0.094
                                                                           (0.023)    (0.023)    (0.023)
                    Market Size                                            0.006       0.006      0.006
                                                                           (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)
                    Navi Spend                                                                    -0.236
                                                                                                 (0.232)
                    Dem Spend                                                                      0.031
                                                                                                 (0.036)
                    Rep Spend                                                                      0.020
                                                                                                 (0.018)
                    FirmBorderYear FE                                        Y          Y          Y
                    FirmCounty FE                                            Y          Y          Y
                    FirmRatingYear FE                                        Y          Y          Y
                    N. Obs.                                                36,622     36,622     36,622
                    Adj. R2                                                0.956       0.956     0.957

Note: This table reports estimates of effects of advertising on the log of insurer-level enrollment size. Each column
reports estimates based on a different combination of advertising variables. Column (1) includes federal, state, private,
and rival advertising. Column (2) includes adds the dummy of whether the number of rival advertisers is at least two,
and its interaction with rival advertising. Column (3) adds navigator, Democrats and Republican advertising. All
specifications include Firm×Border×Year fixed effects, Firm×County fixed effects, and Firm×Rating Area×Year
fixed effects. The unit of the market size (the number of potential enrollees) is in thousands. Standard errors are in
parentheses and two-way clustered at the DMA×Year level and the Firm×County level. The stars indicate: *** for
p<0.01, ** for p<0.05 and * for p<0.1.




                                                            59
                            Table 16: Robustness: Market-Level Demand Analysis
                                         Log (ln(1 + ad ))                                       Level (ad )
                            (1)        (2)          (3)           (4)         (5)        (6)             (7)          (8)
       Fed Spend          0.050      0.049        0.050         0.049       0.031      0.030          0.031        0.031
                          (0.021)     (0.021)     (0.020)       (0.020)     (0.013)     (0.012)        (0.012)      (0.012)
       State Spend        -0.011       0.005       -0.018        -0.006      0.001       0.007         -0.003        0.003
                          (0.034)     (0.041)     (0.034)       (0.041)     (0.016)     (0.016)        (0.016)      (0.017)
       Priv Spend          0.023       0.028       0.016         0.021       0.010      0.010           0.006        0.007
                          (0.018)     (0.019)     (0.018)       (0.018)     (0.006)     (0.006)        (0.006)      (0.006)
       1[Fed Spend>0]                 0.233                    0.269                    0.236                      0.273
                                      (0.095)                   (0.085)                 (0.095)                     (0.086)
       1[State Spend>0]                -0.022                    -0.017                  -0.025                      -0.022
                                      (0.019)                   (0.019)                 (0.017)                     (0.017)
       1[Priv Spend>0]                 -0.009                    -0.007                  -0.004                      -0.003
                                      (0.016)                   (0.016)                 (0.015)                     (0.015)
       No. of Insurers      0.012      0.012      0.016         0.015         0.013       0.013        0.016        0.016
                           (0.008)    (0.008)     (0.009)       (0.009)      (0.008)    (0.008)        (0.009)      (0.009)
       Market Size        -0.026     -0.026      -0.036        -0.036       -0.026     -0.026         -0.036       -0.036
                           (0.006)    (0.006)     (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.006)    (0.006)        (0.006)      (0.006)
       Sample             Baseline   Baseline   Rating Area   Rating Area   Baseline   Baseline     Rating Area   Rating Area
       BorderYear FE         Y          Y            Y             Y           Y          Y              Y             Y
       County FE             Y          Y            Y             Y           Y          Y              Y             Y
       RatingYear FE         Y          Y            Y             Y           Y          Y              Y             Y
       N. Obs.             18,182     18,182      10,224        10,224       18,182     18,182         10,224       10,224
       Adj. R2             0.919       0.919      0.912         0.912        0.919      0.919           0.912        0.912

Note: Column (1) of this table reports the estimates reported in Column (3) in Table 4. Column (2) reports the
estimates of the specification that includes the dummy variables that equal to one if sponsor k (k = f , s, mp) has positive
advertising spending. Columns (3) and (4) report the estimates of the same specifications as in Column (1) and (2)
with the sample that includes only border pairs in the same rating area. Columns (4) through (8)report the estimates
of the specifications in Columns (1) through (4), but we replace advertising variables ln(1 + ad ) with the level ad . All
specifications include Border×Year fixed effects, County fixed effects, and Rating Area×Year fixed effects. The unit
of the market size (the number of potential enrollees) is in thousands. Standard errors are in parentheses and two-way
clustered at the DMA×Year level and the County level. The stars indicate: *** for p<0.01, ** for p<0.05 and * for
p<0.1.




                                                               60
                          Table 17: Robustness: Insurer-level Demand Analysis
                                        Log (ln(1 + ad ))                                       Level (ad )
                           (1)        (2)          (3)            (4)        (5)        (6)             (7)          (8)
     Fed Spend           0.125      0.123        0.134         0.134       0.070      0.069           0.077        0.078
                         (0.053)     (0.054)     (0.057)        (0.057)    (0.031)     (0.031)        (0.034)       (0.034)
     State Spend         -0.033      -0.013       0.006          0.003     -0.025      -0.020         -0.013        -0.016
                         (0.070)     (0.084)     (0.072)        (0.086)    (0.032)     (0.033)        (0.032)       (0.034)
     Priv Spend          0.093       0.101       0.090          0.104      0.035       0.035          0.034        0.035
                         (0.048)     (0.051)     (0.050)        (0.054)    (0.016)     (0.016)        (0.017)       (0.017)
     1[Fed Spend>0]                  0.322                     0.317                   0.323                       0.315
                                     (0.164)                    (0.146)                (0.163)                      (0.145)
     1[State Spend>0]                 -0.032                     -0.002                 -0.025                       0.009
                                     (0.058)                    (0.062)                (0.050)                      (0.055)
     1[Priv Spend>0]                  -0.010                     -0.018                  0.003                       -0.005
                                     (0.034)                    (0.035)                (0.032)                      (0.033)
     No. of Insurers     -0.091     -0.091       -0.066        -0.067      -0.090     -0.091          -0.065       -0.066
                          (0.024)    (0.024)      (0.027)       (0.027)     (0.024)    (0.024)         (0.027)      (0.027)
     Market Size         -0.021     -0.021      -0.038        -0.038       -0.021     -0.021         -0.038       -0.038
                          (0.005)    (0.005)      (0.008)       (0.008)     (0.006)    (0.006)         (0.008)      (0.008)
     Sample              Baseline   Baseline   Rating Area   Rating Area   Baseline   Baseline     Rating Area   Rating Area
     FirmBorderYear FE      Y          Y            Y             Y           Y          Y              Y             Y
     FirmCounty FE          Y          Y            Y             Y           Y          Y              Y             Y
     FirmRatingYear FE      Y          Y            Y             Y           Y          Y              Y             Y
     N. Obs.              36,558     36,558      19,712        19,712       36,558     36,558         19,712       19,712
     Adj. R2              0.938       0.938      0.926         0.926        0.938      0.938           0.926        0.926

Note: Column (1) of this table reports the estimates reported in Column (4) in Table 5. Column (2) reports the
the estimates of the coefficients of the specification thaincludes the dummy variables that equal to one if sponsor k
(k = f , s, p) has positive advertising spending. Columns (3) and (4) report the estimates of the same specifications
as in Column (1) and (2) with the sample that includes only border pairs in the same rating area. Columns (4)
through (8)report the estimates of the specifications in Columns (1) through (4), but we replace advertising variables
ln(1 + ad ) with the level ad . All specifications include Firm×Border×Year fixed effects, Firm×County fixed effects,
and Firm×Rating Area×Year fixed effects. The unit of the market size (the number of potential enrollees) is in
thousands. Standard errors are in parentheses and two-way clustered at the DMA×Year level and the Firm×County
level. The stars indicate: *** for p<0.01, ** for p<0.05 and * for p<0.1.




                                                             61
                     Table 18: The Effects of Advertising: New vs Mature Markets
                                                             (1)          (2)          (3)
                                                         Up to 2016   Up to 2018   Linear Trend
                            Fed Spend                     0.119        0.125           0.102
                                                          (0.058)      (0.053)       (0.066)
                            State Spend                    0.047       -0.033         -0.027
                                                          (0.090)      (0.070)       (0.082)
                            Priv Spend                    0.134        0.093           0.080
                                                          (0.064)      (0.048)       (0.053)
                            Linear Trend × Fed Spend                                  0.048
                                                                                     (0.043)
                            Linear Trend × State Spend                                -0.001
                                                                                     (0.028)
                            Linear Trend × Priv Spend                                 0.016
                                                                                     (0.018)
                            No. of Insurers              -0.106       -0.091        -0.090
                                                          (0.026)      (0.024)       (0.024)
                            Market Size                  -0.023       -0.021        -0.021
                                                          (0.007)      (0.005)       (0.005)
                            FirmBorderYear FE                Y            Y             Y
                            FirmCounty FE                    Y            Y             Y
                            FirmRatingYear FE                Y            Y             Y
                            N. Obs.                       25,074       36,558        36,558
                            Adj. R2                       0.942        0.938         0.938

Note: Columns (1) of this table presents the estimates with the sample period up to 2016; Column (2) presents the
estimates with the full sample, which is up to 2018. Column (3) reports the estimates of the specifification that
includes interactions between the linear time trend and each of federal, state, and private advertising spending. All
specifications include Firm×Border×Year fixed effects, Firm×County fixed effects, and Firm×Rating Area×Year
fixed effects. The unit of the market size (the number of potential enrollees) is in thousands. Standard errors are in
parentheses and two-way clustered at the DMA×Year level and the Firm×County level. The stars indicate: *** for
p<0.01, ** for p<0.05 and * for p<0.1.




                                                           62
                     Table 19: Coefficient Estimates for Advertising Content (Log)

                                                                                (1)        (2)
                             Fed Spend:
                             Open Enrollment and Financial                    0.316      0.325
                                                                              (0.135)    (0.141)
                             Fed Spend:
                             Not Both Open Enrollment And Financial            0.089
                                                                              (0.060)
                             Fed Spend:
                             Either Open Enrollment or Financial (not both)               -0.056
                                                                                         (0.237)
                             Fed Spend:
                             Other ACA-related                                            0.102
                                                                                         (0.068)
                             State Spend:
                             Open Enrollment and Financial                     0.092      0.121
                                                                              (0.108)    (0.110)
                             State Spend:
                             Not Both Open Enrollment And Financial           -0.048
                                                                              (0.072)
                             State Spend:
                             Either Open Enrollment or Financial (not both)               0.094
                                                                                         (0.085)
                             State Spend:
                             Other ACA-related                                            -0.100
                                                                                         (0.075)
                             Priv Spend:
                             Open Enrollment and Financial                     0.058      0.076
                                                                              (0.064)    (0.069)
                             Priv Spend:
                             Not Both Open Enrollment And Financial           0.096
                                                                              (0.048)
                             Priv Spend:
                             Either Open Enrollment or Financial (not both)               0.072
                                                                                         (0.072)
                             Priv Spend:
                             Other ACA-related                                             -0.062
                                                                                          (0.063)
                             Priv non-ACA Spend                                           0.121
                                                                                          (0.055)
                             No. of Insurers                                  -0.089     -0.088
                                                                               (0.024)    (0.025)
                             Market Size                                      -0.021     -0.021
                                                                               (0.005)    (0.005)
                             BorderYear FE                                       Y          Y
                             County FE                                           Y          Y
                             RatingYear FE                                       Y          Y
                             N. Obs.                                           36,558     36,558
                             Adj. R2                                           0.938       0.938

Note: This table reports the estimates of the coefficients in specifications that include advertising content types. We
use the log transformation of advertising spending in the estimation. The set of advertising content types considered
in Column (1) is: (i) advertisements that provide information aboutthe open enrollment period and financial assistance
and (ii) the rest of advertisements. The set of advertising content considered in Column (2) is: (i) advertisements
that provide information about the open enrollment period and financial assistance, (ii) advertisements that provide
content about the open enrollment period or financial assitance, but not both, (iii) the rest of ACA-related advertise-
ments, and (iv) non-ACA related advertisements. The non-ACA related advertisements only exist for private insurers
because advertisemnts by the federal or state governments are ACA-related by definition. All specifications include
Firm×Border×Year fixed effects, Firm×County fixed effects, and Firm×Rating Area×Year fixed effects. The unit of
the market size (the number of potential enrollees) is in thousands. Standard errors are in parentheses and two-way
clustered at the DMA×Year level and the Firm×County level. The stars indicate: *** for p<0.01, ** for p<0.05 and
* for p<0.1.

                                                             63
        Table 20: Robustness Check: Coefficient Estimates for Advertising Content (Level)

                                                                                 (1)         (2)
                              Fed Spend:
                              Open Enrollment and Financial                    0.262      0.272
                                                                                (0.101)    (0.103)
                              Fed Spend:
                              Not Both Open Enrollment And Financial            0.052
                                                                               (0.034)
                              Fed Spend:
                              Either Open Enrollment or Financial (not both)                -0.054
                                                                                           (0.161)
                              Fed Spend:
                              Other ACA-related                                            0.063
                                                                                           (0.038)
                              State Spend:
                              Open Enrollment and Financial                    -0.010       0.020
                                                                               (0.070)     (0.070)
                              State Spend:
                              Not Both Open Enrollment And Financial           -0.027
                                                                               (0.036)
                              State Spend:
                              Either Open Enrollment or Financial (not both)                0.060
                                                                                           (0.053)
                              State Spend:
                              Other ACA-related                                             -0.059
                                                                                           (0.038)
                              Priv Spend:
                              Open Enrollment and Financial                     0.026       0.034
                                                                               (0.029)     (0.032)
                              Priv Spend:
                              Not Both Open Enrollment And Financial           0.040
                                                                               (0.016)
                              Priv Spend:
                              Either Open Enrollment or Financial (not both)                0.048
                                                                                           (0.044)
                              Priv Spend:
                              Other ACA-related                                              -0.024
                                                                                            (0.029)
                              Priv non-ACA Spend                                           0.048
                                                                                            (0.018)
                              No. of Insurers                                  -0.089     -0.087
                                                                                (0.024)     (0.025)
                              Market Size                                      -0.021     -0.021
                                                                                (0.005)     (0.005)
                              BorderYear FE                                       Y          Y
                              County FE                                           Y          Y
                              RatingYear FE                                       Y          Y
                              N. Obs.                                           36,558     36,558
                              Adj. R2                                           0.938       0.938

Note: This table reports the estimates of the coefficients in specifications that include advertising content types. We use
the level of advertising spending in the estimation. The set of advertising content types considered in Column (1) is:
(i) advertisements that provide information aboutthe open enrollment period and financial assistance and (ii) the rest of
advertisements. The set of advertising content considered in Column (2) is: (i) advertisements that provide information
about the open enrollment period and financial assistance, (ii) advertisements that provide content about the open
enrollment period or financial assitance, but not both, (iii) the rest of ACA-related advertisements, and (iv) non-ACA
related advertisements. The non-ACA related advertisements only exist for private insurers because advertisemnts
by the federal or state governments are ACA-related by definition. All specifications include Firm×Border×Year
fixed effects, Firm×County fixed effects, and Firm×Rating Area×Year fixed effects. The unit of the market size
(the number of potential enrollees) is in thousands. Standard errors are in parentheses and two-way clustered at the
DMA×Year level and the Firm×County level. The stars indicate: *** for p<0.01, ** for p<0.05 and * for p<0.1.


                                                              64
                Table 21: Heterogeneous Effects Depending on Market Characteristics

                                                                     (1)                      (2)
                                                           Market Characteristics = Market Characteristics =
                                                           Medicaid Expansion       unhealthy
                   Fed Spend                                         0.002                  0.141
                                                                    (0.067)                 (0.058)
                   Market Characteristic=1 × Fed Spend              0.216                    -0.129
                                                                    (0.103)                 (0.081)
                   State Spend                                       -0.116                 -0.012
                                                                    (0.108)                 (0.073)
                   Market Characteristic=1 × State Spend             0.105                   -0.168
                                                                    (0.134)                 (0.133)
                   Priv Spend                                        0.070                  0.085
                                                                    (0.088)                 (0.051)
                   Market Characteristic=1 × Priv Spend              0.050                   0.051
                                                                    (0.104)                 (0.058)
                   No. of Insurers                                 -0.090                  -0.090
                                                                    (0.024)                 (0.024)
                   Market Size                                     -0.021                  -0.021
                                                                    (0.005)                 (0.006)
                   FirmBorderYear FE                                  Y                        Y
                   FirmCounty FE                                      Y                        Y
                   FirmRatingYear FE                                  Y                        Y
                   N. Obs.                                          36,558                   36,558
                   Adj. R2                                           0.938                    0.938

Note: This table reports the estimates for the specifications that include interaction terms between market character-
istics and advertising variables. Column (1) reports the estimates for the specification with interaction terms between
advertising variables and a dummy variable for Medicaid expansion status under the ACA. Note that there are counties
in states without Medicaid expansion that had exposure to state advertising if these counties border with other states
with Medicaid expansion. Column (2) reports the estimates for the specification with interaction terms between ad-
vertising variables and a dummy variable for "unhealthy" markets. A market is defined as unhealthy if the share of
individuals with fair or poor self-reported health status in the market is greater than the 75th percentile (21%). All
specifications include Firm×Border×Year fixed effects, Firm×County fixed effects, and Firm×Rating Area×Year
fixed effects. The unit of the market size (the number of potential enrollees) is in thousands. Standard errors are in
parentheses and two-way clustered at the DMA×Year level and the Firm×County level. The stars indicate: *** for
p<0.01, ** for p<0.05 and * for p<0.1.




                                                              65
                        Table 22: Heterogeneous Effects for Demographic Groups

                                                        (1)                   (2)
                                                   Demo=Age 55      Demo=Income 138% of FPL
                          Fed Spend                    0.097                  0.102
                                                       (0.049)                (0.052)
                          State Spend                   -0.058                 -0.054
                                                       (0.077)                (0.081)
                          Priv Spend                    0.082                 0.091
                                                       (0.051)                (0.054)
                          Demo × Fed Spend              0.061                  0.054
                                                       (0.084)                (0.085)
                          Demo × State Spend            -0.052                 0.050
                                                       (0.134)                (0.144)
                          Demo × Priv Spend             -0.008                 -0.061
                                                       (0.089)                (0.103)
                          No. of Insurers             -0.137                 -0.133
                                                       (0.022)                (0.026)
                          Market Size                 -0.000                 -0.000
                                                       (0.000)                (0.000)
                          FirmBorderYearDemo FE           Y                      Y
                          FirmCountyDemo                  Y                      Y
                          FirmRatingYearDemo FE           Y                      Y
                          N. Obs.                      68,206                 68,042
                          Adj. R2                       0.911                  0.899

Note: This table reports the estimates of the coefficients in the specification that includes interaction terms between
advertising variables and dummy variables for individuals aged at least 55 and individuals with incomes below 138%
of the federal poverty line FPL). For each column, we consider two demographic groups: whether or not an individ-
ual's age is at least 55 for Column (1) and whether or not an individual's income is below 138% of the FPL for Column
(2). The unit of observation is at the level of each border pair, county, year, insurer, and demographic group. All speci-
fications include Firm×Border×Year× Demographic Group fixed effects, Firm×County× Demographic Group fixed
effects, and Firm×Rating Area×Year× Demographic Group fixed effects. The unit of the market size (the number of
potential enrollees) is in thousands. Standard errors are in parentheses and two-way clustered at the DMA×Year level
and the Firm×County level. The stars indicate: *** for p<0.01, ** for p<0.05 and * for p<0.1.




                                                           66
     Table 23: Heterogeneous Effects Across Markets with Different Age and Income Group
                                        Compositions

                                                         (1)                  (2)
                                                    Demo = Share of   Demo = Share of
                                                    Age 55            Income 138% of FPL
                               Fed Spend                 -0.072              0.192
                                                        (0.147)             (0.156)
                               Demo × Fed Spend           1.066              -0.278
                                                        (0.869)             (0.531)
                               State Spend                0.174              0.001
                                                        (0.155)             (0.161)
                               Demo × State Spend       -1.028               -0.236
                                                        (0.746)             (0.591)
                               Priv Spend               0.170                0.065
                                                        (0.090)             (0.088)
                               Demo × Priv Spend        -0.359               0.131
                                                        (0.349)             (0.295)
                               No. of Insurers         -0.115              -0.114
                                                        (0.026)             (0.026)
                               Market Size             -0.026              -0.027
                                                        (0.007)             (0.007)
                               FirmBorderYear FE          Y                   Y
                               FirmCounty FE              Y                   Y
                               FirmRatingYear FE          Y                   Y
                               N. Obs.                  34,208              34,208
                               Adj. R2                  0.936               0.936

Note: This table reports the estimates of the coefficients in the specification that includes interaction terms between
advertising variables and county-level demographic variables. The demographic variables we consider are the share of
potential marketplace enrollee aged at least 55 for Column (1), and the share of potential marketplace enrollees with
incomes below 138% of the Federal Povery Level for Column (2). The average shares (standard deviations) of the for-
mer and the latter are 0.20 (0.054) and 0.23 (0.085), respectively. All specifications include Firm×Border×Year fixed
effects, Firm×County fixed effects, and Firm×Rating Area×Year fixed effects. Standard errors are in parentheses and
two-way clustered at the DMA×Year level and the Firm×County level. The unit of the market size (the number of
potential enrollees) is in thousands. The stars indicate: *** for p<0.01, ** for p<0.05 and * for p<0.1.




                                                          67
                   Table 24: Heterogeneous Effects of State Advertising in California

                                                      Market-Level                   Insurer-Level
                                                     (1)           (2)      (3)           (4)          (5)
                     Fed Spend                     0.050       0.050      0.124        0.124          0.128
                                                   (0.021)     (0.021)    (0.053)      (0.053)        (0.054)
                     State Spend                   -0.016      -0.013     -0.053       -0.049          -0.048
                                                   (0.036)     (0.035)    (0.074)      (0.074)        (0.073)
                     1[State=CA]=1 × State Spend    0.085       0.095     0.298        0.300          0.300
                                                   (0.088)     (0.086)    (0.145)      (0.143)        (0.143)
                     Priv Spend                     0.022       0.023     0.094        0.093          0.091
                                                   (0.018)     (0.017)    (0.048)      (0.048)        (0.047)
                     Rival Spend                                                        -0.038         -0.043
                                                                                       (0.047)        (0.047)
                     Navi Spend                                  -0.054                                -0.384
                                                                (0.122)                               (0.240)
                     Dem Spend                                 0.050                                    0.050
                                                                (0.016)                               (0.037)
                     Rep Spend                                 -0.015                                   0.016
                                                                (0.008)                               (0.018)
                     No. of Insurers                 0.012       0.013    -0.092      -0.091         -0.088
                                                    (0.008)     (0.008)    (0.024)     (0.024)        (0.024)
                     Market Size                   -0.027     -0.026      -0.021      -0.021         -0.022
                                                    (0.006)     (0.006)    (0.005)     (0.005)        (0.005)
                     BorderYear FE                    Y            Y
                     County FE                        Y            Y
                     RatingYear FE                    Y            Y
                     FirmBorderYear FE                                       Y            Y             Y
                     FirmCounty FE                                           Y            Y             Y
                     FirmRatingYear FE                                       Y            Y             Y
                     N. Obs.                        18,182     18,182      36,558       36,558        36,558
                     Adj. R2                        0.919       0.919      0.938        0.938          0.938

Note: This table reports the estimates of the coefficients in the specification that includes the interaction term between
the California (CA) dummy and state advertising. Columns (1) and (2) are based on the market-level demand model.
Columns (3) and (4) are based on the insurer-level demand model. The specifications in Columns (1) and (2) include
Border×Year fixed effects, County fixed effects, and Rating Area×Year fixed effects. The specifications in Columns
(3) and (4) include Firm×Border×Year fixed effects, Firm×County fixed effects, and Firm×Rating Area×Year fixed
effects. The unit of the market size (the number of potential enrollees) is in thousands. Standard errors are in paren-
theses and two-way clustered at the DMA×Year level and the County level (or the Firm×County level for Columns
(3) and (4)). The stars indicate: *** for p<0.01, ** for p<0.05 and * for p<0.1.




                                                              68
        Table 25: Coefficient Estimates: Interaction between Federal and Private advertising

                                                                  (1)             (2)
                                                           Log (ln(1 + ad ))   Level (ad )
                                  Fed Spend                      0.117          0.062
                                                                 (0.064)        (0.033)
                                  State Spend                     -0.034         -0.025
                                                                 (0.070)        (0.032)
                                  Priv Spend                     0.087          0.029
                                                                 (0.051)        (0.017)
                                  Fed Spend × Priv Spend          0.022          0.010
                                                                 (0.086)        (0.012)
                                  No. of Insurers               -0.091         -0.090
                                                                 (0.024)        (0.024)
                                  Market Size                   -0.021         -0.021
                                                                 (0.005)        (0.006)
                                  FirmBorderYear FE                Y               Y
                                  FirmCounty FE                    Y               Y
                                  FirmRatingYear FE                Y               Y
                                  N. Obs.                        36,558         36,558
                                  Adj. R2                         0.938          0.938

Note: This table reports the estimates of the coefficients for the specification includes the interaction term between
federal and private advertising. The specification include Firm×Border×Year fixed effects, Firm×County fixed ef-
fects, and Firm×Rating Area×Year fixed effects. Standard errors are in parentheses and two-way clustered at the
DMA×Year level and the Firm×County level. The unit of the market size (the number of potential enrollees) is in
thousands. The stars indicate: *** for p<0.01, ** for p<0.05 and * for p<0.1.




                                                           69
   Table 26: Counterfactual Experiments: Changes in Insurer-level Enrollment and Advertising
                                                         All Markets                         Large Fed Ad Market
     Number of insurers with                             Baseline      Fed Ad×0   Fed Ad×3   Baseline   Fed Ad×0   Fed Ad×3
     positive baseline ads

     1                         Elasticity                0.029         0.029      0.030      0.038      0.037      0.039
                               Private Advertising ($)   0.85          0.89       0.80       1.04       1.27       0.90
     2+                        Elasticity                0.026         0.022      0.022      0.026      0.020      0.022
                               Private Advertising ($)   0.70          0.76       0.66       0.76       1.10       0.62


Note: This table presents elasticities of insurer's enrollment with respect to advertising and insurer-level advertising
spending. We report average elasticities and advertising spending for insurers with positive baseline advertising spend-
ing, depending on the number of such insurers in a market. We also report separately for markets with large federal
advertising spending (top 10% markets). Baseline elasticities are elasticities in partial equilibrium, which do not take
into account other insurers' equilibrium responses. "Fed Ad x 0" and "Fed Ad x 3" report equilibrium elasticities
that allow for endogenous insurer responses in our two sets of counterfactuals. We also report average insurer-level
advertising spending in the two sets of counterfactuals.




                                                                    70
