The Effect of Job Displacement on College Enrollment: Evidence from Ohio
Veronica Minaya, Brendan Moore, and Judith Scott-Clayton
NBER Working Paper No. 27694
August 2020, Revised September 2020
JEL No. I23,J60

                                        ABSTRACT

Displaced workers su er large and persistent earnings losses. These losses can be mitigated by
returning to school, yet the extent to which such workers enroll in post-secondary education in
response to displacement is poorly understood. Using employer-employee-student matched
administrative data from Ohio, we provide the rst direct evidence of workers' enrollment
responses following mass layo s in the United States. Close to 10% of these displaced workers
enroll in public two- or four-year colleges after displacement, with the typical enrollment
persisting for ve semesters and 29% completing a degree. However, much of this enrollment may
have occurred regardless of the displacement. To estimate a causal e ect, we compare displaced
workers over time to similar non-displaced workers. We estimate that for every 100 displaced
workers, only about 1 is ever induced to enroll in a public college as a result. This e ect is
concentrated almost entirely among displaced manufacturing workers, who enroll at a rate of 2.5
per every 100. Such workers with lower within- rm earnings and from local labor markets with
limited for-pro t college options are the most likely to enroll in public institutions.

Veronica Minaya                                Judith Scott-Clayton
Teachers College, Columbia University          Teachers College
525 W. 120th St, Box 174                       Columbia University
New York, NY 10027                             525 W.120th Street, Box 174
vmm2122@tc.columbia.edu                        New York, NY 10027
                                               and NBER
Brendan Moore                                  scott-clayton@tc.columbia.edu
Stanford University
Department of Economics
579 Jane Stanford Way
Stanford, CA 94305
bdmoore@stanford.edu
      The Effect of Job Displacement on College Enrollment:
                                     Evidence from Ohio

         Veronica Minaya               Brendan Moore                   Judith Scott-Clayton

          Columbia University           Stanford University         Columbia University and NBER

                                               August 2020



                                                   Abstract


          Displaced workers suffer large and persistent earnings losses. These losses can be mitigated
      by returning to school, yet the extent to which such workers enroll in post-secondary education
      in response to displacement is poorly understood. Using employer-employee-student matched
      administrative data from Ohio, we provide the first direct evidence of workers' enrollment
      responses following mass layoffs in the United States. Close to 10% of these displaced workers
      enroll in public two- or four-year colleges after displacement, with the typical enrollment
      persisting for five semesters and 29% completing a degree. However, much of this enrollment
      may have occurred regardless of the displacement. To estimate a causal effect, we compare
      displaced workers over time to similar non-displaced workers. We estimate that for every 100
      displaced workers, only about 1 is ever induced to enroll in a public college as a result. This
      effect is concentrated almost entirely among displaced manufacturing workers, who enroll at
      a rate of 2.5 per every 100. Such workers with lower within-firm earnings and from local
      labor markets with limited for-profit college options are the most likely to enroll in public
      institutions.



Keywords: Layoffs, Plant Closings, Higher Education
JEL Classification: E24, I21, I23, J24, J63, J65
   
     Minaya: Minaya-Lazarte@exchange.tc.columbia.edu; Moore: bdmoore@stanford.edu; Scott-Clayton: scott-
clayton@tc.columbia.edu; We thank Katharine Abraham, Andrew Foote, Michel Grosz, Ben Hyman, Patrice Iatarola,
Robert Kelchen, Jason Lee, Karen Ni, Christina Patterson, Jesse Rothstein, Daphne Skandalis, Jim Spletzer, Miguel
Urquiola, and participants at the New York Fed Economics of Education Seminar and the Association for Education
Finance and Policy Annual Conference for feedback on this paper. We gratefully acknowledge Lisa Neilson and the
staff of the Ohio Education Research Center, who helped facilitate our use of the restricted data in this study.

                                                       1
1     Introduction

Highly-tenured workers who lose their jobs in mass layoffs suffer large and persistent earnings losses
many years after their initial separations. This "scarring effect" curtails earnings by 15 to 20% even
two decades after displacement (Davis and Von Wachter, 2011). Community college credentials and
retraining programs that specifically target displaced workers can ameliorate these losses, even for
older workers and those in particularly distressed industries and regions (Jacobson, LaLonde, and
Sullivan, 2005a,b; Hyman, 2018). In the absence of other constraints, such workers might seek to
upskill when faced with such grim economic prospects.
    Surprisingly, very few studies have attempted to directly estimate the causal effect of job dis-
placement on postsecondary enrollment among those who were actually displaced. While prior
literature has established that community college enrollment rises when the labor market is weak
(Barrow and Davis, 2012; Hillman and Orians, 2013; Foote and Grosz, 2019), this is not necessarily
informative regarding the effects on displaced workers themselves. Enrollment induced by poor
labor markets may come primarily from individuals besides those who lost their job: workers who
voluntarily leave their jobs to return to school, recent high school graduates who opt to pursue col-
lege instead of entering a weak labor market, and those whose college choices are indirectly affected
via the financial situations of their parents. One paper which directly examines job displacement
and subsequent postsecondary enrollment is Frenette et al. (2011). The authors use the Canadian
Longitudinal Worker File to compare enrollment before and after 2003 for workers displaced in 2003
versus similar workers who were not displaced, they find that job displacement for Canadian workers
age 25-44 increases postsecondary enrollment by 0.6 to 1.3 percentage points over the subsequent
four years, from a baseline enrollment rate of about 10% among a non-displaced comparison group.
    It is not clear whether the findings of Frenette et al. (2011) would translate to an American
setting, given the differences in UI policies, educational options, and safety net programs (Card and
Riddell, 1993; Card and Oreopoulos, 2019; Jones and Riddell, 2019). For example, Barr and Turner
(2015, 2018) find that specific UI policy factors influence the enrollment response of unemployed



                                                  2
workers in the United States1 ­ among them, UI benefit duration, the ease with which UI recipients
can claim benefits while enrolled, and whether agencies are proactive about informing unemployed
workers of available financial aid. Further, the relative "push" of weaker labor markets and "pull"
of more generous disability insurance (DI) in the U.S. compared to Canada may induce some
Americans workers who would have otherwise sought retraining to instead take up DI (Milligan
and Schirle, 2019). To illustrate this point, in U.S. regions that were highly exposed to Chinese
import competition in the 1990s and 2000s, the per capita increase in Social Security DI payments
was more than thirty times that of Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA), the federal program which
incentivizes retraining for workers displaced by foreign trade (Autor et al., 2013). For these and
other reasons, it is not obvious whether Frenette et al.'s (2011) findings would generalize to an
American setting. Our paper provides the first direct evidence using micro-level data of the effect
of job displacement on college enrollment in the United States.
      Using employer-employee-student matched administrative data from Ohio, we identify workers
who lose their job in a mass layoff between 2002 and 2009 and find 9% enroll in public two- or
four-year colleges after displacement. The typical enrollment spell persists for five semesters, and
29% of these displaced workers attain a degree after being laid off. However, much of this enrollment
may have occurred regardless of an individual's career disruption. Using a dynamic two-way fixed
effects approach similar to Jacobson, LaLonde, and Sullivan (1993), we estimate the causal effect of
job displacement on postsecondary enrollment. Our preferred model includes linear worker-specific
time trends in addition to worker fixed effects, and all specifications include a comparison group of
non-displaced workers. We find that the enrollment response to job displacement is very small: for
every 100 displaced workers, only 1 is ever induced to enroll in a public college within four years of
layoff. Most of the "enrollment effect" occurs within the first year of displacement.
      Our identifying assumption is that displacement is orthogonal to unobserved, non-linear trends
in employment or human capital. If a worker receives a positive or negative shock that affects both
postsecondary enrollment decisions and displacement, our approach will incorrectly attribute any
  1
      The authors do not restrict their samples to highly-tenured displaced workers



                                                          3
change in enrollment trajectories to the effect of displacement. While it is not possible to rule out
every possible alternative explanation, we find that our results are robust to a range of sensitivity
checks, including models that exclude the individual-specific trends, models that utilize alternative
measures of enrollment, and models examining effects for shutdowns versus mass layoffs separately.
   After presenting our main results, we then explore how these enrollment effects differ by industry
of displacement. We show this effect is almost entirely concentrated in the manufacturing sector,
which comprises just 29% of our displaced sample. Within a year of displacement, more than 2
workers per every 100 laid off from manufacturing firms enrolled in college. After three years, this
effect grew to 2.5 workers. Our sample (laid off between 2002 and 2009) spans the period when U.S.
manufacturing employment's decades-long decline fell at its fastest rate (Pierce and Schott, 2016),
so the relative value of switching industries may be particularly high for these workers. Nevertheless,
our findings suggest that even in this declining industry, few workers respond to job loss by seeking
postsecondary retraining.
   We then restrict our sample to manufacturing employees to explore whether heterogeneity in
these effects follows the patterns we would predict based upon economic theory. First, we present
evidence that a worker's likelihood of enrollment depends strongly on her income prior to layoff,
specifically relative to coworkers. Because lower earners (within a firm) are typically younger and
have less educational attainment, one would predict these workers may be differentially more likely
to pursue schooling after displacement. Although we document that even the highest-paid displaced
manufacturing employees are drawn to college after layoff, middle- and low-earners are more likely
to seek retraining. For instance, three years after layoff, the displaced from the bottom-tercile of
firm earnings distribution are more than three times as likely to enroll in college than those laid off
from the top tercile.
   Next, we examine whether a displaced workers' geographic proximity to Ohio institutions of
higher education relates positively with likelihood of enrollment, consistent with economic theory
(lower economic cost of enrollment for workers nearby) and past empirical evidence (Card, 1993).
While proximity to a higher concentration of public colleges doesn't predict increased public enroll-


                                                  4
ment, we document that enrollment in public institutions are depressed in local labor markets with
a higher concentration of for-profit schools. Our study complements previous evidence that public
and for-profit schools are substitutes (Laband and Lentz, 2004; Cellini, 2009; Cellini et al., 2020).
    We find that other dimensions of heterogeneity do not predict a displaced worker's likelihood of
college enrollment. For example, despite the fact that those laid off in the third calendar quarter
(July to September) may be better-positioned to swiftly transition to college in the autumn semester
compared to those displaced in the fourth quarter, we conclude that the season of one's layoff does
not explain variation in subsequent enrollment. Similarly, while firm size or whether the firm
closes permanently (as opposed to simply shedding workers) could theoretically influence workers
post-layoff educational decisions, we detect no empirical relationship.
    Our heterogeneity analysis lends credibility to our causal interpretation of the effects of job
loss on enrollment. To the extent that our baseline estimates were driven by selection bias rather
than a causal mechanism, we would not necessarily expect our estimation to yield these patterns of
heterogeneity. Further work is needed to determine how many displaced workers retrain at private,
for-profit, or non-college institutions and whether the postsecondary training programs effectively
match displaced workers with new jobs. We proceed by summarizing related literature in section 2
and describing the data in section 3. Section 4 outlines the empirical strategy. Section 5 reviews
our findings, and section 6 discusses and concludes.



2     Previous Literature

For workers displaced in mass layoffs and plant closings, the consequences of job loss are large
and extend beyond when they are unemployed (Jacobson et al., 1993; Charles and Stephens, 2004;
Brand et al., 2008). On average, these workers experience a 20% reduction in their earnings up to
two decades after the displacement occurred (Von Wachter et al., 2009). Displaced workers are also
more likely to suffer health issues, end up on the disability rolls, or die following job loss (Autor and
Duggan, 2003; Sullivan and Von Wachter, 2009). The long-run earnings losses of displaced workers



                                                   5
are associated with a declining demand for a certain set of job- or industry-specific skills (Jacobson
et al., 2005b). Employees with specific skills in waning industries experience lower earnings even
after they are reemployed full-time because their old skills are less valuable to other employers and
more difficult to transfer to emerging and growing sectors (LaLonde and Sullivan, 2010).
   The job displacement literature is linked to a well-developed scholarship on the impact of re-
training on earnings. This literature estimates substantial returns to college and shows that it takes
time for the benefits of training to be realized. In their studies, Jacobson, LaLonde, and Sullivan
(2005a,b) link administrative earnings records with community college transcripts for workers dis-
placed from their jobs in Washington State. They estimate returns to one year of college to be about
9% for men and about 13% for women. The authors also show that returns to community college
for displaced workers may be limited in the short-term but increases over time. In more recent
work, Hyman (2018) exploits quasi-random assignment of TAA cases to investigators of differing
approval leniencies to estimate that that the program boosts earnings by $50,000 over a decade for
displaced workers through its extended unemployment benefits, job search assistance, and retrain-
ing subsidies. Finally, using a similar dataset and time period as we examine here, Leung and Pei
(2020) apply a matching strategy that compares UI claimants from Ohio who enrolled in further
education to similar claimants who did not. They find that enrollees earned about 7% more than
non-enrollees three to four years after enrollment.
   Although this research demonstrates that retraining through community colleges can reduce the
skills gaps of some of these displaced workers and mitigate their earnings losses, the extent to which
such workers enroll in postsecondary education in response to displacement is poorly understood.
Theoretically, in the absence of other constraints, labor market downturns decrease the opportunity
cost of postsecondary enrollment by reducing current labor market opportunities.
   The literature studying the impact of losing one's job on educational investment has largely
focused on settings with high unemployment or in a recession (Betts and McFarland, 1995; Card
and Lemieux, 2001; Berger and Kostal, 2002). In a more recent study, Barr and Turner (2015)
estimate the college enrollment response during the Great Recession by examining the interaction of


                                                  6
labor market conditions and state-specific UI policies and how this affects postsecondary enrollment.
They find that individuals in their mid to-late twenties are proportionally more responsive to cyclical
variation in economic conditions and that an additional 10 weeks of UI benefits increases the
likelihood of enrollment among unemployed workers by about 1.8 percentage points.
   Far less attention has been devoted to the causal effect of job displacement on postsecondary en-
rollment among those who were actually displaced and often face especially difficult readjustments.
Foote and Grosz (2019) estimate the effect of local labor market downturns measured by local
mass layoff events on two-year college enrollment using aggregate data at the commuting-zone level
and applying a generalized difference-in-difference approach with year and commuting-zone fixed
effects. Three years after a mass layoff, they find that for every 100 workers involved, 3 enrolled in
a two-year college and 2 completed a credential. While their analysis spans the entire country and
includes for-profit institutions, it is conducted at the aggregate level and therefore cannot pinpoint
whether individuals enrolling are the same ones who were laid off. Moreover, geographic mobility
could be a confounding factor in this context, although the authors argue that the role of migration
was muted during periods of labor market exits from mass layoffs (Foote et al., 2019).
   Ost et al. (2018) also studied the effects of mass layoffs on educational investments, but among
working college students who are already enrolled and experience a layoff while enrolled. They
compare students who worked at firms that had a mass layoff in their first year enrolled to students
who worked at firms that had a mass layoff in their third year enrolled. They find that layoff
leads to a considerable reduction in the probability of employment while in school, but it has little
impact on enrollment decisions at the extensive margin. On the intensive margin, they find that
layoff leads to an increase in enrolled credits. While the authors use the same administrative data
that we use in this study, their analytical sample and research question are focused on individuals
who are already enrolled prior to a layoff.
   Our study is most similar to Frenette et al. (2011), who exploit micro-level variation in individual
job displacement and consider the impact of mass-layoff on the postsecondary enrollment of workers
in the Canadian context. They find that workers affected by mass layoff events are slightly more


                                                  7
likely to subsequently enroll in college compared to workers not affected by mass layoff events.
Using a strategy of individual fixed effects with a control group comparing enrollment before and
after 2003 for workers displaced in 2003 versus similar workers who were not displaced, they find
that job displacement for Canadian workers age 25-44 increases postsecondary enrollment by 0.6 to
1.3 percentage points over the subsequent four years, from a baseline enrollment rate of about 10%
among a non-displaced comparison group.
        Our study is the first to use micro-level data to measure the direct effect of job displacement
on college enrollment in the United States. Aided by the richness of our worker-student matched
administrative data, our work is also the first to examine heterogeneity in these effects, including
by industry, geography, and earnings rank within the firm.



3         Data

We utilize three administrative data sources from the state of Ohio to study the links between
displacement and education decisions. These data are made available through the Ohio Educational
Research Center (OERC), which assembles data from multiple state agencies, including the Ohio
Department of Higher Education (ODHE) and the Ohio Department of Job and Family Services
(ODJFS), into a repository known as the Ohio Longitudinal Data Archive (OLDA).2
        The first dataset provides information for all students attending Ohio public institutions of higher
education between the years 2000 and 2011.3 The data, which aggregate student performance to
the student-by-semester level, includes credits earned, institution attended, degree information,
as well as demographic variables such as race, age, and gender. All schools have four semesters
corresponding to winter, spring, summer and fall, with the vast majority of schools experiencing
    2
     The Ohio Longitudinal Data Archive is a project of the Ohio Education Research Center
(http://www.oerc.osu.edu/oerc.osu.edu) and provides researchers with centralized access to administrative data.
The OLDA is managed by The Ohio State University's CHRR (https://chrr.osu.edu/chrr.osu.edu) in collaboration
with Ohio's state workforce and education agencies (http://www.ohioanalytics.gov/ohioanalytics.gov), with those
agencies providing oversight and funding. For information on OLDA sponsors, see http://chrr.osu.edu/projects/ohio-
longitudinal-data-archive.
   3
     We have data on Ohio Technical Centers (OTCs) as well, a network of noncredit career development programs
operated by local educational institutions, but do not use it in our analysis because only 1% of displaced workers in
our sample (769 individuals) matched to the OTC dataset.

                                                         8
peak enrollment in the fall and spring semesters. We follow the approach employed by Jepsen et al.
(2014) in which we assign the spring semester a start date of the first quarter and end date of the
second quarter; the summer term is assigned a start date of the second quarter and an end date
of the third quarter; and the fall semester is assigned a start date of the third quarter and an end
date of the fourth quarter. From this dataset, we can construct a binary measure of enrollment as
well as a discrete measure of number of classes taken.
    The second dataset includes information on both firms and private sector, state, and local
public employees subject to Unemployment Insurance (UI) contributions in Ohio between 1999Q3
and 2013Q1. Thus, an observation exists for every quarter an individual has positive earnings in
the state of Ohio during this time period. Importantly, the earnings records include individual
identifiers that link to the education data. Thus, for our purposes, we can identify the quarter of a
displaced worker's separation as well as the quarter of entry at an Ohio public college or university.
    The third dataset includes firm-level variables such as employer identifier, three-digit North
American Industry Classification Systems (NAICS) codes, and county of the employer.4 The iden-
tifiers, all derived from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW), allow for con-
struction of a firm-size variable by summing across the records associated with a given employer in
each quarter.
    The Ohio administrative data is particularly advantageous for the purposes of studying displaced
workers' earnings patterns and education decisions. Ohio is the seventh largest U.S. state by
population and lies at the heart of America's manufacturing region that has experienced several
decades of deindustrialization. Between 2005 and 2016, three of top ten "trade-displaced" ZIP
codes as calculated from Department of Labor estimates were located in Ohio (Hyman, 2018).
The longitudinal nature of the data enables the tracking of worker tenure and enrollment patterns,
facilitating the study of questions which could not be feasibly addressed in previous displaced worker
studies which relied on information at a highly aggregated geographic level, such as Census division
(Betts and McFarland, 1995) or commuting zone (Foote and Grosz, 2019).
   4
     Note that the employer county data reflects the location of the enterprise. For multi-unit employers, the location
of work may not be accurate for a given employee.


                                                          9
       The Ohio data nevertheless have some limitations, typical of state administrative UI and ed-
ucation databases. First, we are unable to distinguish between individuals who leave Ohio, exit
the labor force, or begin working for non UI-covered employers in the state. Second, we lack de-
mographic information for workers who did not attend Ohio public institutions during the selected
timeframe. Third, the education data does not include enrollment records at any private institu-
tions or at public institutions outside of the state of Ohio. Although displaced workers may seek
to retrain at private institutions, Xia (2016) shows that two-year for-profit schools respond more
strongly to incentives from governmental financial aid availability than local demand for certain
skills, the latter of which would be more relevant to our research question. Nevertheless, we use
information on location of for-profit colleges to shed light on the role such institutions play for
displaced workers.
       We use the Ohio administrative records to construct a sample of displaced workers and a com-
parison group for our analysis of postsecondary enrollment patterns. We describe the construction
of such samples below.


3.1       Displaced Sample

Displaced workers are typically defined as individuals with stable work histories who involuntarily
separate from a firm because of a mass layoff and are unlikely to be recalled to their prior job ­
features which distinguish them from routine job changers or other unemployed individuals (Kletzer,
1998). Because we use administrative data, we cannot explicitly identify the reason for a worker's
separation (quit, discharge for cause, etc.). Consistent with the displaced worker literature, we use
separations during a mass layoff to identify workers who separate because of economic distress at
their firm. Despite concerns that this approach misclassifies voluntary movers as displaced workers,
Flaaen et al. (2019) shows that mass layoffs identified in administrative data serve as a reliable
proxy for involuntary displacement.5
   5
     Specifically, Flaaen et al. (2019) merges the Longitudinal Employer Household Dynamics (LEHD), an admin-
istrative dataset, with the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), which contains worker-provided
reasons for separations. The authors find that earning loss estimates using only survey responses are very close to



                                                        10
    We define a mass layoff as a 30% or more quarter-to-quarter reduction in firm's level of employ-
ment, a convention aligned with Davis and Von Wachter (2011). A firm shutdown is counted as a
mass layoff. Because some firms exhibit many mass layoffs, we rank a firm's four largest mass layoffs
by percentage change during the observed period (2002-2009) and assess only these four events to
avoid over-counting. Furthermore, because small employers are mathematically more likely to meet
this 30% benchmark without a substantial change in absolute employment, we adhere to Jacobson
et al.'s (1993) practice of excluding firms with fewer than 50 employees from the sample of mass
layoff firms.
    Upon identifying dates of mass layoffs, we define a displaced worker as someone satisfying the
following conditions: the individual (1) worked at a firm experiencing a firm shutdown or mass
layoff in 2002q1 through 2009q4 within one year prior to the layoff date; (2) is not employed at the
firm the quarter after the mass layoff; (3) worked at the firm continuously for at least three years
prior to displacement; (4) holds only one job at the time of job separation; (5) earns the equivalent
of at least minimum wage corresponding to 30 hours per week.6 This definition aligns with Davis
and Von Wachter (2011). Choosing a less-stringent tenure requirement (three years rather than six)
allows use to study a greater number of displaced cohorts.7
    We choose not to impose certain sample restrictions common in studies which examine the
effect of job loss on future earnings if the conditioning behavior is correlated with or influenced
by the decision to re-enroll. For example, we do not condition that workers in our sample remain
attached to the labor force in the post-layoff period. While such a condition may be sensible for
studying the wage scarring effects of unemployment, we are interested in the educational rather
than employment outcomes of displaced workers. Some workers, particularly those who are not
burdened by credit constraints, may opt to devote several years to schooling without balancing
those using only administrative data.
    6
      Quarterly earnings corresponding to the minimum wage (in 2014 inflation adjusted dollars) is $2,163 in the
quarter before displacement. This corresponds to earning $5.15/hour, Ohio's minimum wage from 2002-2006, for 30
hours per week for one full quarter.
    7
      Lachowska et al. (2019) show that job displacement depresses long-run hours worked for employees with higher
tenure (6 years) compared to lower tenure (3-4 years). To the extent that this suggests our sample is less attached
to the labor force and more likely to return to school after layoff, our study's baseline estimates could be even lower
if we restricted to six years of pre-displacement tenure.


                                                          11
a full-time work schedule. This sample selection criterion renders our paper's conclusions about
educational choices relevant for all displaced workers, not just those attached to the labor force.
   Likewise, we also do not impose that displaced workers claim unemployment insurance benefits
upon job loss because, once again, such a condition influences one's decision to enroll in postsec-
ondary education (Barr and Turner, 2018). Further, such a restriction would omit a substantial
share of the population of interest from the sample. Auray et al. (2019) find that from 1989-2012,
23% of Americans eligible for UI benefits did not claim them. Moreover, the insured unemployment
rate ­ defined as the number of unemployed individuals receiving UI benefits as a percentage of
the labor force ­ during the Great Recession never eclipsed 5.0% even as the overall unemployment
rate peaked at 10.0%.


3.2    Comparison Sample

We then create a sample of individuals who are not displaced throughout the whole panel. On
these comparison and displaced samples, we estimate our multi-period individual fixed effects model,
described in section 4, to compare enrollment outcomes before and after displacement. Traditionally,
the displaced worker literature has used a "never displaced" control group of workers who remain
continuously employed in order to isolate the share of future potential earnings that is destroyed
when an individual involuntarily separates from a particular job. However, in our case, the outcome
of interest is the likelihood of post-secondary enrollment instead of earnings. Thus, there is no need
to compare a displaced worker to one who remained continuously at the same job.
   We define a non-displaced worker as someone satisfying the following conditions: the individual
(1) is continuously employed (but not necessarily at the same employer) throughout the whole
panel (1999-2012); (2) had at least 3 years of tenure at any firm; (3) earns at least minimum
wage corresponding to 30 hours per week. These latter two restrictions ensure our comparison
group is similar to our treatment group, which has these same requirements. By limiting our
comparison group to those who are continuously employed, we would if anything overstate the
effects on education college enrollments. This comparison group has a higher opportunity cost


                                                 12
of college enrollment, and would presumably be less sensitive to other factors driving education
enrollments.



4     Empirical Approach

To infer the causal effect of displacement on various educational outcomes, we apply the standard
multi-period individual fixed effect with comparison group model that has frequently been used to
measure the effect of job loss on earnings (Jacobson et al., 1993; Davis and Von Wachter, 2011;
Lachowska et al., 2019; Moore and Scott-Clayton, 2019). Our preferred measure of enrollment is
cumul enrollit , an indicator which assumes zero for each worker i until the first time she enrolls in
a public college or university. cumul enrollit equals one during the period of first enrollment, and
remains one for the rest of the panel regardless of worker i's enrollment status.
    On the sample of displaced workers and non-displaced comparisons, we estimate

                                                                 12
                    cumul enrollit = i + t + i · t + Wit  +            k · Ditk + it               (1)
                                                                k=-2


where the variable of interest Ditk is an indicator that equals one if worker i is observed in quarter
k relative to displacement in time period t, and equals zero otherwise. The final quarter of a
displaced worker's observed tenure with the layoff firm is reflected when k assumes the value zero.
We allow the index k to assume negative values as low as -2, because a worker may enroll in college in
anticipation of a layoff that has not yet occurred. k assumes a maximum value of 12, thus restricting
measurement of the effect of displacement to three full post-layoff years. The "omitted category" for
the treated sample includes earnings in quarters -8  k  -3. Because the within-worker residuals
cannot be assumed to be independent across time, we cluster at the worker level.
    In equation (1), i are worker fixed effects which absorb an individual's constant propensity to
enroll in public college over the length of the panel. Year-quarter time fixed effects, t , capture any
non-linear time effects of enrollment common across all workers (such as during the beginning of the
Great Recession). We include worker-specific linear time trends, denoted by i , which absorb any

                                                  13
linear differential trend across workers. These worker-specific time trends account for the fact that
the change in one's likelihood of enrolling college over time is much greater for some workers than
others. For example, workers in different industries or occupations may have systematically different
enrollment trends over time, even in the absence of displacement. These worker-specific trends will
thus also control for differential trends by industry or occupation. Similarly, older workers are
typically less likely to enroll in postsecondary school because they have fewer years left in the labor
market to reap the returns of such education. Because we suspect the probability of enrollment
is correlated with worker age8 , we consider one of the main values of worker-specific linear time
trends in this case is to account for potentially differential time trends by age. Lastly, recognizing
that workers with lower earnings are more likely to be displaced and, holding other factors constant,
should be differentially more likely to enroll in college to increase future earnings, we further control
for pre-layoff earnings interacted with time dummies. Specifically, Wit is a vector of year-quarter
indicators interacted with the log of pre-displacement earnings (average of the 5-8 quarters before
separation for the treatment group, average of 2003 earnings for comparison group), capturing any
non-linear differential time-trends by pre-displacement earnings.
      In order to identify ^k coefficients from equation (1) as a causal effect of displacement, we need

to assume that displacement was orthogonal to unobserved, non-linear trends in employment or
human capital. For example, if a worker receives a positive or negative shock that affects both
post-secondary enrollment decisions and displacement, our approach will attribute any change in
enrollment patterns to displacement rather than to this other shock. Another concern would be
if employers specifically target workers for displacement that they know are planning to return to
school. While it is not possible to fully rule out all alternative explanations, we do test the sensitivity
of our results to alternative specification choices. We include several robustness checks in Appendix
A, including models without individual-specific trends and examining effects for shutdowns versus
mass layoffs separately. In addition, we also run our main specification separately for subgroups by
industry, geography, and earnings percentile.
  8
      Like many state administrative employment datasets, our sample lacks information on employees' ages.



                                                        14
        We use several measures of enrollment throughout our analysis. Our preferred dependent vari-
able is the cumulative indicator of any enrollment, cumul enrollit , as defined above. We also
examine an alternative point-in-time measure of enrollment, enrollit , which indicates enrollment
in an institution of higher education for worker i in year-quarter t.9 Additionally, we use tran-
script information to construct a cumulative measure of college credits attained, cumul creditit , as
a dependent variable in robustness checks.



5         Results

5.1        Descriptive statistics on displaced workers and college enrollment

Table 1 describes basic characteristics of the displaced and non-displaced samples. Displaced workers
are slightly more likely to have ever enrolled in a 2-year institution but less likely to have ever enrolled
in a 4-year institution compared to non-displaced workers. Pre-displacement earnings are slightly
lower for displaced workers than comparison workers in 2005Q1. There are also notable differences
in their industry composition: displaced workers are substantially more likely than comparison
workers to have been employed in construction, manufacturing, transportation and warehousing,
and administrative, support, and waste management. Nearly half of all displaced workers were laid
off from three 2-digit NAICS industries: manufacturing, construction, and retail trade.
        Table 2 provides further details about displaced workers who enrolled in postsecondary education
at some point between 2000 and 2011. The first column describes those who ever enrolled, the
second describes those who enrolled after displacement, and the third describes displaced workers
who enrolled for the first time as undergraduates after displacement. By comparing the sample size
in the second column of Table 2 to the total sample of displaced workers from Table 1, we note that
just under 10% of displaced workers exhibit a spell of post-layoff enrollment. The three samples are
    9
     We consider enrollit a less illuminating measure with respect to the question of how many workers enroll in
college as a result of displacement because resulting  ^k coefficients only reveal how many displaced workers are
induced to enroll at a given point in time. In theory, the set of workers who enroll in year-quarter k0 relative to
displacement could be the same or an entirely different set of individuals for all values t where t = k0 .




                                                        15
broadly similar in terms of their demographics and academic characteristics, although those who
enroll for the first time (in our sample window) after displacement are older at the time of layoff
and first enrollment than their peers. Interestingly, while the majority of enrollment for all three
groups occurs at two-year institutions, 37% of displaced workers enrolled in a four-year institution
after displacement, and 7% enrolled in a graduate program.
   Displaced workers enroll in a wide range of fields, but health, engineering, and business are the
most popular. Among those who enroll after layoff, 29% of them earn a degree within two years
of displacement. Note that only 37% of workers who enrolled after job loss were unemployed in
the quarter after displacement, and 51% were working more than part-time. Thus, the decision to
return to school or continue seeking work is not a mutually exclusive one for displaced workers.
   Data limitations prevent us from comparing the demographic information of workers who enroll
in college to those who do not enroll. Nevertheless, we find roughly half of the displaced workers
who enroll in an institution of higher education are female and 15% are non-white (Table 2). Among
such workers, the median age at displacement and enrollment were 32 and 35, respectively.
   Table 3 further describes patterns of educational enrollment and attainment for displaced workers
who pursued school after layoff. On average, most displaced workers enroll as part-time students
within two years after displacement and remain enrolled for over a year. Among those who earn a
degree within four years after displacement (about 30% of displaced workers), about 40% earn an
associate's degree, and 30% earn a bachelor's and 12% attain a master's degree.
   We explore enrollment patterns of displaced workers according to the industry of their layoff
employers in Table 4. Among our sample who enrolls in college after job loss, workers displaced
from industries with lower-earnings--retail trade, transportation and warehousing, arts and enter-
tainment, and food and accommodation services--skew much younger than the rest of the sample
(median age 24 at layoff), while displaced manufacturing employees are substantially older (age
38). Nearly two-thirds of workers displaced from education and health services who seek postsec-
ondary training do so at 4-year institutions, while this number is only 25% for manufacturing (the
vast majority attend 2-year schools). Those displaced from education and health are the only group


                                                16
which pursue graduate enrollment at any appreciable rate (23%), while upwards of 95% of displaced
workers from all other sectors attend undergraduate programs.
       We also examine fields of study pursued by displaced workers from different industries. Although
we lack occupational data, previous research has documented that students exiting from specific
occupations such as health and law enforcement enroll in community college programs that require
similar skills (Acton, 2020). In our Ohio sample, many former manufacturing employees study
engineering upon college enrollment (22% compared to 16% of overall displaced workers who enroll
after layoff). Unsurprisingly, 39% of those laid off from education and health services pursue
postsecondary training in health-related fields (and another 9% in education). This group is also
disproportionately likely to pursue social and behavioral sciences (14% compared to 9% average).
Those originating from the aforementioned low-wage industries pursue many different areas of study
after job loss, including health (20%), business (17%), social and behavioral science (14%), arts and
humanities (12%), and natural science and mathematics (10%).


5.2       Main Results

Before turning to effects on enrollment, it is useful to establish that the workers in our sample
experience the same employment and earnings outcomes of displacement as has been documented by
prior research. Figure 1 illustrates the well-documented effects of job displacement on employment
and earnings for workers in our Ohio sample.10 Four years after job loss, 15% of workers are not
employed. They earn roughly 25% less than they would if they had not been displaced, a number
consistent with the literature since Jacobson et al. (1993). Using the same administrative data and
a very similar displaced sample, Moore and Scott-Clayton (2019) estimate about a 10-12 percentage
point negative effect of displacement in a mass layoff on the likelihood of employment several years
later. It is possible some of these unemployed individuals are enrolled in an institution of higher
education, many are likely searching for a job, retired, or accepting public benefits such as disability
insurance which keep them out of the labor force. Moreover, a number of the displaced workers
  10
    Coefficients plotted in Figure 1 result from specifications similar to equation (1), with employment status or log
earnings as a dependent variable. These specifications do not use worker-specific linear time trends.

                                                         17
who do enroll in school may be working full- or part-time contemporaneously.
   Figure 2 plots two different measures of the enrollment rate for the comparison sample and cohort
displaced in 2006Q1 and provides plausible evidence that our displaced and comparison samples
follow similar enrollment trends prior to displacement. The point-in-time enrollment rate from
Figure 2a exhibits a declining trend over time, likely representing age effects (enrollment declines
as individuals get older). Figure 2b plots a cumulative enrollment rate, which increases over time
but at a decreasing rate. The figure suggests that job displacement may have a positive effect on
college enrollment. Further, enrollment appears to increase modestly at the time of or just before
layoff. We quantify this effect by estimating the impact of displacement in the 2 quarters preceding
layoff in specification (1).
   Figure 3 plots the estimated coefficients from our main specification (listed in Table 5), which
can be interpreted as the cumulative effect of job displacement on public college enrollment. We
find that the enrollment response to job displacement is statistically significant but very small: for
every 100 displaced workers, only 1 is ever induced to enroll in a public college within three years
of layoff. Nearly the entire effect of displacement on enrollment occurs in the first year after layoff.
The stability of the ^k coefficients for k > 4 suggest that virtually no new workers are induced to

enroll after the first year.
   We subject our main finding, that displacement has a positive but limited effect on public college
enrollment, to several robustness checks in Appendix A. First, we apply our preferred specification
without worker-specific linear time trends ­ to the displaced and comparison sample. Figure A.6
estimates a noticeably larger but still limited effect of 2.5 workers per every 100 who enroll as a result
of displacement. Additionally, we use two alternative measures of enrollment: a quarter-varying
enrollment indicator (as from Figure 2a) and a cumulative measure of college credits attained,
constructed from student-level transcript information. Both suggest a small but positive effect of
displacement on enrollment (Figures A.7 and A.8).
   These results are highly consistent with Frenette et al. (2011) who find that for every 100
displaced workers in Canada, one worker is induced to return to school. Most of the "enrollment


                                                   18
effect" occurs within the first year after displacement. Even though effects of displacement on
enrollment seem small, it's worth noting that the causal effect of displacement on employment is
only about 10 percentage points (Moore and Scott-Clayton, 2019).


5.3       Heterogeneity in Enrollment Effects

5.3.1      Industry of Layoff

We first explore whether propensity to enroll in college as a result of displacement varies considerably
by industry. Theory might suggest that workers in industries such as manufacturing facing perma-
nent disruptions (Baily and Bosworth, 2014; Pierce and Schott, 2016) might be more likely to return
to school to retrain rather than try to find another similar job. On the other hand, older displaced
workers have a shorter time horizon to recoup the payoff from additional educational investment
and may be overrepresented in industries facing permanent disruptions like manufacturing.11
       To maintain statistical power, we divide our displaced and non-displaced comparison samples
into four broad industrial groups: manufacturing (NAICS 31-33), educational services, health care
and social assistance (NAICS 61-62), wholesale trade, retail trade, transportation and warehousing,
arts, entertainment, recreation, accommodation and food services (NAICS 42, 44-45, 48-49, 71, 72),
and a remaining miscellaneous group. We apply equation (1) separately to each group. Results are
presented in Figure 4 and Appendix Table A.3.
       Former manufacturing employees clearly drive the bulk of the college enrollment response to
displacement. These workers exhibit a strong enrollment response soon after displacement, as 2
in every 100 manufacturing workers had enrolled in college just four quarters after layoff. After
four years, more than 2.5 displaced Ohio manufacturers pursued public college as a result. These
workers contrast sharply with those laid off from other sectors, who do not appear to be induced
to public college enrollment after job loss. While those laid off from retail, wholesale, transporta-
tion and warehousing, arts, entertainment, food and accommodation exhibit a modest significant
  11
    Because of Ohio sample's limitations on demographic information, we examine demographics by industry of
layoff for those in the Displaced Workers Supplement (DWS) of the Current Population Survey in Appendix C. We
document that those laid off from manufacturing are, on average, among the oldest displaced workers (Table C.2).


                                                      19
positive effect in the first post-layoff year, after three years their likelihood of enrollment is not
distinguishable from zero. Displaced workers in education, health, and the "other" category never
enroll in college at a significant rate.
   Because employees displaced from manufacturing account for the vast majority of those who
consequently enroll, we focus our subsequent heterogeneity analysis on these workers. Restricting
to a more homogenous set of workers in the same industry will allow to better assess how enrollment
responses to displacement vary along other dimensions. As Table 4 describes, these laid off indi-
viduals are much more likely to enroll in two-year institutions than other displaced workers. Their
most common fields of study are health, engineering, and business. At a national level, displaced
manufacturing workers are older (average age at layoff is 44 years) and more likely to be male (62%).
Over half have only a high school diploma or less (Table C.2).


5.3.2   Within-Firm Earnings

It is well-documented that earnings increase with firm-tenure (and therefore age) (Brown, 1989;
Topel, 1991). While we cannot observe age for all workers directly, displaced workers with lower
within-firm earnings may be younger and have more years remaining in their careers. These lower-
paid, often younger workers may find schooling a more attractive pursuit after losing their job
than their higher-paid counterparts. Even holding age and other factors constant, one might ex-
pect workers with lower incomes to be differentially likely to pursue postsecondary education to
increase their human capital and future earnings. This may be especially true in manufacturing,
as the highest-paid workers are often engineers or production managers, whose positions require
a bachelor's degree and whose skills may be in higher demand at other firms. Those who worked
as former assemblers and machinists, positions that are less well-remunerated and don't require a
college degree, may have fewer attractive destinations in the labor market. Therefore, we investigate
whether the enrollment effect varies by a worker's position within the earnings distribution at her
layoff firm.
   We divide displaced and comparison manufacturing workers by tercile of earnings within the


                                                 20
firm and apply equation (1).12 Despite splitting the sample by within-firm earnings, we still control
for a worker's pre-layoff earnings interacted with time. As Figure 5 illustrates, the percentile of a
worker's within-firm earnings strongly predicts college enrollment after layoff. Four quarters after
displacement from a manufacturing firm, 4 workers per every 100 from the bottom tercile enrolled
in college as a result, compared to just 2 and 1 from the middle and top terciles, respectively.
Three years after layoff, the lowest-paid workers are still more than three-times as likely to have
enrolled in college than those laid off from the top of the earnings distribution. The finding that
lower-earning workers are more likely to enroll in college after displacement is robust to whether
workers are divided into two or four groups (Appendix Figure A.1).


5.3.3    Geographic Access to College

We next investigate how job loss may have differential effects on enrollment patterns of manufac-
turing workers with varying proximity to public and for-profit colleges. We assign each displaced
and non-displaced comparison worker a local labor market based on the county of her employer
according to the Commuting Zone (CZ) scheme developed by Tolbert and Sizer (1996). CZs are
clusters of counties that are characterized by commuting ties which are strong within-region and
weak across regions.13 We then classify each of Ohio's seventeen multi-county CZs14 as either high-
or low-access in terms of higher education based on the number of institutions in the local labor
market. We first designate high- and low-access CZs for public colleges, and then within this strat-
ification we classify CZs by relative availability of for-profit institutions using data on location of
for-profits from the Urban Institute's Education Data Portal in order to examine whether for-profit
access may depress public enrollment.15
  12
     A displaced worker is assigned an earnings tercile based on her earnings in the last full quarter before layoff.
Terciles for a comparison worker are assigned based on earnings in 2005Q1.
  13
     Because our analysis is conducted at the individual worker-level, we do not implement the clustering robustness
check advised by Foote et al. (2017) for empirical labor economics papers which use CZs themselves as the unit of
observation.
  14
     Two CZs ­ Huntington, WV and Parkersburg, WV ­ include only one Ohio county as they are mostly part of
West Virginia, so we drop the small number of workers employed in these counties for geographic analysis.
  15
     The Urban Institute's data combines information from Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System
(IPEDS), the Department of Education's College Scorecard, and the National Historical Geographic Information
System (NHGIS)


                                                         21
   Because our data is limited to enrollment records at public universities, we cannot directly
observe those who retrain at private institutions, including for-profit colleges. In 2009, for-profits
accounted for 9% of nationwide enrollment in degree-granting schools. Deming et al. (2012) find that
relative to other institutions, for-profits educate a larger fraction of minority, disadvantaged, and
older students and more often grant degrees for short programs at the certificate and AA levels,
suggesting they may be more prominent school avenues for displaced workers. Thus, displaced
workers may seek retraining at easily accessible for-profits rather than public colleges. When Foote
and Grosz (2019) estimate the enrollment response to mass layoff events, they do not find any
statistically significant enrollment response at for-profit institutions (in contrast to their findings on
public enrollment). However, their point estimate is still more than 50% as big as their estimate for
public enrollment (1.5 for-profit enrollees per 100 displaced workers, versus 2.8 at public colleges),
suggesting that for-profits may attract displaced workers at higher rates than they attract other
types of students.
   First, focusing on proximity to public institutions, we classify six CZs ­ Cincinnati, Cleveland,
Columbus, Dayton, Portsmouth, and Toledo ­ as `high-access' given they host at least 7 public
colleges or universities. These CZs are home to employers which displace roughly 70% of the overall
sample. Figure 6 presents estimates from specification (1) when splitting the manufacturing sample
by high- and low-public college access CZ. In the first post-layoff year, roughly two workers out of
every 100 enroll in college regardless of their geographic proximity to public colleges. After three
years, these numbers diverge slightly, as roughly 2.5 (3.5) workers of every 100 displaced in a CZ with
high (low) proximity to public schools are induced to enroll. The medium-run cumulative effect of
displacement on enrollment follows a similar trajectory for both sets of workers: a strong push into
enrollment in the first few quarters followed by two years of a gradually increasing effect. Further
robustness checks at the county-level (rather than CZ-level) bolster the finding that geographic
proximity to public institutions does not strongly predict enrollment propensity (Appendix Figure
A.5).
   Next, we further classify each high- or low-public college access CZ by its relative geographic


                                                   22
concentration of for-profits using county-level data from the Urban Institute.16 Figure 7 presents
the results of equation (1) for these four distinct samples of workers, describing the effect of displace-
ment on public college enrollment by geographic proximity to both for-profits and public institutions.
Interestingly, workers are less likely to enroll in public colleges if displaced in local markets with
higher concentration of for-profits. This pattern is consistent with other evidence for the substi-
tutability of for-profits and community colleges for displaced workers seeking to retrain. The effect
of displacement on public enrollment does not strongly correlate with the number of public options
available.17
    Specifically, workers displaced in local education markets with few for-profit institutions were the
most likely to enroll in public college as a result. One year after displacement in these areas, roughly
four in 100 displaced workers responded by enrolling. On the other hand, workers in markets with
many for-profit institutions enrolled in public colleges at much lower rates in response to job loss. In
the first post-displacement year, less than two such displaced manufacturing workers per every 100
enrolled in college. This result depends little on whether workers had many nearby public college
options, although enrollment for "high-public, high-for-profit" workers was slightly higher than for
"low-public, high-for-profit" counterparts in the first post-layoff year.
    In Appendix A.2, we test other dimensions of heterogeneity which could have predictive power
for displaced workers' enrollment patterns, such as calendar-quarter of layoff, firm size, and firm
shutdown status. In each instance, roughly two of every 100 displaced manufacturing workers from
various subgroups were induced to enroll in college.
   16
      This classification designates Dayton, Portsmouth, and Toledo as high-public and low-for-profit local education
markets and Canton, Lorain, and Youngstown as low-public and high-for-profit markets. The remaining CZs are
either high- or low-access for both types of schools. For a full list of CZs, their classifications, and number of
institutions, see Table B.1.
   17
      This may be because CZs with many public options also may have more alternative job options for displaced
workers, or it may indicate that one public option is as useful as multiple public options when it comes to enrollment
decisions.




                                                         23
6        Discussion and Conclusion

Despite the documented benefits of postsecondary education after a mass layoff (Jacobson et al.,
2005a,b), job displacement is found to be associated with only a modest increase in college enroll-
ment. For every 100 displaced workers, only about 1 is ever induced to enroll in a public college
within four years of layoff. Workers are most likely to pursue higher education in the first post-layoff
year, with the median enrollment spell lasting five semesters. Very few workers are induced into en-
rollment beyond the first few quarters post-layoff. The sizable difference between these small causal
estimates and the post-layoff probability of displaced workers' college enrollment observed in the
data (9%) suggests that the majority of displaced individuals who enroll in college post-displacement
would have likely done so even the absence of a job loss.
       Our causal estimates are comparable to those from the limited empirical work on postsecondary
enrollment patterns of displaced workers in other settings. Our baseline estimate that 1 out of every
100 displaced workers enrolls in college as a result of displacement is similar to Frenette et al. (2011),
who estimate an effect of between 0.6 to 1.3 workers for every 100 displaced workers in Canada.18
Our estimates are also in line with those from Foote and Grosz (2019), who estimate that for every
100 workers involved in mass layoff, 3 enrolled in a two-year college after three years.19
       Our quantitatively-small estimate of displacement's effect on college enrollment, if anything,
may overstate the true response we seek to measure. To obtain a causal estimate, we followed the
displacement-earnings literature's long-standing approach by comparing the outcomes of our dis-
placed sample's to those of a stably-employed control (Jacobson et al., 1993; Davis and Von Wachter,
2011; Lachowska et al., 2019). Our dynamic difference-in-difference model, which controls for
individual-specific trends over time, assumes that displaced and comparison workers do not dif-
ferentially deviate from these trends over time except for the effects of displacement. However, to
  18
     Frenette et al.'s (2011) estimates vary based on definition of displacement. Their definition most similar to ours
(using mass layoffs to proxy for job displacement) yields estimates of 0.6% for males and 1.3% for females.
  19
     Although Jacobson et al. (2005a) do not estimate a reduced-form effect of job loss on enrollment, the authors
document that roughly 15% of displaced workers in 1990s Washington state later enroll in a 2-year community college.
Although this is larger than our sample's post-layoff enrollment rate of 9%, the magnitudes of these descriptive
patterns are reasonably aligned.



                                                          24
the extent this assumption is violated (for example if some third factor contributes to both higher
displacement and higher enrollment, or if employers displace workers they expect to enroll), this
violation is likely to overestimate the enrollment response because workers in the continuously-
attached comparison group exhibit such a high degree of employment stability that there could be
less of motive for this group to seek postsecondary schooling at any point during their tenure.
       Our findings of the heterogeneous effects of job loss on enrollment support our causal interpreta-
tion. For example, our conclusion that displaced workers in local labor markets with more for-profit
institutions are less likely to enroll in public colleges than counterparts in low-for-profit markets
(independent of public-college concentration) accords with prior research indicating that public and
for-profit schools are substitutes (Laband and Lentz, 2004; Cellini, 2009; Cellini et al., 2020).
       A possible explanation for the small magnitude of effects could be that those who do experi-
ence persistent employment and earnings declines following a layoff may also face greater financial
constraints (Ganong and Noel, 2019), depressing college enrollment. Student aid policies and labor
market policies ­ including UI ­ can play a role in determining how and whether displaced workers
engage in postsecondary education (Barr and Turner, 2015). Information failures could also play a
role if displaced workers are not aware of the aid available to them. During the Great Recession,
the State of Ohio sent out letters to UI recipients proactively informing them of their eligibility for
federal Pell Grants. Barr and Turner (2018) studied this policy, exploiting the idiosyncratic timing
of when the letters were sent in different areas, and concluded that the letters significantly increased
the likelihood of college enrollment.20
       Finally, while our estimated effect of displacement on college enrollment appears objectively
small, it is worth placing the magnitude of this finding in context of post-displacement employment
patterns, which indicate that most displaced workers quickly return to other jobs. For example,
(Moore and Scott-Clayton, 2019) estimate a 10-12 percentage point negative effect of layoff on
likelihood of employment several years later using the same administrative data and a very similar
  20
    Note, however, that according to Unemployment Insurance summary data from the US Department of Labor
from 2019Q4, only 3 in 10 unemployed workers received UI benefits, so even these letters would not reach all the
displaced workers considered in our sample. Further, Ohio did not send letters to UI recipients until December 2009,
after the period of displacements that we examine in this analysis.


                                                        25
displaced sample. Lachowska et al. (2019) estimate an even smaller long-term impact on employ-
ment (a 3-4 percentage point decline) on displaced workers in Washington State during the Great
Recession. It would be surprising for the share seeking retraining to be larger than the share re-
maining jobless in the years following separation. Still, interpreted along with other evidence, our
results suggest that more work may be needed to ensure that college enrollment is an accessible
option for displaced workers seeking to retrain.




                                                   26
References
Acton, R. K. (2020): "Community College Program Choices in the Wake of Local Job Losses," .
Albertini, J. and X. Fairise (2018): "Layoffs, recalls and experience rating," .
Auray, S., D. L. Fuller, and D. Lkhagvasuren (2019): "Unemployment insurance take-up rates in
  an equilibrium search model," European Economic Review, 112, 1­31.
Autor, D., D. Dorn, and G. H. Hanson (2013): "The China syndrome: Local labor market effects of
  import competition in the United States," American Economic Review, 103, 2121­68.
Autor, D. H. and M. G. Duggan (2003): "The rise in the disability rolls and the decline in unemploy-
  ment," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 157­206.
Baily, M. N. and B. P. Bosworth (2014): "US manufacturing: Understanding its past and its potential
  future," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28, 3­26.
Barr, A. and S. Turner (2015): "Out of work and into school: Labor market policies and college
  enrollment during the Great Recession," Journal of Public Economics, 124, 63­73.
------ (2018): "A Letter and Encouragement: Does Information Increase Postsecondary Enrollment of
  UI Recipients?" American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 10, 42­68.
Barrow, L. and J. Davis (2012): "The upside of down: Postsecondary enrollment in the great recession,"
  Economic Perspectives, 36.
Berger, M. C. and T. Kostal (2002): "Financial resources, regulation, and enrollment in US public
  higher education," Economics of Education Review, 21, 101­110.
Betts, J. R. and L. L. McFarland (1995): "Safe port in a storm: The impact of labor market
  conditions on community college enrollments," Journal of Human Resources, 741­765.
Brand, J. E., B. R. Levy, and W. T. Gallo (2008): "Effects of layoffs and plant closings on subsequent
  depression among older workers," Research on Aging, 30, 701­721.
Brown, J. N. (1989): "Why do wages increase with tenure? On-the-job training and life-cycle wage
  growth observed within firms," The American Economic Review, 971­991.
Card, D. (1993): "Using geographic variation in college proximity to estimate the return to schooling,"
  Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Card, D. and T. Lemieux (2001): "Dropout and enrollment trends in the postwar period: What went
  wrong in the 1970s?" in Risky Behavior Among Youths: An Economic Analysis, University of Chicago
  Press, 439­482.
Card, D. and P. Oreopoulos (2019): "Introduction: Labor Markets and Public Policies in the United
  States and Canada," Journal of Labor Economics, 37, S243­S252.
Card, D. and W. C. Riddell (1993): "A comparative analysis of unemployment in Canada and the
  United States," in Small differences that matter: Labor markets and income maintenance in Canada
  and the United States, University of Chicago Press, 149­190.
Cellini, S. R. (2009): "Crowded colleges and college crowd-out: The impact of public subsidies on the
  two-year college market," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 1, 1­30.
Cellini, S. R., R. Darolia, and L. J. Turner (2020): "Where Do Students Go When For-Profit
  Colleges Lose Federal Aid?" American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 12, 46­83.
Charles, K. K. and M. Stephens, Jr (2004): "Job displacement, disability, and divorce," Journal of
  Labor Economics, 22, 489­522.

                                                  27
Davis, S. J. and T. Von Wachter (2011): "Recessions and the Costs of Job Loss," Brookings Papers
  on Economic Activity, 42, 1­72.
Deming, D. J., C. Goldin, and L. F. Katz (2012): "The for-profit postsecondary school sector: Nimble
  critters or agile predators?" Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26, 139­64.
Farber, H. S. (2015): "Job loss in the great recession and its aftermath: US evidence from the Displaced
  Workers Survey," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Flaaen, A., M. D. Shapiro, and I. Sorkin (2019): "Reconsidering the Consequences of Worker
  Displacements: Firm versus Worker Perspective," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 11,
  193­227.
Foote, A. and M. Grosz (2019): "The effect of local labor market downturns on postsecondary enroll-
  ment and program choice," Education Finance and Policy, 1­50.
Foote, A., M. Grosz, and A. Stevens (2019): "Locate Your Nearest Exit: Mass Layoffs and Local
  Labor Market Response," ILR Review, 72, 101­126.
Foote, A., M. Kutzbach, and L. Vilhuber (2017): "Recalculating-How uncertainty in local labor
  market definitions affects empirical findings," .
Frenette, M., R. Upward, and P. W. Wright (2011): "The long-term earnings impact of post-
  secondary education following job loss," Statistics Canada Analytical Branch Studies Working Paper.
Fujita, S. and G. Moscarini (2017): "Recall and unemployment," American Economic Review, 107,
  3875­3916.
Ganong, P. and P. Noel (2019): "Consumer spending during unemployment: Positive and normative
  implications," American Economic Review, 109, 2383­2424.
Handwerker, E. W. and L. G. Mason (2012): "Which layoffs-and which laid-off workers-are in the
  mass layoff statistics," Monthly Lab. Rev., 135, 17.
Hillman, N. W. and E. L. Orians (2013): "Community colleges and labor market conditions: How
  does enrollment demand change relative to local unemployment rates?" Research in Higher Education,
  54, 765­780.
Hipple, S. (1999): "Worker displacement in the mid-1990s," Monthly Lab. Rev., 122, 15.
Hyman, B. (2018): "Can Displaced Labor Be Retrained? Evidence from Quasi-Random Assignment to
  Trade Adjustment Assistance," .
Jacobson, L. S., R. J. LaLonde, and D. G. Sullivan (1993): "Earnings losses of displaced workers,"
  The American Economic Review, 685­709.
------ (2005a): "Estimating the returns to community college schooling for displaced workers," Journal
  of Econometrics, 125, 271­304.
------ (2005b): "The impact of community college retraining on older displaced workers: Should we teach
  old dogs new tricks?" ILR Review, 58, 398­415.
Jepsen, C., K. Troske, and P. Coomes (2014): "The labor-market returns to community college
  degrees, diplomas, and certificates," Journal of Labor Economics, 32, 95­121.
Johnson, L. (1996): "Common Ground: Exemplary Community College and Corporate Partnerships." .
Jones, S. R. and W. C. Riddell (2019): "Unemployment, Marginal Attachment, and Labor Force
  Participation in Canada and the United States," Journal of Labor Economics, 37, S399­S441.
Kletzer, L. G. (1998): "Job Displacement," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12, 115­136.


                                                  28
Laband, D. N. and B. F. Lentz (2004): "Do costs differ between for-profit and not-for-profit producers
  of higher education?" Research in Higher Education, 45, 429­441.
Lachowska, M., A. Mas, and S. A. Woodbury (2019): "Sources of Displaced Workers' Long-Term
  Earnings Losses," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
LaLonde, R. and D. Sullivan (2010): "Retraining Displaced Workers. Policy Brief." Hamilton Project.
Lendel, I., M. Piazza, and M. Ellerbock (2019): "Lordstown GM Plant Closure Economic Impact
  Study," .
Leung, P. and Z. Pei (2020): "Further Education During Unemployment," .
Maher, K. (2018): "GM's Plan to Drop Chevy Cruze Hits Ohio Town Hard," .
Milligan, K. and T. Schirle (2019): "Push and pull: Disability insurance, regional labor markets, and
  benefit generosity in Canada and the United States," Journal of Labor Economics, 37, S289­S323.
Moore, B. and J. Scott-Clayton (2019): "The Firm's Role in Displaced Workers' Earnings Losses,"
  Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Neal, D. (1995): "Industry-specific human capital: Evidence from displaced workers," Journal of Labor
  Economics, 13, 653­677.
Ost, B., W. Pan, and D. Webber (2018): "The impact of mass layoffs on the educational investments
  of working college students," Labour Economics, 51, 1­12.
Pierce, J. R. and P. K. Schott (2016): "The surprisingly swift decline of US manufacturing employ-
  ment," American Economic Review, 106, 1632­62.
Roueche, J. E. et al. (1995): The Company We Keep: Collaboration in the Community College., ERIC
  - Education Resources Information Center, U.S. Department of Education.
Schmieder, J. F. and T. Von Wachter (2010): "Does wage persistence matter for employment fluc-
  tuations? Evidence from displaced workers," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2, 1­21.
Sullivan, D. and T. Von Wachter (2009): "Job displacement and mortality: An analysis using
  administrative data," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124, 1265­1306.
Tolbert, C. M. and M. Sizer (1996): "US commuting zones and labor market areas: A 1990 update,"
  Tech. rep.
Topel, R. (1991): "Specific capital, mobility, and wages: Wages rise with job seniority," Journal of
  Political Economy, 99, 145­176.
Von Wachter, T., J. Song, and J. Manchester (2009): "Long-term earnings losses due to mass lay-
  offs during the 1982 recession: An analysis using US administrative data from 1974 to 2004," Unpublished
  paper, Columbia University.
Xia, X. (2016): "What explains the rise of for-profit universities? Evidence from dental assistant pro-
  grams," Columbia University Job Market Paper.




                                                   29
Figures

                  Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for Displaced and Comparison Group

                                                                      Displaced     Comparison
              Industry of Layoff Firm
              Agriculture, Fishing, Hunting                              0.008          0.001
              Mining, Quarrying, Oil and Gas Extract                     0.006          0.003
              Utilities                                                  0.001          0.010
              Construction                                               0.100          0.021
              Manufacturing                                              0.285          0.240
              Wholesale Trade                                            0.029          0.057
              Retail Trade                                               0.107          0.090
              Transportation and Warehousing                             0.078          0.031
              Information                                                0.019          0.027
              Finance and Insurance                                      0.083          0.074
              Real Estate and Rental Leasing                             0.008          0.011
              Professional, Scientific, and Technical                    0.038          0.042
              Management of Companies and Enterprises                    0.006          0.008
              Administrative, Support, Waste Management                  0.058          0.028
              Educational Services                                       0.021          0.111
              Health Care and Social Assistance                          0.052          0.142
              Arts, Entertainment, Recreation                            0.025          0.006
              Accommodation and Food Services                            0.042          0.027
              Other Services                                             0.019          0.015
              Public Administration                                      0.012          0.053
              Yearly Pre-Layoff Earnings
              1-4 Quarters Before ($)                                   49,888         54,153
                                                                       (38,976)       (37,491)
              Higher Education
              Ever Enrolled in 2-Year Institution                        0.113          0.094
              Ever Enrolled in 4-Year Institution                        0.062          0.086
              N                                                         68,547         898,040
Note: Standard errors for earnings are expressed in parentheses. Table lists the share of workers displaced from
various industries between 2002q1 and 2009q4. Earnings are in inflation-adjusted to USD$2012 using the CPI-U.
Industries are listed at 2-digit NAICS level. Because the comparison group is never displaced, industries represent
their industry of employment in 2005q1. "Pre-layoff earnings" for the comparison group is four times their 2005q1
earnings.




                                                        30
              Table 2: Summary Statistics: Displaced Workers with Enrollment Records


                                                                   Displaced Workers, 2002q1-2009q4
                                                     Ever enrolled,      Enrolled Post-      First Time UG Enroll
                                                      2000-2011          Displacement         Post Displacement
 Basic Demographics
 Female                                                    0.48                0.48                     0.49
 Non-white                                                 0.14                0.14                     0.15
 Age at Displacement (median)                               32                  32                       35
 Age at First Enrollment (median)                           35                  35                       38
 Enrollment
 Any Enrollment in 2-yr Institution                        0.72                0.76                     0.77
 Any Enrollment in 4-yr Institution                        0.39                0.37                     0.32
 Any Undergraduate Enrollment                              0.95                0.96                     0.94
 Any Graduate Enrollment                                   0.06                0.07                     0.08
 CIP Area at First Enrollment
 Arts & Humanities                                         0.14                0.11                     0.12
 Business                                                  0.16                0.15                     0.16
 Education                                                 0.05                0.05                     0.05
 Engineering                                               0.16                0.16                     0.15
 Health                                                    0.16                0.20                     0.21
 Law                                                       0.01                0.01                     0.01
 Natural Science & Mathematics                             0.08                0.09                     0.08
 Services                                                  0.04                0.04                     0.04
 Social & Behavioral Sciences                              0.09                0.09                     0.07
 Trades & Repair Technicians                               0.03                0.03                     0.04
 Degree Attainment
 Earned Degree w/i 2yrs of Displacement                    N/A                 0.29                     0.25
 Employment
 Unemployed quarter after layoff                           0.36                 0.37                     0.40
 More than Part-Time Employment                            0.54                 0.51                     0.50
 N                                                        10,780               6,306                    4,197
Note : The first column includes workers displaced between 2002q1 and 2009q4 with any record of enrollment at
an Ohio public college or university (community college, 4-year undergraduate, or graduate program) between 2000
and 2011. This group includes workers who pursued higher education before and/or after displacement. The second
column isolates displaced workers who enroll in a public college or university after displacement, regardless of enroll-
ment status before job loss. The third column includes only workers who enroll in an undergraduate institution for
the first time after they are displaced.




                                                          31
                           Table 3: Displaced Workers: Educational Attainment

                                                                        Years From Displacement
                                                                             to Enrollment
                                                                        0-2 years        2-4 years
             Enrollment
             Any Enrollment in a 2-yr Institution                         0.732            0.725
             Any Enrollment in a 4-yr Institution                         0.331            0.344
             Any Undergraduate Enrollment                                 0.943            0.943
             Any Graduate Enrollment                                      0.066            0.070
             Any Full-Time (FT) Enrollment                                0.429            0.392
             Any Part-Time (PT) Enrollment                                0.869            0.874
             Attainment
             # Courses Enrolled within 2 or 4 years                       11.99            11.96
             # Quarters Enrolled within 2 or 4 years                      4.656            4.934
             # Quarters Enrolled FT w/i 2 or 4 years                      1.327            1.251
             # Quarters Enrolled PT w/i 2 or 4 years                      3.062            3.295
             Earned Degree w/i 2 or 4yrs of Displacement                  0.302            0.325
             Among Those Completing Degree After Layoff
             Less than one-year award                                     0.060            0.053
             Associate's degree                                           0.432            0.415
             Bachelor's degree                                            0.289            0.305
             Master's degree                                              0.120            0.135
             First-professional degree                                    0.009            0.011
             Doctoral degree                                              0.022            0.011
             N                                                            6,031            4,297
Note : First column provides enrollment and attainment variable means for displaced workers who enroll in an
institution of higher education any time within the first two years after their displacement (including workers who
were enrolled prior to displacement). The second column provides means for the same variables for displaced workers
who enroll in an institution of higher education anytime between 2 and 4 years after their displacement. Because
some workers enroll in the year after displacement and continue schooling for many years, the two groups are not
disjoint. However, the 2-4 group is also not a proper subset of the 0-2 group. Attainment variables for courses and
quarters enrolled correspond to either "within 2 years" for the first column or "within 4 years" for the second column.




                                                          32
 Table 4: Summary Statistics: Displaced Workers with Enrollment Records by Industry of Layoff


                                                         Displaced Workers, Enrolled Post-Layoff
                                                  Manufacturing        Educ/Health        RWTAEFA          Other
    Basic Demographics
    Age at Displacement (median)                          38                  33               24            34
    Enrollment
    Any Enrollment in 2-yr Institution                   0.82               0.63              0.67          0.81
    Any Enrollment in 4-yr Institution                   0.25               0.62              0.53          0.29
    Any Undergraduate Enrollment                         0.98               0.86              0.98          0.96
    Any Graduate Enrollment                              0.02               0.23              0.08          0.06
    CIP Area at First Enrollment
    Arts & Humanities                                    0.07               0.07              0.12          0.12
    Business                                             0.17               0.06              0.17          0.15
    Education                                            0.02               0.09              0.08          0.04
    Engineering                                          0.22                                 0.08          0.21
    Health                                               0.23               0.39              0.20          0.16
    Law                                                  0.02                                                
    Natural Science & Mathematics                        0.10               0.11              0.10          0.07
    Services                                             0.03               0.03              0.05          0.05
    Social & Behavioral Sciences                         0.06               0.14              0.14          0.07
    Trades & Repair Technicians                          0.03                                               0.05
    Employment
    Unemployed quarter after layoff                     0.52                0.45               0.33         0.40
    More than Part-Time Employment                       0.41               0.39               0.46         0.52
    N                                                   1,240               575               1,446        3,045
Note : This table splits the sample of workers who enroll in a public college after displacement (column 2 of Table 2) by
broad industrial category of their layoff employer. The sample includes workers displaced between 2002q1 and 2009q4
with any record of enrollment at an Ohio public college or university after layoff and until 2011. Enrollment rates
within a column may sum to more than 1 because workers enroll at multiple types of institutions. RWTAEFA includes
workers displaced from Retail Trade, Wholesale, Transportation & Warehousing, Arts & Entertainment, and Food
& Accommodation Services. Other includes remaining displaced workers laid off from firms outside manufacturing,
education and health services, and RWTAEFA. * indicates that the cell value suppressed, as it represents less than
10 individuals.




                                                           33
         Table 5: Cumulative Effect of Displacement on Enrollment, 2002-2009

                          Quarter rel. to displacement
                          -2                                     0.0002
                                                                (0.0003)
                          -1                                    0.0011*
                                                                (0.0005)
                          0                                     0.0013*
                                                                (0.0006)
                          1                                    0.0046***
                                                                (0.0008)
                          2                                    0.0071***
                                                                (0.0009)
                          3                                    0.0086***
                                                                (0.0010)
                          4                                    0.0088***
                                                                (0.0011)
                          5                                    0.0089***
                                                                (0.0012)
                          6                                    0.0087***
                                                                (0.0014)
                          7                                    0.0087***
                                                                (0.0015)
                          8                                    0.0090***
                                                                (0.0016)
                          9                                    0.0087***
                                                                (0.0017)
                          10                                   0.0091***
                                                                (0.0018)
                          11                                   0.0088***
                                                                (0.0019)
                          12                                   0.0087***
                                                                (0.0021)
                          Observations                         44,291,188
Results from specification (1). Standard errors in parentheses; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001




                                                 34
                                                              Figure 1: Effect of Displacement on Employment and Earnings

                                                                    Pr(earnings > 0)                                                                                              Log earnings
                                         .1
                                                                                                                                                     0


                                          0
                                                                                                                                                    -.1
 Point estimate




                                                                                                                   Point estimate
                                         -.1
                                                                                                                                                    -.2


                                         -.2                                                                                                        -.3



                                         -.3                                                                                                        -.4
                                               -2        -1         0          1        2           3     4                                               -2        -1          0         1        2             3     4
                                                                Year Relative to Displacement                                                                              Year Relative to Displacement


                                               (a) Probability of Employment                                                                                        (b) Log(earnings)

Note : Figure plots the estimated effect of displacement on a worker's probability of being employed (panel a) and
log of earnings (panel b) in a given quarter compared to a stably employed comparison group (always employed at
same employer). Whiskers (very small) denote 95-percent confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by
worker. Displaced sample is laid off between 2002q1 and 2008q4 (total sample for the paper is 2002-2009).




                                                       Figure 2: Enrollment Rates of Displaced and Non-Displaced Workers

                                  .035                                                                                                     .16
     Enrolled Share Per Quarter




                                   .03
                                                                                                                   Cumulative Enrollment




                                                                                                                                           .14

                                  .025

                                                                                                                                           .12
                                   .02

                                                                                                                                            .1
                                  .015


                                   .01                                                                                                     .08
                                          2003q3            2005q3         2007q3        2009q3          2011q3                                   2003q3            2005q3         2007q3        2009q3              2011q3
                                                            Quarter Relative to Displacement                                                                        Quarter Relative to Displacement

                                                                 Displaced               Non-Displaced                                                                   Displaced                   Non-Displaced
                                         Enrollment rates are four-quarter moving averages                                                       Enrollment rates are four-quarter moving averages



                                                (a) Enrollment (point-in-time)                                                                                 (b) Cumulative Enrollment

Note : Panels (a) and (b) plot the four-quarter moving averages of point-in-time and cumulative enrollment rates,
respectively, for the cohort of workers displaced in 2006q1 and a comparison group attached to the labor force.




                                                                                                              35
                     Figure 3: Cumulative Effect of Displacement on Enrollment, Displaced 2002-2009


                    .015




                     .01
   Point estimate




                    .005




                       0
                                      0                  1                2                                3
                                               Year Relative to Displacement

Note : Figure plots the estimated  ^k 's from equation (1). Whiskers denote 95-percent confidence intervals based on
standard errors clustered by worker. Displaced sample is laid off between 2002q1 and 2009q4. Coefficients with
standard errors are listed in Table 5.




                                                          36
                     Figure 4: Cumulative Effect of Displacement on Enrollment by Industry of Layoff



                    .03


                    .02
   Point estimate




                    .01


                      0


                    -.01


                    -.02
                                      0                  1                2                                3
                                               Year Relative to Displacement

                                     Manufacturing                                     Education & Health
                                     Retail, Transport, Accomm./Food Service           Other


Note : Figure plots the ^k 's from equation (1) estimated separately for workers displaced from employers (or stably
employed at) in manufacturing (23% of displaced and comparison workers), education and health services (24%),
retail, wholesale, transport and warehousing, arts and entertainment, accommodations and food services (20%),
or other industries (33%). Whiskers denote 95-percent confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by
worker. Displaced sample is laid off between 2002q1 and 2009q4. Point estimates and standard errors are listed in
Appendix Table A.3.




                                                           37
Figure 5: Cumulative Effect of Displacement from Manufacturing on Enrollment by Earnings Tercile
within Layoff Firm


                             Displacement Effect on Enrollment
                    .06



                    .04
   Point estimate




                    .02



                     0

                               0                     1                2                                         3
                                           Year Relative to Displacement

                                                Lowest Tercile                Middle Tercile
                                                Highest Tercile


Note : Figure plots the ^k 's from equation (1) estimated separately for displaced manufacturing workers with earning
in the lowest, middle, and highest tercile of their firm at the time of layoff. The comparison workers are similarly split
by wage tercile and include those who were employed at a manufacturing firm for at least three consecutive years.
Whiskers denote 95-percent confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by worker. Displaced sample is
laid off between 2002q1 and 2009q4. Displaced and comparison workers in the lowest, middle, and highest tercile
comprise 20%, 35%, and 45% of the manufacturing sample, respectively. Point estimates and standard errors are
listed in Appendix Table A.4.




                                                           38
Figure 6: Cumulative Effect of Displacement from Manufacturing on Enrollment by Local Labor
Market Proximity to Public Higher Education


                            Displacement Effect on Enrollment
                    .05


                    .04
   Point estimate




                    .03


                    .02


                    .01


                     0
                              0                     1                2                                       3
                                          Year Relative to Displacement

                                            High Access CZ                   Low Access CZ


Note : Figure plots the  ^k 's from equation (1) estimated separately for workers displaced from employers located
in high vs. low college access commuting zones (CZs). Whiskers denote 95-percent confidence intervals based on
standard errors clustered by worker. Displaced sample is laid off between 2002q1 and 2009q4. Point estimates and
standard errors are listed in Appendix Table A.7. "High-access CZs" are those which host seven or more public
institutions of higher education (four-year universities, branch campuses, community colleges, or technical colleges).
Appendix Table B.1 lists each CZ's classification as high- or low-access with respect to public institutions. Workers
displaced in the Parkersburg and Huntington, WV commuting zones are excluded because their CZs only include
one Ohio county. 64% of displaced workers were laid off in high-access CZs and 36% from low-access CZs.




                                                         39
Figure 7: Cumulative Effect of Displacement from Manufacturing on Enrollment by Proximity to
Public and For-Profit Institutions


                            Displacement Effect on Enrollment
                    .08


                    .06
   Point estimate




                    .04


                    .02


                     0

                              0                     1                2                                       3
                                          Year Relative to Displacement

                                   High-Public, High-FP CZ                   High-Public, Low-FP CZ
                                   Low-Public, High-FP CZ                    Low-Public, Low-FP CZ


Note : Figure plots the   ^k 's from equation (1) estimated separately for manufacturing workers displaced from em-
ployers located in commuting zones (CZs) classified by access to both public and for-profit college. CZs are divided
according to public college access as in Figure 6, and then divided by high- and low- for-profit access within these
groups according to locations of for-profits in 1999. "High-access public, high-access for-profit" CZs include Cincin-
nati, Cleveland, and Columbus (blue), representing 43% of the displaced manufacturing sample. "High-access public,
low-access for-profit," including Dayton, Portsmouth, and Toledo (red), represents 21% of the sample. "Low-access
public, high-access for-profit," including Canton, Lorain, and Youngstown (green), represents 22% of the sample.
"Low-access public, low-access for-profit," including Athens, Defiance, Findlay, Lima, Mansfield, Steubenville, Wash-
ington, Wheeling (WV), and Zanesville (yellow), represents 14% of the sample. Workers displaced in the Parkersburg
and Huntington, WV commuting zones are excluded because their CZs only include one Ohio county. Whiskers de-
note 95-percent confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by worker. Displaced sample is laid off
between 2002q1 and 2009q4. Point estimates and standard errors listed in Table A.8.




                                                         40
Appendix

A     Further Results

In Appendix A, we present further results and robustness checks for our paper's analysis.

A.1     Tables Corresponding to Main Body
Tables presenting point estimates and standard errors for regression results presented in Figures 4,
5, 6, and 7 are listed in this section. The tables are Table A.3, A.4, A.7 and A.8, respectively.

A.2     Heterogeneity
As a sensitivity check for our results in Figure 6, we conduct similar analysis at the county rather
than commuting zone level. Specifically, we apply equation (1) when splitting samples according to
whether manufacturing workers were employed (or laid off) in a county with a public community
college (Figure A.5a). A list of community colleges and corresponding counties is provided in
Table B.2. We find that workers displaced in "community college counties" are initially more likely
to enroll than those without a community college in their county. After three years, however,
the estimated effects on cumulative enrollment converge, such roughly 3 per every 100 displaced
manufacturing workers pursue postsecondary training regardless of whether their county is home
to a community college.
    In Figure A.5b, we restrict this sample of displaced and comparison workers to those employed in
counties without 4-year non-branch universities ("main universities" specified in Table B.3). Among
these manufacturing employees for whom enrollment in a nearby 4-year university is less accessible
due to geography, we estimate a larger enrollment response among those laid off in counties without
a community college (4 per every 100 compared to 3 after three post-displacement years). We believe
the results of Figures A.5a and A.5b, taken together, bolster our finding that increased proximity
to public postsecondary institutions does not correlate with higher post-displacement enrollment.


   Beyond heterogeneity explored in the main body of the text, in this section we investigate
whether the effect of displacement on enrollment varied by other characteristics, including calendar
quarter of layoff, firm size, and whether or not a firm shut down operations. Similar to the main
text, we restrict our analysis to the subset of displaced workers laid off from manufacturing firms
and comparison group workers who were employed for at least three years at a manufacturing plant.
   If laid off between October and December, a worker may need to wait almost a full year to
enroll if they want to start at the beginning of a school year, while those displaced between July
and September may be able to start a new program immediately. This difference in season of layoff
may change the individual's cost-benefit assessment and thus lead to differences in enrollment
patterns. We examine this hypothesis in Figure A.2, which applies equation (1) separately to the
workers displaced from manufacturing firms by calendar quarter of layoff and a common group of
comparison manufacturing workers. Note that for this analysis, the quarter of layoff is defined as

                                                41
the last quarter of non-zero earnings at the displacement firm, such that a worker with non-zero
earnings at the firm in Q3 and zero earnings at the firm in Q4 would be considered a Q3 layoff.
The enrollment effects for displaced manufacturing workers are low across the board with limited
seasonal variation. One year after job loss, between 1 and 2 out of every 100 manufacturing workers
has been induced to enroll in public college regardless of calendar-quarter of layoff.
    We also analyze enrollment patterns of workers by layoff firm characteristics, such as employer
size and whether it fully shut down as opposed to implementing a mass layoff. One may speculate
that firm size may have predictive power regarding how many displaced workers ultimately pursue
postsecondary retraining. Historically, certain large firms have partnerships with local commu-
nity colleges that may heighten workers' awareness of retraining options (Johnson, 1996; Roueche
et al., 1995). Moreover, because large firms are subject to the Worker Adjustment and Retraining
Notification (WARN) Act--which requires employers to provide at least 60 days of notice before
plant closure or a mass layoff--affected employees could search for opportunities to enroll before
separating from their job.21
    To investigate this, we classify our displaced and non-displaced comparison samples by size of
employer, designating a "large firm" and "small firm" group and applying equation (1) separately
to each. We allow both 500 workers and 1,000 workers to serve as the cutoff for classification as a
small or large firm. Figure A.3 underscores, however, that the size of the firm is not predictive of
the share of displaced workers who are induced to enroll. In each case, roughly 2.5 per every 100
manufacturing workers enroll as a result of layoff.
    Lastly, we study enrollment effects by firm shutdown status ­ proxied by a firm's unique identifier
disappearing in the employer records or if employment level drops to zero ­ because many individ-
uals' jobless spells end with "recall hires," reemployment at the firm from which they separated
(Fujita and Moscarini, 2017; Albertini and Fairise, 2018). If newly-displaced workers expect to be
recalled by their employers, they may be less likely to seek retraining to change occupations while
jobless.22 In addition, examining firm shutdowns separately from mass layoffs may also address the
identification concern that employers might non-randomly target specific workers for layoffs that
may correlate with these workers' expected enrollment trends.
    We apply equation (1) to the comparison group and the subset of displaced workers who lose
their jobs in firm shutdowns, rather than simply any mass layoff. We classify displaced workers to
have lost their job in a firm shutdown if they were employed within six quarters of a shutdown. We
choose this window (as opposed to classifying only those workers who remain with the firm until the
last period) because, in addition to the fact mass layoffs often occur in the months or years before a
shutdown, many workers quit due to economic distress at the firm in anticipation of an impending
shutdown (Flaaen et al., 2019).23 Figure A.4 compares the baseline estimates from specification (1)
  21
      Specifically, WARN applies to employers with 100 or more employees (excluding new and seasonal workers) to
provide at least 60 calendar days advance written notice of a plant closing and mass layoff affecting 50 or more
employees at a single site of employment.
   22
      According to Handwerker and Mason (2012), the Mass Layoff Statistics program documents that roughly half of
firms which contracted substantially according to administrative data records reported that expected to recall some
workers in the future.
   23
      In the recent case of General Motors' Lordstown Assembly Complex in Lordstown, Ohio, GM first announced
layoffs in November 2016 effective in 2017Q1. In 2018Q2, it announced a second wave of layoffs. Finally, in November
2018 GM announced its intention to close the Lordstown plant, which was idled in March 2019 (Maher, 2018; Lendel
et al., 2019). For those Lordstown employees who left GM several months before March, while the proximate reason
for separation may have been finding a new job, their ultimate reason for leaving was the firm distress and impending


                                                         42
for the entire displaced sample with those for the subset of workers laid off in a firm shutdown (26%
of all displaced manufacturing workers). Similar to firm size, whether a firm shut down operations
does not predict whether a worker subsequently enrolls in a public college.

A.3     Other Measures and Specifications for Enrollment Effect
As mentioned in Section 4, we estimate the effect of job displacement on postsecondary enrollment
with variations of specification (1) as a robustness check.
   The following equation is similar to (1) but omits worker-specific linear time trends.
                                                            12
                       cumul enrollit = i + t + Wit  +            k · Ditk + it                   (2)
                                                           k=-2


Figure A.6 presents the point estimates and 95% confidence intervals resulting from equation (2)
applied to the overall sample of displaced and comparison workers. Three years post-layoff, this
measure estimates that 2.5 per every 100 displaced workers subsequently enrolls in college compared
to just 1 in our baseline estimates from equation (1).
    We use transcript information to construct a cumulative measure of college credits attained,
cumul creditit , as a further robustness check for our finding that displacement has a limited but
positive effect on public college enrollment. While cumul enrollit only assumes the values of 0 or
1, cumul creditit is a cumulative and unbounded above.
                                                                  12
                   cumul creditit = i + t + i · t + Wit  +              k · Ditk + it             (3)
                                                                 k=-2


Figure A.7 presents the results of equation (3) applied to the overall displaced and comparison
sample. While we estimate virtually no effect in the quarters leading up to job loss, just one year
after separation, roughly 12 college credits have been attained by displaced workers for every 100
laid off. After three years, this effect rises to over 30 credits. Figure A.7 suggests a reasonable
degree of enrollment persistence. However, given a typical college course amounts to 3 credits, we
consider this further evidence that the effect of displacement on enrollment is fairly limited.
    Lastly, we use a shorter time horizon and a point-in-time measure of enrollment, enrollit , as a
dependent variable in equation 4. Figure A.8 presents the results.
                                                            12
                       enrollit = i + t + i · t + Wit  +          k · Ditk + it                   (4)
                                                           k=-2

While displacement does not have a statistically significant effect on postsecondary enrollment
during the calendar-quarter of layoff, we estimate a positive effect in the following quarters. The
effect peaks in the third full post-layoff quarter and fades to near-zero after two years. Using the
point-in-time enrollment measure, we estimate that three quarters after layoff, 1 worker for every
100 displaced enrolled was enrolled in college as a result.


shutdown.


                                                 43
                 Table A.1: Industry of Displacement by Calendar Quarter of Layoff

                                                               Quarter of Displacement
                                                             1st    2nd      3rd     4th
                 Industry
                 Construction, Utilities, Mining          0.087     0.120     0.115     0.118
                 Manufacturing                            0.403     0.297     0.329     0.201
                 Retail Trade                             0.098     0.126     0.081     0.147
                 Transportation & Warehousing             0.016     0.039     0.033     0.019
                 Finance, Insurance, Real Estate          0.046     0.038     0.052     0.215
                 Educational & Health Services            0.111     0.081     0.078     0.061
                 Hospitality & Food Services              0.029     0.046     0.064     0.047
                 Other                                    0.210     0.253     0.248     0.192
                 N                                       15,151    15,442    15,095     22,859
Note: Table lists the share of workers displaced from different industries during a given calendar quarter. The 1st
quarter corresponds to a mass layoff during January­March. The 2nd quarter is April­June, the 3rd quarter is
July­September, and the 4th quarter is October­December.




                                                        44
           Table A.2: Displaced Worker Descriptive Statistics by Firm Shutdown Status

                                                           Displaced in Firm Shutdown
                                                             Yes            No
                  Industry of Layoff
                  Construction, Utilities, Mining           0.112             0.111
                  Manufacturing                             0.278             0.297
                  Retail Trade                              0.268             0.063
                  Transportation & Warehousing              0.018             0.028
                  Finance, Insurance, Real Estate           0.044             0.129
                  Educational & Health Services             0.072             0.083
                  Hospitality & Food Services               0.041             0.048
                  Other                                     0.167             0.241
                  Yearly Pre-Layoff Earnings
                  1-4 Quarters Before ($)                   44,837           51,746
                                                           (34,619)         (40,398)
                  Firm Characteristics
                  Average Number of Employees               846              1,463
                  Std. Dev. of Yearly Earnings ($)         30,582            39,923
                  Median Annual Earnings ($)               32,950            43,957
                  N                                        17,281            51,266
Note: Table lists the share of workers displaced between 2002q1 and 2009q4 from different industries by whether
or not they were laid off in a firm shutdown. Standard deviation of pre-displacement earnings is in parentheses.
Earnings are in inflation-adjusted to USD$2012 using the CPI-U.




                                                      45
          Table A.3: Cumulative Effect of Displacement on Enrollment by Layoff Industry

                                       Manufacturing     Educ/Health     RWTAEFA           Other
     Quarter rel. to displacement
     -2                                    0.0000            -0.0012        0.0003         0.0002
                                          (0.0005)          (0.0013)       (0.0007)       (0.0006)
     -1                                    0.0011            0.0008          0.0009         0.0006
                                          (0.0007)          (0.0020)       (0.0010)       (0.0008)
     0                                    0.0024**            0.0011         0.0006         0.0001
                                          (0.0009)          (0.0026)       (0.0013)       (0.0010)
     1                                   0.0096***            0.0034       0.0031*          0.0007
                                          (0.0013)          (0.0032)       (0.0016)       (0.0013)
     2                                   0.0167***            0.0044       0.0037*          0.0010
                                          (0.0015)          (0.0037)       (0.0018)       (0.0015)
     3                                   0.0195***            0.0040       0.0043*          0.0020
                                          (0.0017)          (0.0042)       (0.0021)       (0.0017)
     4                                   0.0211***            0.0027        0.0036         0.0017
                                          (0.0018)          (0.0046)       (0.0023)       (0.0019)
     5                                   0.0219***            0.0019        0.0037         0.0008
                                          (0.0020)          (0.0051)       (0.0026)       (0.0021)
     6                                   0.0223***            0.0012        0.0026         0.0007
                                          (0.0021)          (0.0056)       (0.0028)       (0.0023)
     7                                   0.0236***            0.0005        0.0020         -0.0006
                                          (0.0023)          (0.0061)       (0.0031)       (0.0025)
     8                                   0.0242***           -0.0005         0.0013        -0.0001
                                          (0.0024)          (0.0066)       (0.0033)       (0.0028)
     9                                   0.0250***           -0.0019         0.0008        -0.0014
                                          (0.0026)          (0.0070)       (0.0036)       (0.0030)
     10                                  0.0259***           -0.0019        0.0002         -0.0012
                                          (0.0027)          (0.0075)       (0.0038)       (0.0032)
     11                                  0.0264***           -0.0021        -0.0010        -0.0022
                                          (0.0029)          (0.0080)       (0.0041)       (0.0034)
     12                                  0.0270***           -0.0033        -0.0020        -0.0026
                                          (0.0030)          (0.0085)       (0.0043)       (0.0036)
     Observations                        10,362,772       10,450,584       8,992,820    14,485,012
Note : Standard errors in parentheses; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001; RWTAEFA: Retail, Wholesale,
Transportation & Warehousing, Arts & Entertainment and Food & Accommodation




                                                   46
Table A.4: Cumulative Effect of Displacement from Manufacturing on Enrollment by Within-Firm
Tercile of Earnings

                   Quarter rel. to displacement          Lowest        Middle        Highest
                   -2                                    0.0002    -0.0002           -0.0000
                                                        (0.0009)  (0.0008)          (0.0008)
                   -1                                   0.0038*     0.0009           -0.0004
                                                        (0.0016)  (0.0012)          (0.0011)
                   0                                    0.0064**    0.0026           -0.0004
                                                        (0.0020)  (0.0015)          (0.0014)
                   1                                   0.0174*** 0.0109***            0.0034
                                                        (0.0028)  (0.0021)          (0.0018)
                   2                                   0.0295*** 0.0174***         0.0080***
                                                        (0.0034)  (0.0025)          (0.0022)
                   3                                   0.0366*** 0.0199***         0.0087***
                                                        (0.0039)  (0.0028)          (0.0025)
                   4                                   0.0392*** 0.0209***         0.0101***
                                                        (0.0041)  (0.0030)          (0.0028)
                   5                                   0.0427*** 0.0209***         0.0101***
                                                        (0.0044)  (0.0032)          (0.0030)
                   6                                   0.0430*** 0.0222***         0.0098**
                                                        (0.0047)  (0.0035)          (0.0032)
                   7                                   0.0440*** 0.0236***         0.0112**
                                                        (0.0049)  (0.0038)          (0.0035)
                   8                                   0.0439*** 0.0247***         0.0119**
                                                        (0.0051)  (0.0040)          (0.0038)
                   9                                   0.0449*** 0.0256***         0.0124**
                                                        (0.0054)  (0.0042)          (0.0041)
                   10                                  0.0451*** 0.0265***         0.0138**
                                                        (0.0057)  (0.0045)          (0.0043)
                   11                                  0.0461*** 0.0272***         0.0138**
                                                        (0.0059)  (0.0047)          (0.0046)
                   12                                  0.0471*** 0.0277***         0.0143**
                                                        (0.0062)  (0.0050)          (0.0049)
                   Observations                        2,212,479      4,000,350     5,192,558
Note : Standard errors in parentheses; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001; Samples are divided by within-firm
tercile of earnings in 2005Q1 (for comparison group) or in the quarter prior to displacement (for displaced group).




                                                        47
Table A.5: Cumulative Effect of Displacement from Manufacturing on Enrollment by Earnings
Relative to Firm Median

                     Quarter rel. to displacement        Below Median       Above Median
                     -2                                        0.0003            -0.0001
                                                              (0.0007)          (0.0006)
                     -1                                       0.0027*             0.0000
                                                              (0.0012)          (0.0009)
                     0                                        0.0048**            0.0006
                                                              (0.0015)          (0.0011)
                     1                                       0.0155***         0.0052***
                                                              (0.0021)          (0.0015)
                     2                                       0.0249***         0.0106***
                                                              (0.0025)          (0.0019)
                     3                                       0.0298***         0.0118***
                                                              (0.0028)          (0.0021)
                     4                                       0.0311***         0.0136***
                                                              (0.0030)          (0.0023)
                     5                                       0.0335***         0.0133***
                                                              (0.0032)          (0.0025)
                     6                                       0.0345***         0.0133***
                                                              (0.0034)          (0.0027)
                     7                                       0.0354***         0.0149***
                                                              (0.0036)          (0.0029)
                     8                                       0.0352***         0.0162***
                                                              (0.0038)          (0.0031)
                     9                                       0.0362***         0.0168***
                                                              (0.0040)          (0.0034)
                     10                                      0.0366***         0.0180***
                                                              (0.0042)          (0.0036)
                     11                                      0.0374***         0.0183***
                                                              (0.0045)          (0.0038)
                     12                                      0.0380***         0.0189***
                                                              (0.0047)          (0.0040)
                     Observations                            4,158,847         7,246,640
Note : Standard errors in parentheses; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001; Samples are divided by within-firm
tercile of earnings in 2005Q1 (for comparison group) or in the quarter prior to displacement (for displaced group).




                                                        48
Table A.6: Cumulative Effect of Displacement from Manufacturing on Enrollment by Within-Firm
Quartile of Earnings

    Quarter rel. to displacement        Lowest Quartile      2nd Quartile      3rd Quartile     4th Quartile
    -2                                       0.0003              0.0000           -0.0001          -0.0002
                                            (0.0013)            (0.0009)         (0.0009)         (0.0009)
    -1                                       0.0031              0.0022           0.0006           -0.0006
                                            (0.0020)            (0.0014)         (0.0013)         (0.0012)
    0                                       0.0066*             0.0035*           0.0022           -0.0011
                                            (0.0026)            (0.0018)         (0.0017)         (0.0016)
    1                                      0.0175***           0.0141***        0.0081***           0.0021
                                            (0.0035)            (0.0026)         (0.0022)         (0.0021)
    2                                      0.0308***           0.0210***        0.0142***         0.0068**
                                            (0.0044)            (0.0031)         (0.0027)         (0.0026)
    3                                      0.0372***           0.0251***        0.0165***          0.0070*
                                            (0.0049)            (0.0034)         (0.0030)         (0.0029)
    4                                      0.0399***           0.0255***        0.0190***          0.0081*
                                            (0.0053)            (0.0036)         (0.0033)         (0.0033)
    5                                      0.0427***           0.0276***        0.0182***          0.0084*
                                            (0.0056)            (0.0039)         (0.0035)         (0.0036)
    6                                      0.0430***           0.0291***        0.0186***          0.0078*
                                            (0.0060)            (0.0042)         (0.0037)         (0.0039)
    7                                      0.0438***           0.0300***        0.0207***          0.0090*
                                            (0.0063)            (0.0044)         (0.0040)         (0.0043)
    8                                      0.0438***           0.0297***        0.0229***          0.0093*
                                            (0.0066)            (0.0047)         (0.0043)         (0.0046)
    9                                      0.0447***           0.0308***        0.0243***           0.0091
                                            (0.0070)            (0.0049)         (0.0046)         (0.0049)
    10                                     0.0451***           0.0313***        0.0267***          0.0092
                                            (0.0073)            (0.0052)         (0.0048)         (0.0052)
    11                                     0.0453***           0.0324***        0.0273***          0.0092
                                            (0.0077)            (0.0055)         (0.0051)         (0.0056)
    12                                     0.0451***           0.0336***        0.0283***          0.0095
                                            (0.0080)            (0.0058)         (0.0054)         (0.0059)
    Observations                            1,460,934          2,697,813        3,374,825         3,871,815
Note : Standard errors in parentheses; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001; Samples are divided by within-firm
tercile of earnings in 2005Q1 (for comparison group) or in the quarter prior to displacement (for displaced group).




                                                        49
Table A.7: Cumulative Effect of Displacement from Manufacturing on Enrollment by Local Labor
Market Proximity to Public Higher Education

                        Quarter rel. to displacement         High-Access     Low-Access
                        -2                                      -0.0004         0.0013
                                                               (0.0007)        (0.0007)
                        -1                                       0.0005        0.0029**
                                                               (0.0010)        (0.0011)
                        0                                        0.0021       0.0037**
                                                               (0.0012)        (0.0013)
                        1                                     0.0108***       0.0091***
                                                               (0.0017)        (0.0018)
                        2                                     0.0184***       0.0168***
                                                               (0.0021)        (0.0023)
                        3                                     0.0213***       0.0198***
                                                               (0.0023)        (0.0025)
                        4                                     0.0226***       0.0215***
                                                               (0.0025)        (0.0028)
                        5                                     0.0232***       0.0229***
                                                               (0.0027)        (0.0030)
                        6                                     0.0233***       0.0244***
                                                               (0.0029)        (0.0032)
                        7                                     0.0233***       0.0287***
                                                               (0.0031)        (0.0035)
                        8                                     0.0237***       0.0303***
                                                               (0.0033)        (0.0037)
                        9                                     0.0237***       0.0327***
                                                               (0.0035)        (0.0039)
                        10                                    0.0242***       0.0349***
                                                               (0.0037)        (0.0042)
                        11                                    0.0245***       0.0360***
                                                               (0.0039)        (0.0044)
                        12                                    0.0254***       0.0369***
                                                               (0.0041)        (0.0046)
                        Observations                          8,233,008       3,844,001
Note : Standard errors in parentheses; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001; Samples are divided by within-firm
tercile of earnings in 2005Q1 (for comparison group) or in the quarter prior to displacement (for displaced group).




                                                        50
Table A.8: Cumulative Effect of Displacement from Manufacturing on Enrollment by Local Labor
Market Proximity to Public and For-Profit Higher Education

               Quarter rel.         High-Public      High-Public      Low-Public      Low-Public
               to displacement       High-FP          Low-FP           High-FP         Low-FP
               -2                       -0.0001         -0.0015         0.0006          0.0024
                                       (0.0006)        (0.0016)        (0.0008)        (0.0014)
               -1                       0.0013          -0.0018         0.0020         0.0043*
                                       (0.0009)        (0.0021)        (0.0013)        (0.0019)
               0                       0.0036**         -0.0017         0.0031         0.0048*
                                       (0.0013)        (0.0027)        (0.0016)        (0.0022)
               1                      0.0098***       0.0120**         0.0053**       0.0149***
                                       (0.0018)        (0.0037)        (0.0020)        (0.0033)
               2                      0.0130***       0.0285***        0.0072**       0.0316***
                                       (0.0020)        (0.0046)        (0.0024)        (0.0044)
               3                      0.0151***       0.0327***        0.0083**       0.0375***
                                       (0.0023)        (0.0051)        (0.0027)        (0.0049)
               4                      0.0156***       0.0358***        0.0098**       0.0397***
                                       (0.0025)        (0.0055)        (0.0031)        (0.0052)
               5                      0.0169***       0.0350***        0.0110**       0.0413***
                                       (0.0027)        (0.0059)        (0.0034)        (0.0055)
               6                      0.0173***       0.0343***       0.0125***       0.0429***
                                       (0.0028)        (0.0063)        (0.0038)        (0.0058)
               7                      0.0170***       0.0348***       0.0192***       0.0435***
                                       (0.0030)        (0.0067)        (0.0042)        (0.0060)
               8                      0.0180***       0.0337***       0.0207***       0.0457***
                                       (0.0032)        (0.0072)        (0.0045)        (0.0063)
               9                      0.0185***       0.0325***       0.0234***       0.0476***
                                       (0.0034)        (0.0076)        (0.0049)        (0.0067)
               10                     0.0199***       0.0311***       0.0261***       0.0489***
                                       (0.0036)        (0.0080)        (0.0052)        (0.0070)
               11                     0.0209***       0.0299***       0.0270***       0.0504***
                                       (0.0039)        (0.0084)        (0.0055)        (0.0073)
               12                     0.0225***       0.0293***       0.0282***       0.0510***
                                       (0.0041)        (0.0088)        (0.0057)        (0.0076)
               Observations           5,874,402        2,358,606       2,257,531       1,586,470
Note : Standard errors in parentheses; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001; Samples are divided by within-firm
tercile of earnings in 2005Q1 (for comparison group) or in the quarter prior to displacement (for displaced group).




                                                        51
Table A.9: Cumulative Effect of Displacement from Manufacturing on Enrollment by Calendar
Quarter of Layoff

           Quarter rel. to displacement         Jan-Mar        Apr-Jun        Jul-Sep        Oct-Dec
           -2                                    -0.0016        -0.0017        -0.0011        -0.0017
                                                (0.0009)       (0.0015)       (0.0012)       (0.0011)
           -1                                    -0.0016        -0.0022        0.0013         -0.0013
                                                (0.0014)       (0.0019)       (0.0019)       (0.0015)
           0                                     -0.0019        -0.0025         0.0007        0.0015
                                                (0.0017)       (0.0023)       (0.0022)       (0.0021)
           1                                    0.0069**         0.0016       0.0080**       0.0055*
                                                (0.0024)       (0.0029)       (0.0030)       (0.0026)
           2                                   0.0112***       0.0111**       0.0097**      0.0139***
                                                (0.0028)       (0.0035)       (0.0034)       (0.0032)
           3                                   0.0141***       0.0112**      0.0125***      0.0155***
                                                (0.0032)       (0.0038)       (0.0038)       (0.0036)
           4                                   0.0137***       0.0134**       0.0127**      0.0171***
                                                (0.0035)       (0.0042)       (0.0041)       (0.0040)
           5                                   0.0131***       0.0138**       0.0131**      0.0170***
                                                (0.0038)       (0.0045)       (0.0045)       (0.0043)
           6                                    0.0124**       0.0137**       0.0123*       0.0177***
                                                (0.0041)       (0.0050)       (0.0049)       (0.0046)
           7                                   0.0152***       0.0139**        0.0108*      0.0179***
                                                (0.0045)       (0.0054)       (0.0053)       (0.0050)
           8                                    0.0147**        0.0133*         0.0101      0.0188***
                                                (0.0048)       (0.0057)       (0.0056)       (0.0054)
           9                                    0.0150**        0.0131*         0.0100       0.0185**
                                                (0.0051)       (0.0061)       (0.0060)       (0.0057)
           10                                  0.0147**          0.0117         0.0094      0.0210***
                                                (0.0054)       (0.0065)       (0.0064)       (0.0061)
           11                                   0.0135*          0.0106        0.0098       0.0217***
                                                (0.0057)       (0.0068)       (0.0068)       (0.0064)
           12                                   0.0137*          0.0089        0.0084       0.0234***
                                                (0.0060)       (0.0072)       (0.0071)       (0.0068)
           Observations                        10,327,405    10,301,977     10,302,310     10,308,711
Note : Standard errors in parentheses; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001; Samples are divided by within-firm
tercile of earnings in 2005Q1 (for comparison group) or in the quarter prior to displacement (for displaced group).




                                                        52
Table A.10: Cumulative Effect of Displacement from Manufacturing on Enrollment by Firm Size

                  Quarter rel. to displacement        < 500 employees  500 employees
                  -2                                        0.0006                -0.0005
                                                           (0.0007)              (0.0007)
                  -1                                       0.0022*                0.0002
                                                           (0.0010)              (0.0010)
                  0                                        0.0028*                 0.0019
                                                           (0.0012)              (0.0013)
                  1                                       0.0079***             0.0107***
                                                           (0.0016)              (0.0018)
                  2                                       0.0130***             0.0194***
                                                           (0.0020)              (0.0022)
                  3                                       0.0169***             0.0212***
                                                           (0.0023)              (0.0024)
                  4                                       0.0180***             0.0232***
                                                           (0.0025)              (0.0026)
                  5                                       0.0196***             0.0233***
                                                           (0.0027)              (0.0028)
                  6                                       0.0206***             0.0231***
                                                           (0.0029)              (0.0030)
                  7                                       0.0209***             0.0251***
                                                           (0.0031)              (0.0033)
                  8                                       0.0217***             0.0255***
                                                           (0.0033)              (0.0035)
                  9                                       0.0220***             0.0266***
                                                           (0.0035)              (0.0037)
                  10                                      0.0230***             0.0272***
                                                           (0.0037)              (0.0039)
                  11                                      0.0236***             0.0274***
                                                           (0.0039)              (0.0041)
                  12                                      0.0234***             0.0286***
                                                           (0.0041)              (0.0043)
                  Observations                               4,595,077           6,810,410
Note : Standard errors in parentheses; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001; Samples are divided by within-firm
tercile of earnings in 2005Q1 (for comparison group) or in the quarter prior to displacement (for displaced group).




                                                        53
Table A.11: Cumulative Effect of Displacement from Manufacturing on Enrollment by Firm Size

                Quarter rel. to displacement        < 1,000 employees  1,000 employees
                -2                                         0.0005                  -0.0005
                                                          (0.0006)                (0.0008)
                -1                                        0.0019*                   0.0001
                                                          (0.0009)                (0.0011)
                0                                         0.0027*                  0.0020
                                                          (0.0011)                (0.0015)
                1                                        0.0092***               0.0099***
                                                          (0.0015)                (0.0020)
                2                                        0.0163***               0.0169***
                                                          (0.0019)                (0.0024)
                3                                        0.0198***               0.0190***
                                                          (0.0021)                (0.0027)
                4                                        0.0215***               0.0203***
                                                          (0.0023)                (0.0029)
                5                                        0.0234***               0.0199***
                                                          (0.0025)                (0.0031)
                6                                        0.0243***               0.0197***
                                                          (0.0027)                (0.0034)
                7                                        0.0246***               0.0220***
                                                          (0.0028)                (0.0036)
                8                                        0.0251***               0.0227***
                                                          (0.0030)                (0.0039)
                9                                        0.0253***               0.0240***
                                                          (0.0032)                (0.0041)
                10                                       0.0261***               0.0247***
                                                          (0.0034)                (0.0044)
                11                                       0.0266***               0.0250***
                                                          (0.0035)                (0.0046)
                12                                       0.0264***               0.0265***
                                                          (0.0037)                (0.0049)
                Observations                             6,649,260                4,756,227
Note : Standard errors in parentheses; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001; Samples are divided by within-firm
tercile of earnings in 2005Q1 (for comparison group) or in the quarter prior to displacement (for displaced group).




                                                        54
Table A.12: Cumulative Effect of Displacement from Manufacturing Firm Shutdown on Enrollment

           Quarter rel. to displacement           All Displaced               Displaced in
                                               from Manufacturing        Manufacturing Shutdown
           -2                                          0.0000                       -0.0004
                                                      (0.0005)                     (0.0011)
           -1                                          0.0011                       -0.0000
                                                      (0.0007)                     (0.0015)
           0                                          0.0024**                      0.0013
                                                      (0.0009)                     (0.0019)
           1                                         0.0096***                     0.0072**
                                                      (0.0012)                     (0.0025)
           2                                         0.0167***                    0.0184***
                                                      (0.0015)                     (0.0032)
           3                                         0.0195***                    0.0197***
                                                      (0.0017)                     (0.0034)
           4                                         0.0211***                    0.0199***
                                                      (0.0018)                     (0.0037)
           5                                         0.0219***                    0.0199***
                                                      (0.0020)                     (0.0040)
           6                                         0.0223***                    0.0202***
                                                      (0.0021)                     (0.0043)
           7                                         0.0236***                    0.0209***
                                                      (0.0023)                     (0.0046)
           8                                         0.0243***                    0.0218***
                                                      (0.0024)                     (0.0049)
           9                                         0.0250***                    0.0216***
                                                      (0.0026)                     (0.0052)
           10                                        0.0259***                    0.0227***
                                                      (0.0027)                     (0.0055)
           11                                        0.0264***                    0.0230***
                                                      (0.0029)                     (0.0058)
           12                                        0.0270***                    0.0249***
                                                      (0.0030)                     (0.0061)
           Observations                              11,405,487                   10,312,303
Note : Standard errors in parentheses; * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001; Samples are divided by within-firm
tercile of earnings in 2005Q1 (for comparison group) or in the quarter prior to displacement (for displaced group).




                                                        55
Figure A.1: Cumulative Effect of Displacement from Manufacturing on Enrollment by Earnings
Percentile

                                            Displacement Effect on Enrollment
                                      .05


                                      .04
                   Point estimate




                                      .03


                                      .02


                                      .01


                                       0
                                            0                    1                2                     3
                                                       Year Relative to Displacement

                                                Below Firm's Median Wage     Above Firm's Median Wage



                                                     (a) Above/Below Median


                                            Displacement Effect on Enrollment
                                      .06



                                      .04
                     Point estimate




                                      .02



                                        0

                                             0                   1                2                     3
                                                       Year Relative to Displacement

                                                     1st (Lowest) Quartile   2nd Quartile
                                                     3rd Quartile            4th (Highest) Quartile



                                                             (b) Quartile
Note : Figures plot the estimated ^k 's from equation (1) split by manufacturing workers' percentile of earnings within
the firm. Panel (a) splits workers by earnings relative to the median, and panel (b) split workers by quartiles.
Whiskers denote 95-percent confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by worker. Displaced sample is
laid off between 2002q1 and 2009q4. Point estimates and standard errors are listed in Appendix Tables A.5 and A.6.

                                                                    56
Figure A.2: Cumulative Effect of Displacement from Manufacturing on Enrollment by Quarter of
Layoff


                             Displacement Effect on Enrollment
                      .04


                      .03
     Point estimate




                      .02


                      .01


                        0


                      -.01
                               0                    1                2                                   3
                                          Year Relative to Displacement

                                               Displaced Q1                Displaced Q2
                                               Displaced Q3                Displaced Q4


Note : Figure plots the estimated ^k 's from equation (1) for the sample employed by or displaced from manufacturing
firms split by calendar quarter of layoff. 30% of the displaced sample was laid off in the first quarter (Jan-Mar),
22% in the second quarter (Apr-Jun), 23% in the third quarter (Jul-Sep), and 25% in the fourth quarter (Oct-Dec).
Whiskers denote 95-percent confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by worker. Displaced sample is
laid off between 2002q1 and 2009q4. Point estimates and standard errors are listed in Appendix Table A.9.




                                                        57
 Figure A.3: Cumulative Effect of Displacement from Manufacturing on Enrollment by Firm Size

                                            Displacement Effect on Enrollment
                                      .04


                                      .03
                   Point estimate




                                      .02


                                      .01


                                       0

                                            0                   1                2                    3
                                                      Year Relative to Displacement

                                                   Small firm (< 500 emp)    Large firm (500+ emp)



                                                 (a) Firm Split:  500 employees


                                            Displacement Effect on Enrollment
                                      .04


                                      .03
                     Point estimate




                                      .02


                                      .01


                                        0

                                             0                   1                2                   3
                                                       Year Relative to Displacement

                                                  Small firm (< 1000 emp)    Large firm (1000+ emp)



                                             (b) Firm Split:  1,000 employees
Note : Figures plot the estimated   ^k 's from equation (1) split by the size of firm from which manufacturing workers
were laid off. In panel (a), a large firm is an employer with more than 500 employees at its maximum size between
2002 and 2009. In panel (b), the cutoff is 1,000 employees. 60% (42%) of displaced manufacturing workers in
our sample were laid off from a firm with more than 500 (1,000) workers. Whiskers denote 95-percent confidence
intervals based on standard errors clustered by worker. Displaced sample is laid off between 2002q1 and 2009q4.
Point estimates and standard errors are listed in Appendix Tables A.10 and A.11.
                                                                   58
Figure A.4: Cumulative Effect of Displacement in Manufacturing Firm Shutdown on Enrollment


                      .04



                      .03
     Point estimate




                      .02



                      .01



                       0

                             0                    1                2                                   3
                                        Year Relative to Displacement

                                       All Displaced              Displaced from Shutdown


Note : Figure plots the estimated ^k 's from equation (1) for the overall displaced sample (blue) and workers who
were displaced in a firm shutdown (red), both compared to a non-displaced comparison sample. 26% of displaced
manufacturing employees were laid off in a shutdown, defined as separating within 6 quarters of a firm's closing.
Whiskers denote 95-percent confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by worker. Displaced sample is
laid off between 2002q1 and 2009q4. Point estimates and standard errors are listed in Appendix Table A.12.




                                                       59
Figure A.5: Cumulative Effect of Displacement from Manufacturing on Enrollment by County-Level
Community College Proximity

                                                 Displacement Effect on Enrollment
                                      .04


                                      .03
                   Point estimate




                                      .02


                                      .01


                                       0

                                                  0                  1                2                   3
                                                           Year Relative to Displacement

                                                  Community College County      Non-Community College County



                                             (a) County with and without Community College


                                                  Displacement Effect on Enrollment
                                      .06



                                      .04
                     Point estimate




                                      .02



                                        0



                                      -.02
                                                   0                  1                2                  3
                                                            Year Relative to Displacement

                                                         CC County, no Univ     Non-CC County, no Univ



                  (b) County with or without Community College (no 4-year University)
Note : Figures plot the estimated ^k 's from equation (1) split by whether a comparison or displaced manufacturing
worker is employed in a county with a public community college. In panel (a), we include displaced and comparison
from all 88 Ohio counties. In panel (b), we restrict to those workers in counties without a 4-year university ("main
universities" specified in Table B.3). Whiskers denote 95-percent confidence intervals based on standard errors
clustered by worker. Displaced sample is laid off between 2002q1 and 2009q4.
                                                                       60
 Figure A.6: Cumulative Effect of Displacement on Enrollment, no Worker-Specific Time-Trends

                                        .03



                                       .025
                      Point estimate


                                        .02



                                       .015



                                        .01



                                       .005
                                                  0              1                2         3
                                                       Year Relative to Displacement

Note : Figure plots the estimated  ^k 's from equation (2), which is a modified version of equation (1) which omits
worker-specific time trends, for the overall displaced sample and comparison sample. Whiskers denote 95-percent
confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by worker. Displaced sample is laid off between 2002q1 and
2009q4.


       Figure A.7: Effect of Displacement on Enrollment as Measured by Cumulative Credits

                                       .4




                                       .3
                      Point estimate




                                       .2




                                       .1




                                       0
                                              0                1                 2          3
                                                      Year Relative to Displacement

Note : Figure plots the estimated ^k 's from equation (3), which uses a measure of cumulative college credits earned as
a dependent variable. Whiskers denote 95-percent confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by worker.
Displaced sample is laid off between 2002q1 and 2009q4.



                                                                61
                               Figure A.8: Effect of Displacement on Point-in-Time Enrollment




                        .008



                        .006
       Point estimate




                        .004



                        .002



                          0
                                              0                        1                              2
                                                  Year Relative to Displacement

Note : Figure plots the estimated   ^k 's from equation (4), a specification with a point-in-time enrollment measure
as the dependent variable. Whiskers denote 95-percent confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered by
worker. Displaced sample is laid off between 2002q1 and 2009q4.




                                                            62
B      Higher Education in Ohio
Enrollment records for this study come from the Ohio Higher Education Information (HEI) system
and cover each of Ohio's public higher education institutions. Table B.1 lists each commuting zone,
the number of counties it contains, and the number of 2-year public, 4-year public, and for-profit
higher education institutions. The community colleges and universities are listed, along with their
locations, in Tables B.2 and B.3.


                Table B.1: Ohio Higher Education Availability by Commuting Zone

                               # Counties        Public        2-Year         4-Year       For-Profit
    Commuting Zone Name          in CZ        Institutions   Public Inst.   Public Inst.    Colleges
    High-Public, High-For-Profit
    Cincinnati                       6             9              5              4            23
    Cleveland                        7             11             7              4            51
    Columbus                         9             10             3              7            22
    High-Public, Low-For-Profit
    Dayton                           9             7              3              4            14
    Portsmouth                       5             8              2              6             4
    Toledo                           5             7              5              2             7
    Low-Public, High-For-Profit
    Canton                           7             5              1              4             5
    Lorain                           3             2              1              1             3
    Youngstown                       3             4              0              4            14
    Low-Public, Low-For-Profit
    Athens                           3             3              1              2             1
    Defiance                         3             1              1              0             0
    Findlay                          5             5              4              1             2
    Lima                             5             3              0              3             1
    Mansfield                        5             4              2              2             1
    Washington                       3             1              1              0             0
    Wheeling, WV                     2             2              1              1             0
    Zanesville                       5             3              2              1             1
Note : Comparison and displaced workers employed in the Parkersburg, WV and Huntingon, WV commuting zones
are excluded from the geographic analysis because these CZs only include one Ohio county.




                                                   63
                               Table B.2: Ohio Community Colleges

                                                                                   University in County
School                                City                         County          Main       Branch
COTC­Coshocton Campus           Coshocton              Coshocton
COTC­Knox Campus                Mount Vernon           Knox
COTC­Pataskala Campus           Pataskala              Franklin
CSCC­Delaware Campus            Delaware               Delaware
Cincinnati State Technical & CC Cincinnati             Hamilton
Clark State­Greene Center       Beakercreek            Greene
Clark State CC                  Springfield            Clark
Columbus State CC               Columbus               Franklin
Cuyahoga CC                     Cleveland              Cuyahoga
Edison­Darke County CC          Greenville             Darke
Edison CC                       Piqua                  Miami
Hocking­Logan Campus            Logan                  Hocking
Hocking­Perry Campus            New Lexington          Perry
Hocking College                 Nelsonville            Athens
Lakeland CC                     Kirtland               Lake
Lorain County CC                Elyria                 Lorain
Northwest State CC              Archbold               Fulton
Owens ­Findlay campus           Findlay                Hancock
Owens CC                        Perrysburg             Wood
SSCC­Fayette Campus             Washington Court House Fayette
SSCC­North Campus               Wilmington             Clinton
SSCC­South Campus               Sardinia               Brown
Sinclair CC                     Dayton                 Montgomery
Southern State CC               Hillsboro              Highland
Terra State CC                  Fremont                Sandusky
Washington State CC             Marietta               Washington
         Note : COTC = Central Ohio Technical College; SSCC = Southern State Community College




                                                  64
              Table B.3: Ohio Four-Year Colleges and University

                                                                  Comm. Coll.
School                           City             County           in County
Main Universities
Bowling Green State University   Bowling Green    Wood
Central State University         Wilberforce      Greene
Cleveland State University       Cleveland        Cuyahoga
Kent State University            Kent             Portage
Miami University                 Oxford           Butler
Ohio University                  Athens           Athens
Shawnee State University         Portsmouth       Scioto
The Ohio State University        Columbus         Franklin
University of Akron              Akron            Summit
University of Cincinnati         Cincinnati       Hamilton
University of Toledo             Toledo           Lucas
Wright State University          Dayton           Greene
Youngstown State University      Youngstown       Mahoning
Branch Universities
Bowling Green State University   Huron             Erie
Kent State University            Ashtabula         Ashtabula
Kent State University            East Liverpool    Columbiana
Kent State University            New Philadelphia Tuscarawas
Kent State University            Canton            Stark
Kent State University            Burton            Geauga
Kent State University            Salem             Columbiana
Kent State University            Warren            Trumbull
Miami University                 Hamilton          Butler
Miami University                 Middletown        Butler
Ohio University                  Chillicothe       Ross
Ohio University                  Zanesville        Muskingum
Ohio University                  Lancaster         Fairfield
Ohio University                  Ironton           Pike
Ohio University                  Saint Clairsville Belmont
The Ohio State University        Mansfield         Richland
The Ohio State University        Newark            Licking
The Ohio State University        Wooster           Wayne
The Ohio State University        Marion            Marion
The Ohio State University        Lima              Allen
University of Akron              Orrville          Wayne
University of Cincinnati         Batavia           Clermont
University of Cincinnati         Blue Ash          Hamilton
Wright State University          Celina            Mercer


                                        65
                                                    Legend

     Campus Name                                             Northeast Ohio Medical University

            Belmont Technical College                        Northwest State Community College

            Bowling Green State University                   Ohio State University

            Bowling Green State University, Firelands        Ohio University

            Central Ohio Technical College                   Ohio University, Chillicothe

            Central State University                         Ohio University, Eastern

            Cincinnati State Tech. & Community College       Ohio University, Lancaster

            Clark State Community College                    Ohio University, Southern

            Cleveland State University                       Ohio University, Zanesville

            Columbus State Community College                 OSU, Agricultural Technical Institute

            Cuyahoga Community College                       Owens State Community College, Findlay

            Cuyahoga Community College, Eastern              Owens State Community College, Toledo

            Cuyahoga Community College, Metro                Rio Grande Community College

            Cuyahoga Community College, Western              Shawnee State University

            Eastern Gateway Community College                Sinclair Community College

            Edison State Community College                   Southern State Community College

            Hocking Technical College                        Southern State Community College, Central




66
            James A. Rhodes State College                    Southern State Community College, Fayette

            Kent State University                            Southern State Community College, North

            Kent State University, Ashtabula                 Southern State Community College, South

            Kent State University, East Liverpool            Stark State College of Technology

            Kent State University, Geauga                    Terra State Community College

            Kent State University, Salem                     University of Akron

            Kent State University, Stark                     University of Akron, Wayne

            Kent State University, Trumbull                  University of Cincinnati

            Kent State University, Tuscarawas                University of Cincinnati, Blue Ash

            Lakeland Community College                       University of Cincinnati, Clermont

            Lorain County Community College                  University of Toledo

            Marion Technical College                         Washington State Community College
                                                                                                         Figure B.1: Map of Ohio Public Institutions of Higher Education




            Miami University                                 Wright State University

            Miami University, Hamilton                       Wright State University, Lake

            Miami University, Middletown                     Youngstown State University

            North Central State College                      Zane State College
C        Comparison to Displaced Worker Survey

Our Ohio administrative data includes limitations that are typical of state administrative UI
databases, such as inability to distinguish between individuals who leave Ohio, exit the labor force,
or begin working for non UI-covered employers in the state. Moreover, although our education data
includes a rich set of demographic variables, we lack them for workers in the UI sample. Thus, we
only observe characteristics like race, age, and gender for the subset of displaced workers who were
enrolled in the Ohio public higher education system at some point during the selected timeframe.
      To supplement our Ohio sample's descriptive statistics, we analyze data from the Displaced
Workers Surveys (DWS), administered every two years from as a supplement to the Current Pop-
ulation Survey (CPS). The DWS has been utilized in displaced worker studies for several decades
(Neal, 1995; Hipple, 1999; Schmieder and Von Wachter, 2010; Farber, 2015). The DWS conveys
information unavailable to researchers only using administrative data, such as demographic infor-
mation, whether notice was given before layoff, whether a jobless displaced worker is searching for
employment (i.e. unemployed or not in the labor force) (see Table C.1).24
      Table C.2 describes the gender and racial composition, average age of layoff, and educational
attainment of displaced workers according to the DWS to contextualize our industry heterogeneity
analysis in Section 5. Workers displaced from manufacturing, education and health, and public
administration are among the oldest, on average, laid off from their jobs. More than half of the
workers displaced from construction and mining, food services and hospitality, and manufacturing
have only a high school degree or less and have not previously attended college.
      Table C.3 compares our Ohio sample to the DWS with respect to workers' industry of displace-
ment. At the broad industrial level (reflecting roughly 1-digit NAICS classification), the sectoral
balance of our Ohio displaced worker sample matches the DWS very well. The only difference is
our sample has a slightly larger share displaced from manufacturing, perhaps unsurprisingly.




 24
      All statistics are survey-weighted using "dwsuppwt."


                                                         67
                      Table C.1: Characteristics from Displaced Worker Supplement

      Variable                                             Displaced 2002-2005         Displaced 2006-2009
      Mean Age at Displacement                                      42                          44
      Share Female                                                 0.45                        0.41
      Share Non-White                                              0.17                        0.17
      Share Married                                                0.62                        0.61
      Educational Attainment (time of survey)
      < HS Diploma                                                   0.09                        0.09
      HS Diploma                                                     0.33                        0.34
      Some College                                                   0.21                        0.20
      Assoc./Bach. Deg or More                                       0.37                        0.36
      Layoff-Related Characteristics
      Mean Years Worked at Lost Job                                    9                           9
      Plant Closed Down/Moved                                        0.44                        0.32
      Worked Full-Time at Lost Job                                   0.90                        0.88
      Received UI Benefits                                           0.55                        0.56
      Notice Given Before Displacement
      None Given                                                     0.56                        0.61
      < 1 Month                                                      0.10                        0.12
      1-2 Months                                                     0.15                        0.13
      > 2 Months                                                     0.17                        0.12
      Employment Status at Time of Survey
      Employed                                                       0.63                        0.51
      Unemployed                                                     0.22                        0.35
      Not in Labor Force: Retired/Disabled                           0.05                        0.05
      Not in Labor Force: Other                                      0.11                        0.10
      Share by Industry of Layoff
      Manufacturing                                                  0.28                        0.23
      Construction, Mining                                           0.08                        0.13
      Utilities                                                      0.01                        0.00
      Retail                                                         0.10                        0.11
      Finance, Insurance, Real Estate                                0.09                        0.09
      Transportation                                                 0.04                        0.04
      Education & Health                                             0.10                        0.10
      Food & Hospitality                                             0.04                        0.04
      Wholesale                                                      0.04                        0.04
      Public Administration                                          0.01                        0.01
      Professional, Scientific, Technical                            0.07                        0.07
      Administrative, Support, Waste Manage                          0.04                        0.03
      N                                                             2,596                       3,261
Source: IPUMS-CPS Displaced Worker Supplement, www.ipums.org. Note: Sample includes civilians age 20+ who
lost their job, had at least three years tenure, and were not self-employed at the time of the survey. The first (second)
column corresponds to the 2004 and 2006 (2008 and 2010) DWS waves.
                                                           68
            Table C.2: Displaced Worker Demographics by Industry of Layoff from DWS

 Layoff Industry                                 Age    Female     Nonwhite      HS or Less     Some College      Degree
 Manufacturing                                   44      0.38        0.17          0.56            0.18            0.26
 Construction, Mining                            39      0.11        0.12          0.61            0.17            0.23
 Utilities                                       40      0.15        0.00          0.20            0.10            0.70
 Retail                                          42      0.54        0.12          0.43            0.23            0.35
 Finance, Insurance, Real Estate                 43      0.59        0.25          0.28            0.20            0.52
 Transportation                                  42      0.19        0.12          0.41            0.27            0.32
 Education & Health                              45      0.78        0.20          0.24            0.27            0.48
 Food & Hospitality                              37      0.52        0.16          0.56            0.24            0.21
 Wholesale                                       41      0.30        0.12          0.34            0.24            0.42
 Public Administration                           45      0.33        0.17          0.16            0.27            0.57
 Professional, Scientific, Technical             42      0.52        0.15          0.13            0.19            0.68
 Administrative, Support, Waste Mgmt             42      0.57        0.28          0.48            0.20            0.33
Source: IPUMS-CPS Displaced Worker Supplement, www.ipums.org. Note: Sample includes civilians age 20+ who
lost their job, had at least three years tenure, and were not self-employed at the time of the survey. Workers were
displaced between 2002 and 2005 (corresponding to the DWS 2004 and 2006 waves, restricting to workers displaced
in the last two years). Sample is weighted using "dwsuppwt." Age column represents mean age at layoff.




             Table C.3: Displaced Worker Industry Comparison: Ohio sample and DWS

 Industry of Layoff              Minaya, Moore, Scott-Clayton                  DWS (displaced 2002-2009)
 Manufacturing                              0.29                                         0.25
 Construction, Utilities, Mining            0.11                                         0.11
 Retail Trade                               0.11                                         0.10
 Transportation & Warehousing               0.08                                         0.04
 Education & Health                         0.07                                         0.10
 Food Services & Hospitality                0.05                                         0.04
 Other                                      0.22                                         0.27
 N                                                     68,547                               5,857
Note: Left column reflects the Ohio administrative sample displaced between 2002 and 2009 (Table 1). Right
reflects national respondents of the DWS displaced during the same time period (2004-2010 waves of the DWS).
"Other" industries include Wholesale, Public Administration, Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services, and
Administrative, Support, and Waste Management.




                                                        69
